THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: May 3, 2010 
Effective: May 3, 2010 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CLEVELAND, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Donald Stanley 
Mayor 
____________ 
Rush Mauney, Ward 1 
Annie Sutton, Ward 2 
Edward Young, Ward 3 
Bradley Greene, Ward 4 
City Council 
____________ 
Grant Keene 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Connie Tracas 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Compiled Ordinances of 1970 and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Compiled Ordinances of 1970 and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to the Mayor and Council and Connie Tracas, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cleveland, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cleveland, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cleveland, Georgia. 2010. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-01 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CLEVELAND, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1 . The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of Cleveland, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2 . All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 18, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3 . The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4 . Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the provisions contained in any amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies including, but not limited to abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5 . Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6 . Ordinances adopted after August 18, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7 . This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Cleveland this 3 day of May, 2010. 



ATTEST: 

1st Reading: April 5, 2010 
2nd Reading: May 3, 2010 
Mayor and Council Action—approved and adopted 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 3rd day of May, 2010. 

(SEAL) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1, 36-32-5, 36-35-6; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; municipal corporation defined, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened form "Cleveland Code." 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
As used in this Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless otherwise specifically provided, and the following rules of construction shall be applied: 
Applicability. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction included in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Chief executive officer. The term "chief executive officer" means the city administrator or, if there is no duly appointed and acting city administrator, the mayor of the city. 
City. The terms "the city" or "this city" means Cleveland, Georgia. 
City council. The term "city council" means the governing authority of Cleveland, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to The Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Georgia, also referred to as the "Cleveland Code." 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either … or," or "neither … nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either … or" and "neither … nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means White County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the city court. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Department; city council; agency. The name or title of any department, city council, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the term "of the City of Cleveland, Georgia" were added thereto. 
Fee schedule or schedule of fees and charges. The term "fee schedule" or "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office and found in chapter 24 that lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. 
Gender. A word importing only the masculine gender shall extend and be implied to female and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city council of Cleveland, Georgia. 
Incorporated limits or incorporated areas of the city. The term "incorporated limits" or "incorporated areas of the city" means all areas of the city that are not situated within the territorial limits of any other incorporated town or city. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Joint authority. Whenever a joint authority is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the judge of the city court. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)  The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)  In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the offense and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)  All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural number shall include the singular. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" or "sworn." 
Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, councils, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the term "of Cleveland, Georgia." 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the city of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, join tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or reasonable notice. The term "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city council of a special or temporary character. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved area between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing or written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, §§ 1-101, 1-102) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines; notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 1-103) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council members. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection of this Code or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, or be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-9. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons. 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-10. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or, should he have no successor, to the city clerk. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of or providing policies and programs for, or providing retirement, disability or death benefits for, officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision within the city; 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance, any ordinance regulating subdivisions, any ordinance regulating signs, or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(13)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(14)  Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code. 
(b)  All such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-15. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-16. - General penalty; continuing violations; violations as public nuisance. 
(a)  In this section, the phrase "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  The phrase "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the city to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the city officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by general law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days or work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, or any combination thereof. 
(d)  All sentences must be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. Furthermore, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rules, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(h)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(i)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(j)  In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(k)  If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with the laws of the state, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 1-17. - Payment of fines. 
All fines collected within the city limits shall be paid to the city clerk, who shall then deposit them in the general fund. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-18. - Fees established by ordinance. 
Fees for permits, licenses, and other city services shall be as established from time to time by ordinance of the city council and set forth in the separate fee schedule adopted by the city and included in chapter 24. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; general authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipalities, and other, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations for acts or omissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; municipal acquisition and disposition of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Records management. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be the coordinator of the city's records management plan and authorized to act for and on behalf of the mayor and city council in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the records retention schedules approved by the state, and the provisions of this section, except as limited in this section. 
(b)  No record shall be destroyed except as authorized by the state records retention schedule. Records shall be maintained for at least the retention period provided in the state records retention schedule, but may be maintained for such longer period as is deemed necessary or advisable by the city clerk. 
(c)  In no event shall any city record maintained under this section be destroyed without the express approval of the city clerk and the member of the city council then assigned to administrative duties. 
State Law reference— Inspection and copying of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to bind subsequent council, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; council members incompetent to hold other municipal office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4; effect of residence in annexed territory as qualification for office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-5; voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; method of calling election in the event all seats in municipal governing authority are vacant, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-13; initial terms of office of members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Members; authority. 
The city is governed by the city council, consisting of the mayor and four council members who are vested with all corporate, legislative and other powers of the city as permitted by the city Charter and by law. The council shall be the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members, also of the amount and manner of compensating them for their services, to the extent permitted by the city Charter and state law. 
Sec. 2-22. - Residency requirements. 
(a)  To be eligible for the office of mayor, a candidate shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months immediately preceding the date of qualification for election. An elected mayor must continue to reside in the corporate limits of the city during his term in office and must be qualified and registered to vote in municipal elections in the city. 
(b)  To be eligible for the office of councilmember, a candidate shall have been a resident of the city and of the ward for which the candidate seeks election for 12 months immediately preceding the date of qualification for election. An elected councilmember shall continue to reside in the corporate limits of the city, in the ward from which he is elected, during his term in office and must be qualified and registered to vote in municipal elections in the city. 
Sec. 2-23. - Election; term; vacancies. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected as provided in the city Charter or by general law to serve terms of four years and until their successors in office are elected and qualified. Terms shall begin on January 1 and expire on December 31 as provided in the city's Charter. Vacancies in office shall be filled as provided in the city Charter or by general law. 
Sec. 2-24. - Compensation; reimbursement of expenses. 
(a)  Generally. That part of the salary of the mayor and each councilmember which is earned by attending each meeting of the city council at which a quorum is present shall be paid monthly, and the remainder of the respective salaries of the mayor and each councilmember shall be paid annually. 
(b)  Mayor. The annual salary of the mayor shall be the sum of $3,000.00, plus an amount equal to the sum of $50.00 for each meeting of the city council at which a quorum is present which is attended by the mayor. 
(c)  Councilmember for Ward No. 1. The annual salary of the councilmember for Ward No. 1 shall be the sum of $2,400.00, plus an amount equal to the sum of $50.00 for each meeting of the city council at which a quorum is present which is attended the councilmember for Ward No. 1. 
(d)  Councilmember for Ward No. 2. The annual salary of the councilmember for Ward No. 2 shall be the sum of $2,400.00, plus an amount equal to the sum of $50.00 for each meeting of the city council at which a quorum is present which is attended the councilmember for Ward No. 2. 
(e)  Councilmember for Ward No. 3. The annual salary of the councilmember for Ward No. 3 shall be the sum of $2,400.00, plus an amount equal to the sum of $50.00 for each meeting of the city council at which a quorum is present which is attended the councilmember for Ward No. 3. 
(f)  Councilmember for Ward No. 4. The annual salary of the councilmember for Ward No. 4 shall be the sum of $2,400.00, plus an amount equal to the sum of $50.00 for each meeting of the city council at which a quorum is present which is attended the councilmember for Ward No. 4. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1987, § 2; Ord. of 10-11-1999, §§ 1—5) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Secs. 2-25—2-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Open meetings and notice of meetings required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; meetings of governing bodies of counties and municipalities to be open, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1. 

Sec. 2-52. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The city council shall hold regular meetings semimonthly on the first and second Monday of each month at 6:30 p.m. in the council room of the city hall, or on such other regular days and at such other regular times as may be determined from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  Special meetings. The council may hold special meetings or work sessions on the call of the mayor or the mayor pro tem and two councilmembers. Notice of any such special meetings or work sessions shall be served on all other councilmembers personally or by personal telephone contact, no less than 24 hours in advance of the meeting. The notice requirements of this section shall not be required and shall be waived if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when this special meeting or work sessions are called. Such notice of any special meeting or work session may also be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting. Attendance at a special meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in a councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the notice may be transacted at a special meeting, unless all councilmembers unanimously consent to the transacting of additional business. 
(c)  Work sessions. The mayor and city council may hold work sessions at such times as is necessary to carry out their duties. At work sessions, the mayor and council may discuss, deliberate, plan, or debate current city issues but may not take any vote or formal action and shall not publish or follow a formal agenda. 
(d)  Open meetings. All meetings of the mayor and council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of any special meetings shall be given, to the extent reasonably possible, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(e)  Chairperson. In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro tem, any member of the council may be chosen to take the chair at the hour appointed for any meeting. 
(f)  Compelling attendance of witnesses. The mayor and council may also adopt procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members, as well as punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the mayor and council. 
(g)  Quorum. A majority of councilmembers present shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A less number may adjourn from time to time and compel attendance of absentees. 
(h)  Voting. Voting on the adoption of any ordinances shall be by voice vote, and the vote shall be recorded in the minutes of the council. Any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote, and such vote shall also be recorded in the minutes, if requested. Except as otherwise provided in the city Charter or by general law, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers, including the mayor, in the event of a tie vote, shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. All councilmembers shall have a duty to vote on any matter coming before the mayor and council that requires such a vote, unless a councilmember has a conflict of interest as defined in the city Charter or is as otherwise legally excused or prohibited from voting by the Charter, or any other laws, ordinances, or regulations of this state. 
(i)  Committee reports. Every committee shall report at the succeeding meeting of the council on all matters referred to them or show good cause why such report is not made. 
(j)  Duty to attend. It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 3-5-2018) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-53. - Agenda. 
(a)  Preparation of agenda. The city clerk, with the advice of the mayor and council, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. The agenda shall be made available to the council and to the public at some time during the week immediately prior to the meeting. Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. This request must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and received at least three business days before the meeting. A new subject that requires attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a majority vote of the council. 
(b)  Public hearings regarding zoning issues. Public hearings regarding zoning shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-4 and 36-66-5 and shall constitute an exception to the provisions of this section that conflict with such statutes. 
State Law reference— Meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-54. - Minutes of meetings. 
(a)  Required; open to public. A summary of the subjects acted on and those members present at a meeting must be written and made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of a meeting. The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each council meeting, and such records shall be open to public inspection once approved as official by the council, but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the council. 
(b)  Minimum contents of minutes. Minutes must, as a minimum, include the names of the members present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll call vote, the name of each person voting for or against a proposal must be recorded. In all other cases, it shall be presumed that the action taken was approved by each person in attendance unless the minutes reflect the name of the persons voting against the proposal or abstaining. 
Sec. 2-55. - Authority to conduct inquiries and investigations; subpoena power. 
The mayor or city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the mayor or city council shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-18. 
Sec. 2-56. - Order of business. 
The order of business shall be as determined from time to time by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 2-103) 
Sec. 2-57. - General rules of order. 
Except as otherwise provided in the city Charter or this Code, the rules of order shall follow standard parliamentary procedure in the transaction of business by and before the mayor and council at its meetings in all cases to which they are applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-58. - Disturbing meetings. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in disorderly or contemptuous behavior which disturbs any meeting of the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 2-105) 
Sec. 2-59. - General procedures. 
The introduction, enactment and recording of city legislation shall be accomplished under the provisions of the city Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 2-201) 
Secs. 2-60—2-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 2-77. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided by any ordinance or state law: 
(1)  All ordinances or resolutions not approved by the mayor shall be effective three days after passage thereof. 
(2)  If the mayor files his reasons for not approving the ordinance or resolution, it shall become effective when a majority of the council again votes in favor of it. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 2-202) 
Sec. 2-78. - Official copy. 
A true copy of an ordinance which has been duly enacted by the mayor and council, signed by the mayor, and attested to by the city clerk shall be known as an official copy of any ordinance of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 2-203) 
Sec. 2-79. - Ordinances appropriating money. 
No appropriation ordinance or ordinance to alter or repeal an appropriation ordinance shall be enacted at any meeting other than a regular meeting or at a meeting called and announced at a regular meeting except by a unanimous vote of the full membership of the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 2-204) 
Sec. 2-80. - Procedure for adoption of ordinances and retention of council records. 
(a)  Time for presenting; rules for consideration. An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and read at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. Ordinances shall be considered and either adopted or rejected by the mayor and council in accordance with the rules it shall establish upon introduction of any ordinance. 
(b)  Emergency ordinances. The mayor and city council may adopt emergency ordinances as provided and limited by the city Charter. 
(c)  Distribution of copies to council; copies for public inspection. The clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy of each ordinance to the mayor and each councilmember and retain a reasonable number of copies in his office for inspection and copying by members of the public. 
(d)  Distribution of copies to codifier. Upon passage, the clerk shall forward certified copies of all ordinances to Municipal Code Corporation or any other person responsible for the codification of the city's ordinances, so that this Code can be properly revised and updated. 
(e)  Numbering of ordinances and resolutions. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number them consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and record them in a permanent record book used solely for this purpose. The clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book. 
(f)  Filing and retention of original documents. The city clerk shall file and preserve the original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and any written motions. 
Secs. 2-81—2-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to provide for, regulate, etc., officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; liability of municipality for acts of officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; personal liability of municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; local government officers and employees not subject to liability for torts involving use of government vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-92-3; fixing of salaries of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; training of members of municipal governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-04; local referenda for abolishing local offices or shortening or lengthening term, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-11; authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-104. - Adoption of personnel manual. 
The city has compiled and maintains the city personnel policies and procedures manual, which is adopted, as amended from time to time, as though fully set forth in this article. 
Sec. 2-105. - Appointment and compensation. 
All officers and employees who are deemed necessary by the mayor and council or their designee and are not otherwise provided for by law or ordinance shall be appointed as provided by the city Charter for such term and at such compensation as shall be provided thereby. Two members of an immediate family may not be appointed to positions of employment with the city. For the purposes of this article, the term "immediate family" shall include a husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother, or such relationships in-law. This policy applies to promotions, demotions, transfers, reinstatements and new employees, but shall not affect any employee who may be in violation as of the effective date of these policies. No employee will be penalized as a result of a departmental reorganization which places him in violation of this policy. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-201) 
Sec. 2-106. - Bonds. 
Except where otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the mayor and council may require any officer or employee, before entering upon his duties, to post bond in an amount specified by the mayor and council. All bond premiums shall be paid from city funds. However, when one person holds two positions, only one bond shall be required. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-202) 
Secs. 2-107—2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-126. - Duties. 
(a)  In the absence of a duly appointed and acting city administrator as provided in the city Charter, the mayor shall preside over all meetings of the city council. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum at such meetings, ensure that all officials and officers of the city faithfully perform all duties required of them, ensure that all the ordinances and laws of the city are properly carried out and executed, and ensure that all revenues are promptly collected and accounted for and proper records are kept of all financial transactions of said officers and of the city. The mayor shall exercise general supervision and jurisdiction over the affairs of the city and have authority to call the council in special session as often as he deems necessary for the proper conduct of the affairs of the city government. 
(b)  If a city administrator is duly appointed and acting as provided in the city Charter, the mayor shall have such powers and duties as are provided by the city council to the extent permitted or required by state law. 
Sec. 2-127. - Mayor pro tem. 
Except where otherwise provided by law, the mayor pro tem shall perform the duties and functions of the mayor provided for in this Code during the absence or disability of the mayor. In the event the mayor and mayor pro tem shall fail or be unable to act, any person specifically designated by the mayor and council may act in their stead. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-128. - Contracts; deeds; bonds. 
The mayor shall sign and execute all contracts authorized by the mayor and council. The mayor shall also be authorized to sign the deeds and bonds of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-102) 
Secs. 2-129—2-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-155. - City administrator; acting city administrator; removal. 
(a)  The city administrator shall be selected and appointed by the mayor and council. He shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by and under the Charter. In the event the office of city administrator is vacant, the mayor shall exercise all powers conferred on the office by this Code, the city Charter, and general law. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall appoint the city administrator for an indefinite term and shall fix his compensation. The city administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, and the term and salary may be fixed by the mayor and council without the passage of an ordinance. Before taking office, the city administrator shall furnish a fidelity bond in the amount of $100,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, with a corporation licensed to do business in the state as a surety. Such bond shall be filed with the city clerk after being approved by the mayor and council. 
(c)  The city administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  a.  The city administrator shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, supervise, suspend, or remove all city employees and administrative officers so appointed, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to the Charter except to the extent otherwise provided in this subsection. 
b.  The mayor and council shall have the sole power and authority to appoint, suspend, or remove the city attorney, city engineer, judge of the city police court, city clerk, fire chief, building inspector, ordinance enforcement officer, and all members of boards, commissions, or authorities which the mayor and council have created or shall create or of which the city is or shall be a member. 
c.  The city administrator shall not appoint, suspend, or remove any city government department head without the prior approval of the mayor and council. For the purpose of this section, a department head shall include, but not be limited to, the city clerk, chief of police, city general superintendent, building inspector, ordinance enforcement officer, and fire chief. 
d.  Each department head shall also have authority to supervise, suspend or remove employees in his department. 
e.  Any city employee or administrative officer suspended or removed under this section may, within five working days of said suspension or removal, file a written request with the city clerk requesting that the mayor and council review such action. After such written request is filed, the mayor and council may veto any such suspension or removal within 30 days thereof. 
(2)  The city administrator shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by state law. 
(3)  The city administrator shall attend all council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(4)  The city administrator shall see that all laws, provisions of the Charter, and acts of the mayor and council subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed. 
(5)  The city administrator shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the mayor and council. With prior approval of the mayor and council, he shall be authorized to make expenditures and purchases in accordance with the operating budget. 
(6)  The city administrator shall submit to the mayor and council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  The city administrator shall make such reports as the mayor and council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(8)  The city administrator shall keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and shall make such recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable and as the mayor and council may require. 
(9)  The city administrator shall perform such other duties as are specified in the Charter or may be required by the mayor and council. 
(10)  The city administrator shall propose the salaries and compensation of all employees of the city, except the city attorney, city engineer, judge of the city police court, city clerk, fire chief, building inspector, ordinance enforcement officer, and all members of boards, commissions, or authorities, provided that no proposed raise in salary or compensation of such employee shall become effective until it is approved by the mayor and council at a regular meeting of the mayor and council. 
(d)  During the temporary absence or disability of the city administrator, the mayor and council may revoke such designation of the city administrator at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city administrator shall return or his disability ceases. The mayor and council shall have the power to appoint the mayor to serve as acting city administrator during the temporary absence or disability of the city administrator or during such time as the office of such city administrator shall remain vacant. Should the council so appoint the mayor as acting city administrator and the mayor so serve, the mayor shall not be entitled to receive the salary of the city administrator. For the purpose of this section, the term "disability of the city administrator" shall include being suspended from his duties by the mayor and council. The acting city administrator shall cease exercising the powers and duties of the city administrator upon the appointment of a city administrator or upon the revocation of said acting city administrator's appointment by the council. In those instances in which the mayor has been appointed acting city administrator, the mayor shall cease exercising the powers and duties of the city administrator upon the appointment of a city administrator or upon the revocation of said mayor's appointment as acting city administrators by the council. The acting city administrator shall take the same oath as the city administrator but need not furnish a fidelity bond. 
(e)  The mayor and council may remove the city administrator from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The mayor and council shall adopt, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members, a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city administrator from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city administrator. 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city administrator, the city administrator may file with the mayor and council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The city administrator may file with the mayor and council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing. 
(3)  If the city administrator has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in subsection (e)(2) of this section, the mayor and council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city administrator has requested a public hearing, the mayor and council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all members at any time after the public hearing. 
(4)  The city administrator shall continue to receive his salary and benefits until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
(5)  The city administrator may be removed from office for cause or without cause. If removed without cause, he shall be entitled to receive his regular salary and benefits for a period of 30 days from the effective date of the final resolution of removal. 
Secs. 2-156—2-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Training for municipal clerks, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-20. 

Sec. 2-179. - Appointment. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk or his designee shall be custodian of the official city seal and shall maintain city council records required by this Code, the city Charter, or state law. 
Sec. 2-180. - General duties of clerk. 
In addition to such duties as provided in the city Charter and by general law, it shall be the duty of the city clerk or his designee to do the following: 
(1)  Attend meetings of the mayor and council and keep the official minutes of its proceedings, including the names of members and other parties present and absent and the vote of each councilmember on each resolution, ordinance, motion, or other official action considered; 
(2)  Prepare and certify copies of official records when requested, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinance; 
(3)  Serve as chief financial officer of the city and work in coordination with the mayor in budget preparation and review and in approving and reviewing purchase requests from department heads; 
(4)  Maintain a book or record of registration of franchises granted by the city; and 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
Secs. 2-181—2-198. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-199. - Appointment; qualifications; oath; compensation. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the state bar and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by the city council for city officers. The city attorney shall receive compensation in the amount established from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  In addition to the city attorney, the mayor and city council shall annually appoint a city solicitor who shall have such duties as are assigned by the council. 
Sec. 2-200. - Duties. 
The city attorney shall have such duties as are provided in the city Charter and prescribed from time to time by the city council, other than those assigned to the city solicitor. The duties assigned to the city attorney may be delegated by the city attorney unless otherwise specifically provided by the city council. 
Secs. 2-201—2-223. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 2-224. - Appointment. 
The city code enforcement officer shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. 
Sec. 2-225. - Recognition and certification. 
The city code enforcement officer shall do all things necessary in order to be recognized as a law enforcement officer of the state and certified within the standards of the state Peace Officer Standards and Training Act (POST Act), as provided in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. In the event the city code enforcement officer is not POST-certified, then he shall have 12 months from his hiring date in which to become POST-certified. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2005, § I) 
Sec. 2-226. - Power of arrest. 
The city code enforcement officer shall have the power of arrest in the enforcement of all ordinances of the city, state codes, and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2005, § II) 
Sec. 2-227. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The primary duties and responsibilities of the city code enforcement officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  To enforce all ordinances enacted by the mayor and city council, state codes, and the laws of the state; 
(2)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance violation, and citations for court appearances for the violation of ordinances and the laws of the state; 
(3)  To investigate and collect evidence of these ordinances and the laws of the state violations; 
(4)  To respond to complaints of alleged violations of ordinances and laws of the state; 
(5)  To appear and testify in court; 
(6)  To do any follow-up work that may be necessary; 
(7)  To ensure proper collection of fines; 
(8)  To coordinate enforcement efforts with the building inspection department, the public works department, the city police department, and any other department or division of the city as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2005, § III) 
Sec. 2-228. - Placement of position. 
The position of code enforcement officer shall be under the supervision of the chief of police. 
Sec. 2-229. - Authority to issue summonses or citations. 
In addition to all duties and responsibilities set forth in this division, where any provisions of this Code that authorize the city police department to issue a summons or citations, the code enforcement officer shall also specifically be authorized to issue said summons or citations. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2005, § IV) 
Secs. 2-230—2-251. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-252. - Departmental organization. 
The city administrator may recommend persons to be appointed as department heads. The mayor and council shall appoint a director or head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. 
Sec. 2-253. - Department heads. 
Each department head shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency, subject to the direction of the city administrator and/or mayor and council. Each such department head shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the mayor for the effective administration of his department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in his particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the mayor and council or their designee, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit annual reports of the activities of his department to the city administrator; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the mayor and council or their designee; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the mayor and council, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in his departments. 
Sec. 2-254. - Interdepartmental cooperation. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the mayor and council or their designee, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
Sec. 2-255. - Appointment of committees and chairs by mayor and city council. 
All committees, committee chairs, and officers of the city council shall be recommended by the mayor and approved by the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Furthermore, the mayor and council shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2-256. - Reports. 
Within 30 days after the close of each fiscal year, the mayor and council or their designee shall obtain a report from the various city departments for the previous year and shall recommend any adjustments necessary or advisable to the city council. The mayor and council or their designee shall have the power to require reports from all officers and employees of the city as he may deem necessary to carry out his executive responsibilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-101) 
Secs. 2-257—2-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDING COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-276. - Establishment by council. 
The city council may establish such standing committees as it deems necessary or appropriate from time to time. 
Sec. 2-277. - Appointment of chairperson, members. 
At the first meeting of each year, the city council shall appoint a chairperson together with such other members, if any, that the city council desires to appoint to each standing committee, said appointments being from the members of council. Said appointment shall be for that calendar year. 
Secs. 2-278—2-302. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ETHICS COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-303. - Composition; appointment. 
The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two persons appointed by the mayor and council subject to approval by a majority of the city council. The third member of the ethics committee shall be a member in good standing of the state bar. 
Sec. 2-304. - Qualifications; terms. 
All members shall be residents of city and shall serve three-year terms. Members of the ethics committee must be approved by at least a three-fourths vote of the mayor and council and shall be appointed initially in such a manner as to permit one term to terminate each year. 
Sec. 2-305. - Compensation. 
The members of the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Res. of 1-8-2007, div. E, § I) 
Secs. 2-306—2-328. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Conduct of members of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-12 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-329. - Establishment by council. 
The city council shall establish such boards, commissions, and authorities as it deems necessary or desirable from time to time to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function upon such terms as are provided by the council by ordinance in accordance with the city Charter. 
Sec. 2-330. - Rules, regulations and bylaws. 
Unless otherwise provided by the city council, each board, commission, and authority established by the city council may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the city Charter, this Code, or general law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs; provided, however, that copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Secs. 2-331—2-348. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Secs. 2-349—2-371. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; training for members of local development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-21; exception to training requirements for directors of downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-22. 

Sec. 2-372. - Authority for creation. 
The city may create, under the provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq., a public body corporate and politic known as the Downtown Development Authority of Cleveland. 
Sec. 2-373. - Downtown development area. 
(a)  The downtown development area of the downtown development authority is designated to be that geographical area within the city which constitutes the central business district of the city as shown on that certain map available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The board of directors shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogative in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law as it now exists and as it may hereafter be amended or modified. 
Secs. 2-374—2-404. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; adoption of budget articles and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1; municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-38-1; standards for city and county audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8; officer responsible for political subdivision investments, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-4; public works bidding, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-405. - Temporary loans. 
The mayor and council may obtain short term loans in the name of the city when approved by the council. Any such indebtedness shall be payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a specified designated source, unless there is a prior appropriation out of which such indebtedness could be paid. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-103) 
Secs. 2-406—2-423. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET 

Sec. 2-424. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 5-301) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required to be established by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-425. - Proposed budget. 
The city's budget shall be prepared, reviewed, and approved annually pursuant to the procedure provided by the city Charter and general law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 5-302) 
State Law reference— Annual budget generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3 et seq.; adoption of budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6. 
Sec. 2-426. - Financial statement. 
The mayor and council shall cause to be published, within six months after the close of each fiscal year and in accordance with state law, a general balance sheet and statement of revenues and expenditures showing all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 5-303) 
Secs. 2-427—2-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; multiple-year contracts and leases, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-84-1 et seq.; municipal purchases through state department of administrative services, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-451. - Purchasing procedures. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the city shall purchase for or on behalf of the city or his office any materials, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise or equipment of any kind or character except through the approval of the mayor and council except purchases by the mayor and city council and emergency purchases as provided in this division. No voucher check or other method of payment shall be honored if this method is not followed. 
(b)  It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the city to make any purchase or aid and abet the making of any purchase by any other manner than through the mayor and city council, except as otherwise specifically provided herein. 
(c)  Purchases of up to $1,000.00 may be made by authorized personnel without approval from the mayor and council or their designee provided that the purchase is a budgeted item. Any purchase over $1,000.00 shall require the approval of the mayor and council. 
(d)  The officer or employee desiring to make a purchase shall first submit to the mayor and council a requisition form, to be provided by the city clerk, which shall identify the officer or employee seeking the purchase, the department for which the purchase is sought, at least three bids on the item to be purchased or explanation as to why bids were not obtained, the quantity of items sought to be purchased, the purchase price of each unit and the total price and any other information required by the mayor and council or their designee. Upon approval of the requisition, the mayor and council or the clerk, at his direction, shall issue the purchase order. 
(e)  All invoices shall be turned in on a daily basis and shall be attached to the purchase orders. All such invoices shall be submitted to the mayor and council or their designee. 
Sec. 2-452. - Purchase orders. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the city shall request any merchant, dealer or other vendor to deliver goods to the city or any department or officer or employee thereof except on a regular purchase order approved by the mayor and council or their designee, except as provided for emergencies. 
(b)  All purchase orders must be executed by the mayor and council or their designee. 
(c)  Any purchases made without obtaining a purchase order in advance shall be disallowed and payment refused. No purchase order will be issued after the fact. Vendors, merchants and dealers will be deemed to have dealt with any employee or officer who does not have a purchase order at their own risk. 
Sec. 2-453. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  In all cases where there is immediate need for any materials, supplies, goods, wares or merchandise by any department, such department must advise the mayor and council or, if they cannot be located, a member of the city council. If none of the above can be reached and the purchase of the item is absolutely necessary, such purchase must be reported to the mayor and council or their designee within 24 hours of such purchase. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency" means a situation where immediate action is absolutely necessary and delay would adversely affect the life, health or safety of the citizens of the city or the property of the city. 
Sec. 2-454. - Substitution of items of equal quality. 
In all purchases where quality as well as price and service are involved, the city administrator, at his direction, shall exercise discretion in making the purchase. In all cases where patented items or special purpose items are requested, the city administrator, at his direction, has the discretionary authority to decide whether similar products of equal quality and at a lower price shall be ordered in lieu of items requested. 
Sec. 2-455. - Competitive bids and exceptions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by the city council, the city shall make all purchases in excess of $20,000.00 by competitive bid except for those relating to the following: 
(1)  Repair to existing equipment and motor vehicles; 
(2)  Emergency purchases; 
(3)  Gasoline, fuel and oil; 
(4)  Routine building and maintenance repairs; 
(5)  Materials and services, when available from only one source; 
(6)  Professional services rendered at the direction of council; 
(7)  Purchases from state or federal agencies. 
(b)  All bids for goods and materials purchased by the city shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk and shall be subject to inspection at any time. 
Sec. 2-456. - Depreciation of city property. 
Any property purchased by the city having a value of $5,000.00 or more shall be considered a depreciable asset. 
Sec. 2-457. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  No property belonging to the city shall be sold except after approval of the city council. 
(b)  When any property owned by the city has become surplus, unserviceable or useless, the head of the department in charge of the property shall certify to the city council that such property is no longer useful and should be disposed of. 
(c)  Any property to be sold shall be sold at public sale either by sealed bid or public outcry to the highest bidder for cash, provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the city from donating or exchanging such surplus property with other governmental units or quasi-governmental units. 
State Law reference— Sale of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6. 
Sec. 2-458. - Violation grounds for discharge. 
Violation of any provision of this division shall be determined a violation of the city personnel policy and shall be deemed sufficient grounds for discharge. 
Secs. 2-459—2-484. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLC WORKS CONTRACTS 

Sec. 2-485. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City contract means any contract for construction for the city or negotiated by the city for the benefit of the public or an individual, firm or corporation, regardless of whether or not the city is a party to the contract. 
Construction means improvements or repairs the objective of which are to build, install, repair or improve a permanent structure, location, system or device with lumber, masonry, concrete, asphalt, rock, gravel, metal, plastic, glass or other similar material, to include necessary machinery, appliances or other fixtures and devices necessary for proper completion of such improvement or repairs. 
Longterm or substantial means any contract of a duration exceeding 12 months or involving the payment by the city of more than $50,000.00 for any goods, services, equipment or materials. 
Permanent means having a useful life of five years or more. 
Sec. 2-486. - Contracting procedures. 
(a)  No longterm or substantial contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is: 
(1)  In writing; 
(2)  Drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney, and, as a matter of course, signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  Made or authorized by the city council, such approval being entered in the city council minutes of proceedings. 
(b)  The city shall follow the requirements of state law with regard to any public works construction projects as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted, in giving notice, receiving bids, requiring performance and payment bonds, and entering into contracts for such projects. 
Sec. 2-487. - Bids required. 
Every city construction contract in the amount of $20,000.00 and over shall require competitive bidding. 
Sec. 2-488. - Application of state law. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 13-10-1, as the same may hereafter be amended, shall apply to all city construction contracts within limits specified therein. 
State Law reference— Bonds for public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 13-10-1. 
Sec. 2-489. - Invitation to bid; advertisement. 
No city construction contract within the regulation of this article shall be entered into until an invitation to bid has been published at least two times one week apart in the official legal organ of the city. The invitation will state the nature of the work to be performed, the project description, if applicable, and the location where specifications for the work, bid documents and bid requirements may be obtained. 
Sec. 2-490. - Bid bonds or other security. 
(a)  In every instance where the city is seeking a contract subject to this article, the city may require a bid bond with good and sufficient surety approved by the city clerk for the faithful acceptance of the contract, payable to the city and for the protection of the city and the person for which the city seeks to contract. Any bid bond required by the city under this section shall be in the amount of not less than five percent of the total payable by the terms of the contract. 
(b)  In lieu of the bid bond provided for in subsection (a) of this section, a cashier's check, certified check or cash may be accepted by the city upon approval by the city council in such amount payable and for the protection aforesaid. 
Sec. 2-491. - Performance bond; payment bond. 
(a)  Every contractor subject to the provisions of this division shall furnish a performance bond with good and sufficient surety payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of the city and/or the person for whom the work is to be done. The performance bond shall be in the amount of at least the total amount payable by the terms of the contract. 
(b)  Every contractor subject to provisions of this division shall furnish a payment bond with good and sufficient surety payable to the city and/or the person for whom the work is to be done and for the use and protection of all subcontractors and all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery, and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract. 
(c)  In lieu of either or both of the bonds provided for in subsections (a) or (b) of this section, the city may accept a cashier's check, certified check or cash in the amount of either or both of the otherwise required bonds for the usage and protection aforesaid. 
Sec. 2-492. - Workers compensation insurance required. 
All contractors performing work subject to this division shall have workers' compensation insurance within limits required by the laws of the state. 
Sec. 2-493. - Vehicle liability insurance required. 
All contractors performing work subject to this division shall have vehicle liability insurance on each vehicle used in the work, with limits not less than $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per incident for personal injuries and $50,000.00 property damage. 
Sec. 2-494. - Public liability insurance required. 
All contractors performing work subject to this division shall have public liability insurance with limits not less than $100,000.00 personal injury and $50,000.00 property damage. 
Sec. 2-495. - Period of insurance coverage; additional insured; copies. 
Insurance required by this division shall be effective for the time required to complete the city contract. With the exception of workers' compensation insurance, the city and/or the party for whom the city has arranged the work shall be listed as an additional insured. Copies of insurance policies evidencing compliance with this division must be furnished to city prior to commencing contract performance. 
Sec. 2-496. - Bonds; acceptability. 
All bonds required by this division shall be obtained from companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties currently listed as such in federal publications. 
Secs. 2-497—2-515. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-516. - Purpose; alternate designation. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this article is also to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  This article may be referred to as the city's identity theft prevention program or ITTP. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-517. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; or 
(2)  Any other account that the creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debt and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person or entity who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit, any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit, or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. For the purposes of this article, the city is a creditor. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Department head means any department head who works at the discretion of the executive officer or the city council, any elected official, or any individual appointed to manage a department on a permanent or temporary basis. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using the identifying information of another person without authority. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to the city by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681C(h)(1), that informs the city of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the city provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, and bank account information and, for a natural person, includes such person's social security number, mother's birth name, drivers' license information and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-518. - Findings. 
The city council has found as follows: 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, solid waste, and stormwater. 
(2)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and making payments for property taxes and other services have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(3)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. 
(4)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways, if any: 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-519. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account with the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer in the form of a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account with written confirmation of being the authorized agent for the entity. The applicant shall also provide any other information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created. The information shall be entered directly into the city's records system and held in a secure storage area with access limited to those city personnel with the need to know. 
(b)  For each customer account for which the city may now or hereafter provide individual customer access to the customer's account information, such account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-520. - Password required for access to covered account information. 
Access to any customer account that includes personal identifying information shall be password-protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. Passwords shall be changed by the head of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by such other city employee authorized to carry out the provisions of this article, on a regular basis. The password shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-521. - Report of unauthorized access. 
Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the appropriate department director and the password changed immediately. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-522. - Customer information confidential; report of requests for access. 
Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential, and any request or demand that specifically asks for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the applicable department head or other person authorized by the city council to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-523. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-524. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft. Such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report, or a notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
c.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as a recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries, an unusual number of recently established credit relationships, a material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships, or an account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor, such as instances in which the address does not match any address in the consumer report or the social security number (SSN) has not been issued or is listed on the social security administration's death master file; 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth; 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor; 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity; 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers; 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers; 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete; 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor; 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account; 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud as in instances where the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments; 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account, such as instances where there is nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments or a material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors; 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account; 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements; 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account; 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-525. - Procedure regarding existing covered accounts. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. 
(b)  If, in his discretion, the employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall immediately report such red flags to his department head. 
(c)  If, in his discretion, the employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his department head, who may, in his discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. 
(d)  If the department head, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the department head: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  If, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account, change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account, or close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer for the covered account in question and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accepted without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector, in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action, as determined by the department head, to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-526. - Procedure regarding new covered accounts. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, the employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. 
(b)  If, in his discretion, the employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall immediately report such red flags to his department head. 
(c)  If, in his discretion, the employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his department head, who may, in his discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. 
(d)  If the department head, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the department head: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action as determined by the department head to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-527. - Updating the program. 
The executive officer shall annually review this article and, if deemed necessary, make recommendations to the city council with regard to any needed amendments, including amendments of the designation of red flags, in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the executive officer shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-528. - Program administration. 
(a)  The executive officer is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation, including, but not limited to, reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the executive officer, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration. 
(b)  Department heads shall report to the executive officer at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The department head reports will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)  Service provider arrangements; 
(3)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(4)  Recommendations for material amendments of this article. 
(c)  The city's department heads are responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening new covered accounts, restoring existing covered accounts or accepting payment for covered accounts with respect to the implementation and requirements of this article. The executive officer shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-529. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the applicable department head shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with the policies and procedures in this article, as agreed upon by contract, designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Sec. 2-530. - Annual report to city council. 
An annual report will be submitted by the executive officer for approval of the city council on such schedule as is established by the city council. The report will include a summary of department head reports and recommendations for any amendment to this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 1) 
Secs. 2-531—2-553. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 2-554. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the city service or account sought by the consumer shall verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer or compare the information in the consumer report with: 
(1)  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(l); 
(2)  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
(3)  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 2) 
Sec. 2-555. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 2) 
Sec. 2-556. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through verifying the address with the consumer, reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address, verifying the address through third-party sources, or using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009(1), div. 2) 
Secs. 2-557—2-575. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, adopted April 11, 2011, amended Article VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article VIII, §§ 2-576—2-594, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Res. of 1-8-2007, div. A, div. B, §§ I, II, div. C, §§ I—X, div. D, §§ 1—III, div. E, §§ II, III, div. F, § I. 
State Law reference— Ethics in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-576. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-577. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
(1)  Benefit means anything, regardless of its monetary value, which: 
a.  Is perceived or intended by either the one who offers it or the one to whom it is offered, to be sufficient in value to influence a member of the mayor and council in the performance or nonperformance of an official action; or 
b.  Under the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence a member of the mayor and council in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. 
(2)  City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
(3)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(4)  Employee means any person who is employed in a position by the city, any person who is employed part-time by any operating department of the city, and any person who is employed through a contractual agreement with the city. 
(5)  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
(6)  Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
(7)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
(8)  Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
a.  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
b.  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
c.  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
d.  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-578. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Cleveland nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a Municipal Court Judge of the City of Cleveland on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Cleveland. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-579. - Financial interest. 
(a)  A member of the mayor and council may not: 
(1)  Have a direct of indirect financial interest that conflicts with his responsibilities and duties as a trustee for the public good; 
(2)  Either directly of indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of or primarily relying upon information obtained in the course of his office or received due to his position. 
(b)  A member of the mayor and council shall be deemed to have a financial interest in transactions involving the following: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits; 
(3)  Any business in which the member of the mayor and council is director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-580. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-581. - Complaint hearings. 
(a)  The Municipal Court of the City of Cleveland shall hear and render decisions on all proper verified complaints filed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-582. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk, who will give it to the municipal court judge, who may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council or the municipal court judge. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court judge shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court judge shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The municipal court judge is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court judge shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the municipal court judge is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the municipal court judge is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court judge shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The municipal court judge is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The municipal court judge is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the municipal court judge shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-583. - Service of complaint. 
The city clerk or municipal court judge as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The municipal court judge shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the municipal court judge shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the municipal court judge, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the article shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the municipal court judge or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-584. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the municipal court judge may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of White County within 30 days after the decision of the municipal court judge. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 2-585. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; 
(2)  A fine up to $600.00; or 
(3)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Secs. 2-586—2-621. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FLAG CODE 

Sec. 2-622. - Establishment of code. 
(a)  National anthem; star-spangled banner. The composition consisting of the words and music known as The Star-Spangled Banner is designated the national anthem of the United States of America. 
(b)  Conduct during playing. During the rendition of the national anthem when the flag is displayed, all present except those in uniform should stand at attention facing the flag with the right hand over the heart. Men not in uniform should remove their headdress with their right hand and hold it at the left shoulder, the hand being over the heart. Persons in uniform should render the military salute at the first note of the anthem and retain this position until the last note. When the flag is not displayed, those present should face toward the music and act in the same manner they would if the flag were displayed there. 
(c)  Pledge of allegiance to the flag; manner of delivery. The Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag, "I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America, and to the republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all," should be rendered by standing at attention facing the flag with the right hand over the heart. When not in uniform, men should remove their headdress with their right hand and hold it at the left shoulder, the hand being over the heart. Persons in uniform should remain silent, face the flag, and render the military salute. 
(d)  Time and occasions for display. 
(1)  It is the universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to sunset on buildings and on stationary flagstaffs in the open. However, when a patriotic effect is desired, the flag may be displayed 24 hours a day if properly illuminated during the hours of darkness. 
(2)  The flag should be hoisted briskly and lowered ceremoniously. 
(3)  The flag should not be displayed on days when the weather is inclement, except when an all-weather flag is displayed. 
(4)  The flag should be displayed on all days, especially on New Year's Day, January 1; Inauguration Day, January 20; Lincoln's Birthday, February 12; Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February; Easter Sunday (variable); Mother's Day, the second Sunday in May; Armed Forces Day, the third Saturday in May; Memorial Day (half-staff until noon), the last Monday in May; Flag Day, June 14; Independence Day, July 4; Labor Day, the first Monday in September; Constitution Day, September 17; Columbus Day, the second Monday in October; Navy Day, October 27; Veteran's Day, November 11; Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; Christmas Day, December 25; and such other days as may be proclaimed by the President of the United States; the birthdays of states (date of admission); and on state holidays. 
(5)  The flag should be displayed daily on or near the main administration building of every public institution. 
(6)  The flag should be displayed in or near every polling place on election days. 
(7)  The flag should be displayed in or near every schoolhouse. 
(e)  Position and manner of display. The flag, when carried in a procession with another flag, should be either on the marching right (that is, the flag's own right) or, if there is a line of other flags, in front or the center of that line. 
(1)  The flag should not be displayed on a float in a parade except from a staff, or as provided in subsection (e)(9) of this section. 
(2)  The flag should not be draped over the hood, top, sides, or back of a vehicle or of a railroad train or a boat. When the flag is displayed on a motorcar, the staff shall be fixed firmly to the chassis or clamped to the right fender. 
(3)  No other flag or pennant should be placed above, or if on the same level, to the right of the flag of the United States of America, except during church services conducted by naval chaplains at sea, when the church pennant may be flown above the flag during church services for the personnel of the Navy. No person shall display the flag of the United Nations or any other national or international flag equal to, above, or in a position of superior prominence or honor to, or in place of, the flag of the United States at any place within the United States or any territory or possession thereof, provided that nothing in this section shall make unlawful the continuance of practice heretofore followed of displaying the flag of the United Nations in a position of superior prominence or honor, and other national flags in positions of equal prominence or honor, with that of the flag of the United States at the headquarters of the United Nations. 
(4)  The flag of the United States of America, when it is displayed with another flag against a wall from crossed staffs, should be on the right, the flag's own right, and its staff should be in front of the staff of the other flag. 
(5)  The flag of the United States of America should be at the center and at the highest point of the group when a number of flags of states or localities or pennants of societies are grouped and displayed from staffs. 
(6)  When flags of state, cities, or localities, or pennants of societies are flown on the same halyard with flag of the United States, the latter should always be at the peak. When the flags are flown from adjacent staffs, the flag of the United States should be hoisted first and lowered last. No such flag or pennant may be placed above the flag of the United States or to the United States flag's right. 
(7)  When flags of two or more nations are displayed, they are to be flown from separate staffs off the same height. The flags should be of approximately equal size. International usage forbids the display of the flag of one nation above that of another nation in time of peace. 
(8)  When the flag of the United States is displayed from a staff projecting horizontally or at an angle from the window sill, balcony, or front of a building, the union of the flag should be placed at the peak of the staff unless the flag is at half-staff. When the flag is suspended over a sidewalk from a rope extending from a house to a pole at the edge of the sidewalk, the flag should be hoisted out, union first, from the building. 
(9)  When displayed either horizontally or vertically against a wall, the union should be uppermost and the flag's own right, that is, to the observer's left. When displayed in a window, the flag should be displayed in the same way, with the union or blue field to the left of the observer in the street. 
(10)  When the flag is displayed over the middle of the street, it should be suspended vertically with the union to the north in an east and west street or the east in a north and south street. 
(11)  When used on a speaker's platform, the flag, if displayed flat, should be displayed above and behind the speaker. When displayed from a staff in a church or public auditorium, the flag of the United States of America should hold the position of superior prominence, in advance of the audience, and in the position of honor at the clergyman's or speaker's right as he faces the audience. Any other flag so displayed should be placed on the left of the clergyman or speaker or to the right of the audience. 
(12)  The flag should form a distinctive feature of the ceremony of unveiling a statute or monument, but it should never be used as the covering of the statute or monument. 
(13)  The flag, when flown at half-staff, should be first hoisted to the peak for an instant and then lowered to the half-staff position. The flag should be again raised to the peak before it is lowered for the day. On Memorial Day, the flag should be displayed at half-staff until noon only, then raised to the top of the staff. By order of the President, the flag shall be flown at half-staff upon the death of principal figures of the United States government and the governor of a state, territory, or possession as a mark of respect to their memory. In the event of the death of other officials or foreign dignitaries, the flag is to be displayed at half-staff according to Presidential instructions or orders, or in accordance with recognized customs or practices not inconsistent with law. In the event of the death of a present or former official of the government of any state, territory, or possession of the United States, the governor of that state, territory, or possession may proclaim that the national flag shall be flown at half-staff. The flag shall be flown at half-staff 30 days from the death of the President or former President; ten days from the day of death of the Vice-president, the Chief Justice or a retired Chief Justice of the United States, or the Speaker of the House of Representatives; from the day of death until interment of an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, a Secretary of an executive or military department, a former Vice-president, or the governor of a state, territory, or possession; and the day of death and the following day for a member of Congress. The flag shall be flown at half-staff on Peace Officers Memorial Day, unless that day is also Armed Forces Day. The flag will be flown at half-staff for one hour before the memorial service through the conclusion of the memorial service for those county, City of Cleveland and City of Helen employees killed in the line of duty. On those other occasions when an active employee dies, whether at work or not, a wreath will be placed at the base of the flag pole located in front of each governing authority's office. As used in this subsection: 
a.  The term "half-staff" means the position of the flag when it is one-half the distance between the top and bottom of the staff; 
b.  The term "executive department" means the Department of State, Treasury, Defense, Justice, Interior, Agriculture, Commerce, Labor, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, Transportation, Energy, Education, or Veterans Affairs; 
c.  The term "military department" means the Department of the Army, Navy, or Air Force; and 
d.  The term "member of Congress" means a Senator, a Representative, a Delegate, or the Resident Commissioner for Puerto Rico. 
(14)  When the flag is used to cover a casket, it should be so placed that the union is at the head and over the left shoulder. The flag should not be lowered into the grave or allowed to touch the ground. 
(15)  When the flag is suspended across a corridor or lobby in a building with only one main entrance, it should be suspended vertically with the union of the flag to the observer's left upon entering. If the building has more than one main entrance, the flag should be suspended vertically near the center of the corridor or lobby with the union to the north, when entrances are to the east and west or to the east when entrances are to the north and south. If there are entrances in more than two directions, the union should be to the east. 
(f)  Respect for flag. No disrespect should be shown to the flag of the United States of America; the flag should not be dipped to any person or thing. Regimental colors, state flags, and organization or institutional flags are to be dipped as a mark of honor. 
(1)  The flag should never be displayed with the union down, except as a signal of dire distress in instances of extreme danger to life or property. 
(2)  The flag should never touch anything beneath it, such as the ground, the floor, water, or merchandise. 
(3)  The flag should never be carried flat or horizontally, but always aloft and free. 
(4)  The flag should never be used as wearing apparel, bedding, or drapery. It should never be festooned, drawn back, nor up, in folds, but always allowed to fall free. Bunting of blue, white, and red, always arranged with the blue above, the white in the middle, and the red below, should be used for covering a speaker's desk, draping the front of the platform, and for decoration in general. 
(5)  The flag should never be fastened, displayed, used, or stored in such a manner as to permit it to be easily torn, soiled, or damaged in any way. 
(6)  The flag should never be used as a covering for a ceiling. 
(7)  The flag should never have placed upon it, nor on any part of it, not attached to it any mark, insignia, letter, word, figure, design, picture, or drawing of any nature. 
(8)  The flag should never be used as a receptacle for receiving, holding, caring, or delivering anything. 
(9)  The flag should never be used for advertising purposes in any manner whatsoever. It should not be embroidered on such articles as cushions or handkerchiefs and the like, printed or otherwise impressed on paper napkins or boxes or anything that is designed for temporary use and discard. Advertising signs should not be fastened to a staff or halyard from which the flag is flown. 
(10)  No part of the flag should ever be used as a costume or athletic uniform. However, a flag patch may be affixed to the uniform of military personnel, firefighters, police officers, and members of patriotic organizations. The flag represents a living country and is itself considered a living thing. Therefore, the lapel pin, being a replica, should be worn on the left lapel near the heart. 
(11)  The flag, when it is in such condition that it is no longer a fitting emblem for display, should be destroyed in a dignified way, preferably by burning. 
(g)  Conduct during hoisting, lowering or passing of the flag. During the ceremony of hoisting or lowering the flag or when the flag is passing in a parade or in review, all persons present, except those in uniform, should face the flag and stand at attention with the right hand over the heart. Those present in uniform should render the military salute. When not in uniform, men should remove their headdress with their right hand and hold it at the left shoulder, the hand being over the heart. Aliens should stand at attention. The salute to the flag in a moving column should be rendered at the moment the flag passes. 
(h)  Flag presentation. Presentation of the flag during a ceremony should be preceded by a brief talk emphasizing the importance of the occasion. Following the presentation all present should salute the flag, recite the pledge of allegiance, and sing the national anthem. 
(i)  Folding the flag. 
(1)  Two persons, facing each other, hold the flag waist high and horizontally between them. 
(2)  The lower striped section is folded, lengthwise, over the blue field. Hold bottom to top and edges together securely. 
(3)  Fold the flag again, lengthwise, folded edge to open edge. 
(4)  A triangular fold is started along the length of the flag, from the end to the heading by bringing the striped corner of the folded edge to meet the open edge. 
(5)  The outer point is turned inward parallel with the open edge, forming a second triangle. 
(6)  Repeat the triangular folding until the entire length of the flag is folded. 
(7)  When the flag is completely folded, only the triangular blue field should be visible. 
(Res. of 1-4-2000) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-18, adopted Nov. 14, 2011, amended Ch. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4, §§ 4-1—4-20, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 1-24-2000, §§ 1, 2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards of the regulation and control for the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages and retail package alcohol; to protect and preserve schools and churches; to give effect to existing land use; and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; to protect against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for liquor in one family and/or in one corporation; and to prevent undesirable persons in engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-2. - Sales to be licensed; compliance with ordinance and state law required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, or to offer for sale for consumption on the premises, or to offer free of charge as a promotional activity or incentive any alcoholic beverages within the city without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. No person shall sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage unless such person has a license from the city to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. The requirements and restrictions contained by O.C.G.A. Title 3, and regulations promulgated thereunder, which are not otherwise enumerated by this chapter are hereby expressly incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-3. - Sale within the incorporated areas of the city; license a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold within the incorporated areas of the city under a license granted by the city clerk as governed by the terms and conditions hereafter provided. 
(b)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city and state law. 
(c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED, AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY FUTURE ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED." 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-4. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, defined words shall have the meaning specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 200 square feet of customer service area within the premises of applicant, but not less than five parking spaces. Such off-street parking shall have vehicular access to streets and shall be constructed of an all-weather surface. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, or distilled spirits, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcohol beverages means and includes all beer, malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, strong beer, and hard cider as may be defined by state law. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brewpub is a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to state law barrel production limitations for retail consumption on the premises and sold solely in draft form. 
Campus property or school property means land on which a college or university is located or other schools. 
Church means a permanent building owned by a church or religious organization where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
City means the City of Cleveland. 
City clerk means the person holding the official title of clerk of the city. 
College means only such state, county, city, church, or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of the state. 
Commercial area means any area which is correspondingly zoned in accordance with the city zoning ordinance. 
Convenience store means a small store or shop in a built up area that stocks a range of everyday items such as groceries, toiletries, soft drinks, and may also offer money order and wire transfer services. The principal business conducted by such establishment deriving at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of these items. 
Designee means an appointment made by the city mayor and council to act in the capacity of the city clerk in the absent of a city clerk or anytime so determined by the city mayor and council. 
Distance means the measurement along a straight line which describes the shortest distance between property line to property line or building wall to building wall of the tract on which is located the business regulated; to the tract on which is located the school property, college campus property, housing authority property, church building, library building, any residential building, or alcohol treatment center building. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquors means any alcoholic beverages containing alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called to include fortified wines, as defined by the Federal Alcohol Administration. 
Family means and includes any person related to the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this chapter within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the laws of the state. 
Food counter means a form of service in restaurants where food is ordered while seated at a counter. Food counter service is compared with table service where service is provided at the table. Some fast food restaurants offer only counter service while table service is the common form in most restaurants. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Golf course means an outdoor golf course covering one acre or more and containing at least nine tees, fairways and greens. "Outdoor golf course sales" refers to sales made outside the clubhouse or other structure and on or immediately adjacent to the golf course itself from a mobile or satellite location between the first and final hole on the course. 
Grocery store/supermarket means a store that retails food, and stocks other products such as clothing, household items, fruits, vegetables. The principal business conducted by such establishment derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of these items. 
Hotel/motel means a building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers, guests, and transients in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Boarding houses or other similar facilities which have less than 50 rooms used for sleeping accommodations for such guests are not classified as a hotel for the purposes of this chapter. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a restaurant on their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. 
(1)  In which the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises and which shall derive at least 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared foods and recreation activities; and 
(2)  In which meals are served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests. Said establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour they are open. 
Inside square area means the unique area located inside of the following description as shown on Attachment I (located at end of chapter). The inside area from traveling in a straight line west on East Jackson Street crossing North Main Street and continuing west on West Jackson Street to North Bell Street then continuing south on North Bell Street crossing West Kytle and continuing south on South Bell Street stopping at Henderson Street then continuing east on Henderson Street crossing South Main Street and continuing in a straight line to South Brooks Street then continuing north on South Brooks Street crossing East Kytle Street and continuing north on North Brooks Street stopping at East Jackson Street. The defined area known as inside square area can only be changed by an amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived. 
Kitchen means a room or part of a room used for cooking and food preparation, which is equipped with a stove, a refrigerator, and a sink with hot and cold running water. A kitchen in addition may have a microwave oven, a dishwasher and other electric appliances. Commercial kitchens must meet all other ordinance requirements, including grease trap and backflow device. 
Library means a room, building, or institution where a collection of books, newspapers, records, tapes, computer, e.g., programs or diskettes, or a collection of routines or instructions used by a computer program and other materials that are valuable for research. 
License means the authorization by the clerk of the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee means a person or persons, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this and other city alcoholic beverage ordinances. In the case of a partnership or corporation, "licensee" shall include all partners, officers and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Liter means the metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Lounge means a room in which people may relax or wait, or a room where cocktails and other drinks are served. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served or consumed in a lounge. Lounges and bars are prohibited. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Patio or open area shall be defined as that portion of an establishment which is outside the main structure but accessible from the main structure and is used for sales of food and/or beverages. 
Performing arts facility means and is limited to an establishment: 
(1)  Which has obtained a special use permit to allow for the presentation of mainline dramatic arts, plays, and theatre productions. 
(2)  Which has as its principal objective or business the presentation of mainline dramatic arts, plays, theatre productions. 
(3)  Which does not feature, show, allow, promote or advertise adult businesses as defined and regulated in the City of Cleveland adult entertainment ordinance including but not limited to adult dancing establishments, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult motion picture theatres, adult motion picture arcades and erotic dance establishments. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in facility including, but not limited to, a room, shop, building, restaurant, or club wherein alcoholic beverages are sold. 
Private club means any association organized under the laws of the state which has been in existence at least one year prior to filing of its application for a license to be issued hereunder; has at least 75 regular dues paying members; owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining space and equipment for the serving of prepared meals for the members and guests; and does not compensate any member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly from the profits of the sale of distilled spirits beyond a fixed salary as established by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club; except that for the purposes of this section, tips which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of distilled spirits. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling where not less than one or more than three families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four or more families and any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application hereunder. 
Registered agent means a natural person residing in the city or the county who is empowered to act for and represent the licensee in all matters with the city relating to an establishment licensed or making application for a license to sell alcohol upon whom any process, notice or demand require or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served. The registered agent may be the licensee if the qualifications set forth in this chapter are met. The registered agent may be different from the registered agent as recognized by the Georgia Secretary of State's office. 
Restaurant means a public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are cooked and served and where meals are actually and regularly cooked and served to the public, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a sufficient number and kind of employees to cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be cooked on the premises and served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating, and the cooking and service of such meals shall be the principal business conducted by such establishment. Restaurants may also engage in the selling of unprepared food products. Such establishment shall be authorized to sell opened containers of wine or beer only with meals provided that restaurants derive at least 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Retail sales means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School building or educational building shall apply to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and are accredited by the state or federal government. 
Special events facility means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where special events including, but not limited to, weddings, wedding receptions, private parties and similar events are held and which provides meals or food services in connection with such events. Any such facility shall be equipped with an adequate sanitary kitchen with dining room facility and have a seating capacity of at least 50 people, and shall be capable of preparing, cooking, and serving meals and other food products associated with its special events on site. Any such facility open to the public for the service of at least one meal per day for three or more days per week, shall be considered a restaurant. 
Special events vendor means a vendor licensed by the city and/or state to sell beer and wine for consumption. Before receiving a license as a special events vendor, the vendor shall have entered into a contractual agreement with the city for the sale of beer and/or wine at special events approved by the city to be held on public property. 
Specialty gift shop shall be defined as any retail gift shop that derives not more than 15 percent of its gross sales from the sale of package gift baskets containing non-alcohol related items such as flowers, plants, food or similar items which also contain unbroken containers of wine or malt beverages. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person licensed by the state or local government who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wine tasting room means a room that has a single means of ingress and egress in which a retail establishment offers the sampling or tasting of wine for educational or instructional purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014; Ord. No. 2018-16, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-5. - Inspection of licensed establishments. 
Sworn officers of the police department and the city clerk or designee shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of the alcohol ordinance of the city and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-6. - License to be exhibited. 
The licenses provided for herein shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view of the public at all times in the premises for which the same was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-7. - Familiarity with ordinance provisions; responsibilities of licensee for violations. 
Each licensee hereunder shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working therein with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be responsible for any acts of agents or employees which are in violation of this chapter or of the laws of the state or of the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-8. - Production of records, audits. 
(a)  In conjunction with any application for license, or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected under this chapter, the city clerk or designee shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, electronic or magnetic media and associated software, reports or invoices of any licensee of the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, proving or disproving violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or showing payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make the original records or certified copies available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing beer, and wine separately; 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes; 
(4)  Monthly Georgia sales and use tax reports; 
(5)  Federal income tax returns with all Form 1099's; and 
(6)  Daily sales receipts showing distilled spirits separately. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-9. - Invoices. 
(a)  Upon each and every delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared showing the quantities and brands of malt beverages and wine delivered, together with the price thereof and the excise tax due and collected thereon. The original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice and shall keep it for a period of 36 months after the date of delivery and during authorized representatives. The remaining copy of the invoice shall be distributed in accordance with Georgia law. Upon request of the city, a copy of such invoice shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the city. 
(b)  Each retail licensee doing business in the city shall keep and maintain accurate and complete records regarding the purchases and sales made by such business including, but not limited to, the original invoice of each sale to him or purchase by him from a wholesaler of any alcoholic beverages and shall maintain such records for at least 36 months after the date of such purchase. Such records shall reveal the gross sales from the operation of their business and the exact quantities of malt beverages and wines by size and type of container purchased by such retail dealer together with the dates of delivery of such shipments by wholesale dealers as well as the identity of each wholesale dealer from whom such licensee purchases alcoholic beverages. The city or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to inspect the records of each licensee to maintain proper records showing receipt of alcoholic beverages, payment therefor, and payment of the taxes due thereon to the appropriate wholesaler, and records which clearly show the sales, the amount of sales, and the types of sales of each licensee may, at the discretion of the city clerk or designee, after a hearing as herein provided, result in the revocation or suspension of such license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-10. - Penalties established for failure to keep records. 
(a)  In the event that any wholesaler dealer or retail dealer licensed under this chapter shall fail to keep and maintain records required to be kept of sales by this chapter or in the event that the right of audit is refused to persons duly authorized by the city to conduct such audits, the license of such dealer shall be subject to suspension or revocation as provided for under this chapter. 
(b)  In the event that an audit of the records required to be kept by wholesale and retail dealers under the terms of this chapter are found to vary from the monthly reports required to be furnished by the wholesale dealers to the city and such discrepancies are not explained to the satisfaction of the city clerk or designee, the license of such wholesale dealers shall be subject to suspension or revocation as provided for under the ordinances of the city. If it appears to the city clerk or designee that any retail dealer participated in or conspired with any wholesale dealer to falsify or keep and maintain incorrect records of such sales in order to avoid payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter, all licenses of the licensees involved in such scheme shall be subject to suspension or revocation as provided for under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-11. - Alcoholic beverage review board. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland, at its discretion, may appoint an alcoholic beverage review board. The mayor and city council will develop guidelines for the effectiveness of the alcoholic beverage review board. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2018-16, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-12. - Application forms. 
All persons, firms or corporations desiring to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall make application on the forms prescribed by the appropriate authorities of the city to the city clerk or designee and must follow the applicable procedures, hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-13. - Procedure for considering application. 
The city clerk or designee shall not consider any application for a license until the written application provided for herein shall have been made, the application fee paid, the plat required herein filed and the fingerprinting and investigation of all persons as required under this chapter is completed by the police department. The chief of police shall attach to said application and form a part of the permanent city record. Upon the completion of all of the foregoing, the application, together with all data, shall be submitted to the city clerk for consideration pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-14. - Application; data; information; requirement. 
The appropriate officials, depending upon the type of license or permit involved, shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications which are required under this chapter. Applicants are required to complete all aspects of all prescribed forms required under this chapter. The failure to provide all information required by such forms may result in denial of any application under this chapter. All applicants shall furnish all data requested of them by the city clerk or designee, or the chief of police and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicants, by filing an application for a license permitted under this chapter, agree to produce, for oral interrogation, any person or persons requested by the city clerk or designee, or the chief of police, considered by either as being important in ascertaining the facts relative to such application and/or licenses issued under this chapter. The failure to produce such person or persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal, with prejudice, of any application pending under this chapter. The application form and all data requested by the city clerk or designee or the chief of police shall be subscribed by the applicant(s) under oath before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof and possible prosecution under State of Georgia Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-15. - Citizenship; residence requirements; registered agent; prohibited interests. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence. Where the applicant is a corporation or other business entity other than an individual, any stockholder or principal owning more than a ten percent financial interest must meet the requirements contained herein and, in the event any license provided for hereunder shall be issued, such license shall be issued in the name of the corporation or business entity and the principal stockholder or principal behind such business entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements contained herein shall be met by all partners, whether general or limited partners. 
(b)  All applicants and licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the city or in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served. This person must be a resident of the city or county. The applicant or licensee shall file such forms as required by the city clerk or designee to provide the name of the registered agent and consent of such agent to serve in said capacity. Additionally, the registered agent shall tender a release permitting the city police department to perform an investigation to verify the residency of the registered agent. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-16. - Application; form; content; process; deposit. 
(a)  All persons desiring to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages within the city shall make a written application to the city clerk or designee for such privilege upon the forms provided by the city clerk or designee. The application shall include but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; the name and address of the registered agent for service of process; the name and address of manager; if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners, and, if a corporation or other entity, the names and addresses of the officers and the names and addresses of all stockholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock or more than a ten percent financial interest in the business or in any other entity having a financial interest in the business. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city clerk or designee with the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. The applicant shall also disclose whether the applicant (its partners if a partnership; its officers, manager, and stockholders having more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock if a corporation) has: 
(1)  Been convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or a violation of any municipal ordinance; and 
(2)  Has any interests in a license to sell any alcoholic beverage by the package at retail within the state. 
The application form and all data requested by the city clerk or designee, or the chief of police shall be subscribed by the applicant(s) under oath before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof and possible prosecution under State of Georgia Statutes. 
(b)  No license hereunder shall be issued to any applicant unless information is provided as required in the written application concerning the business location and building construction. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, the laws of the state, and all other pertinent laws. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when finished by the building inspector. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. All premises for which a license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers herein. 
(c)  Each applicant seeking a license under this section shall submit proof of ownership of the building in which the applicant will conduct its business. If the applicant is the owner of such building, the applicant shall provide a certified copy of the deed conveying ownership to the applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of such building, the applicant shall provide a copy of the current lease, in addition to a certified copy of the deed conveying ownership to the current owner of the building. 
(d)  Each applicant shall submit a survey by a registered land surveyor showing compliance with all distance requirements contained herein. 
(e)  All applicants under this section shall submit a complete copy of the Personnel Statement Form ATT-17, State of Georgia, Department of Revenue, Alcohol and Tax Control Unit. 
(f)  In the case of corporate or limited partnership applicants, the applicant must be a business in good standing with the Secretary of State of Georgia. 
(g)  In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by this chapter, such applicant shall attach thereto a complete application form will all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
(h)  Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash for the full amount of the license fee in accordance with the scale fixed by the city council, together with a separate certified check or cash in the amount of $250.00 payable to the city and shall be paid over to the clerk of the city or designee who shall note the payment of such application fee upon the original application for such license. The application fee provided for herein is to be used to defray the investigative and administrative costs and expenses of investigating and considering the application. If the application is denied and the license refused or if the applicant withdraws his application after submission to the city clerk or designee, the application fee provided herein shall not be refundable. However, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded. Any request to amend any provision of a license granted under this chapter is subject to an additional $150.00 administrative application fee. 
(i)  Each application shall contain a certification stating that the applicant (its partner if a partnership; its officers, manager, and stockholders having more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock if a corporation) and registered agent have read this chapter. 
(j)  In the event the applicant is denied a license by the state, the license fee (without interest), but not the application fee, shall be refunded. 
(k)  The city shall require not less than 15 nor more than 60 days for processing any application for license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises after a complete application, including all additional information requested, has been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-17. - Fingerprints of applicants, owners, managers. 
As a prerequisite to the issuance of a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages, all applicants, owners, and managers shall submit themselves to the city police department for the purpose of providing a set of fingerprints, which fingerprints may be forwarded to the appropriate investigative agencies of both the state and federal governments who shall search the appropriate files for any instance of criminal activity within the previous ten years and such fingerprints may be submitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records; said record(s), if any, shall be obtained and returned to the police department. In addition, the requirements of this section shall apply to all newly hired managers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-18. - Advertisement of intent to engage in business; signs posted. 
(a)  All applicants desirous of obtaining a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall give notice at their expense of the making of an application by advertisement at least twice for two consecutive weeks, said advertisement to begin no later than ten days following submission of the application required by section 4-16 (application; form; content; process; deposit). The advertisement shall be published in the legal organ (newspaper) of White County in which the legal advertisements of the city are published. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital in lower case and shall be at least a two-inch, one-column advertisement in size. Said notice shall contain a complete description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant and if a partnership, the names of the partners, whether limited or general, and if a corporation, the names of the officers and all stockholders having more than ten percent of a class of corporate stock therein, and the date the application was filed with the city clerk or designee. The advertisement shall contain the following additional statement: "AN APPLICATION HAS BEEN FILED ON (date) WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND FOR A LICENSE TO OPERATE AND SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AT THE ABOVE LOCATION. A DECISION ON WHETHER OR NOT TO GRANT OR DENY SUCH A LICENSE WILL BE MADE BY THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND NO LATER THAN 60 DAYS FROM THE DATE THE FILED APPLICATION IS DETERMINED TO BE COMPLETE. MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC ARE INVITED TO NOTE ANY OBJECTIONS, IN WRITING, THAT THEY MAY HAVE TO THE GRANTING OF SUCH A LICENSE BY FILING SAID WRITTEN OBJECTIONS WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND." 
(b)  Tear sheets and a publisher's affidavit shall be furnished to the city by the applicant(s) prior to the applicant's application being considered complete. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed at their expense upon the location of the proposed business no later than ten days following submission of the application, a sign or signs stating the following: "AN APPLICATION HAS BEEN FILED ON (date) WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND FOR A LICENSE TO SELL ___________. A DECISION ON WHETHER OR NOT TO GRANT OR DENY SUCH A LICENSE WILL BE MADE BY THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND NO LATER THAN 60 DAYS FROM THE DATE THE FILED APPLICATION IS DETERMINED TO BE COMPLETE. MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC ARE INVITED TO NOTE ANY OBJECTIONS, IN WRITING, THAT THEY MAY HAVE TO THE GRANTING OF SUCH A LICENSE BY FILING SAID WRITTEN OBJECTIONS WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND." 
(d)  The sign or signs required by subsection (c) shall be constructed of wood or metal and shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground and shall be not less than 48 inches by 48 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property adjoining the proposed location. The statement above shall be printed or painted on the sign in the English language. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen and the statement above easily read from all public properties adjoining the proposed location. Said sign shall not be require to comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance pertaining to signs. 
(e)  The advertising requirements of this section shall not be required in cases where the location of the proposed business has previously served as a location where alcoholic beverage sales have been licensed within five years of the date of the application for license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-19. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sales. 
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-20. - Annexation of licensed businesses. 
Any person, persons, establishment, partnership, corporation or other entity which holds a license from a county for the retail sale of package malt beverages and wine, or consumption of distilled spirits, and which is located in an area annexed by the city, shall have 30 days from the effective date of the annexation to apply for the appropriate licenses and permits under this chapter. However, all applicable fees and costs for the equivalent license(s) in the city shall be waived for the year of annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-21. - Other licenses. 
The licenses and taxes provided for in this chapter are not levied in lieu of any other license fees or taxes that may be levied upon licensees, but are in addition thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-22. - Restriction upon transfers. 
(a)  Licenses permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided for in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest greater than ten percent therein, the license may, with the approval of the city clerk or designee and subject to the terms of this chapter, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if such heirs make application and meet all of the other qualification contained herein. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his estate and dispose of the license or his interest therein, but in no event to exceed eight months. In the event of the bankruptcy or in the event that any applicant shall have a receiver appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction, such license shall be transferable to such receiver or trustee in bankruptcy for such period of time as may be granted by the city clerk or designee for the proper liquidation of such assets and stock and goods of alcoholic beverages or both. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his/her interest in such partnership to one or more of the partners who were partner at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this chapter are fully complied with, and then only upon the approval of the city clerk or designee. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock to persons who held more than ten percent of any class of stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license. 
(d)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself will directly receive none of the additional capital investment. Under this section an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved by the city clerk or designee. This subsection only applies to corporations when the new stockholder obtains ten percent or more of the common stock or financial interest in the business entity. 
(e)  Should a transfer of the license be approved, there shall be no prorated return of any license fee and the new licensee shall meet all requirements for a new license to be issued hereunder, except payment of license fees. 
(f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall be cause for immediate suspension of any license issued hereunder pending a revocation hearing as provided for under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-23. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for non-use. 
(a)  All holders of licenses permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages must within 12 months after the issuance of said license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within 12 months after the issuance of such license shall serve as cause for the revocation of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. A six-month extension to the 12-month period may be granted by the city clerk or designee in the case of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Failure to operate the business authorized by a license under this chapter for a period of six consecutive months after the licensee has begun operation under a license, shall serve as cause for the revocation of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-24. - Annual renewal. 
All licensees holding licenses permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be required to file their application to renew their licenses by January 1 of each year on forms prescribed by the city clerk or designee. 
Sec. 4-25. - Training required for issuance of licenses. 
(a)  The applicant for a license under this chapter shall present to the city clerk or designee a current certification of attendance at an approved alcohol awareness training program. 
(b)  If the applicant lacks such training and certification, the applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the granting of the license to complete the training and submit certification to the city clerk or designee. Upon due cause being shown, the city clerk or designee may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 60 days, to complete said training. Failure to timely obtain such certification shall be grounds for revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(c)  Every applicant to whom a handling permit is issued and all managerial staff of a licensee shall also complete an approved alcohol awareness training program within 30 days of being issued a pouring permit, being employed as a part of any managerial staff, or being issued a license in the case of the named individual licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-26. - Considerations for granting a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages provided for by this chapter is purely a privilege and the city clerk or designee shall have discretionary powers to grant or refuse to grant any such application for license hereunder; however, it shall be proper for the city clerk or designee to consider the following matters in connection with any application for license hereunder, which considerations are deemed to be in the public interest and welfare, as follows: 
(1)  That the applicant for a license for retail sales or consumption on the premises is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state; 
(2)  That the applicant for a wholesaler license is related to any retailer of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state; 
(3)  That the applicant, or any person having a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the issuance of the license, has had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcohol or malt beverages suspended within the past five years or revoked within the past ten years; 
(4)  That any applicant for a license to sell package beer and wine is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state; 
(5)  That any applicant for a license to sell package beer and wine, or any person having a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the issuance of the license, has had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcohol or malt beverages suspended within the past five years or revoked within the past ten years; 
(6)  That the applicant or any person owning a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license for which application is made does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made, or who has been dishonorably discharged from the Armed Services of the United States, or fails to demonstrated financial stability; 
(7)  That the applicant is not 21 years of age or older; 
(8)  That the applicant is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence; 
(9)  The location of the premises from which the proposed sale of alcoholic beverages shall be conducted does not meet the distance restrictions below; 
(10)  That any licensee, owner, or manager has not obtained a valid alcohol handling permit as required by this chapter; 
(11)  Failure to meet any other criteria specified by this chapter; 
(12)  The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct the business proposed to be conducted; 
(13)  That applicant, or any person who shall have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license, as a previous holder of a license to sell any type of alcoholic beverages has been found to have violated an law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period, immediately preceding the date of the application for license hereunder; 
(14)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any type of alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he or she conducted the business under such license and as to the necessity for any unusual police observation and inspection of such prior business in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(15)  If applicant has had a prior license, whether or not any such prior license for the sale of any type of alcoholic beverages has been previously suspended or revoked or whether or not hearings have been held for the revocation or suspension of any such license regardless of whether or not any such license was revoked or suspended as a result of such hearing; 
(16)  The location of the premises from which the proposed sale of alcoholic beverages shall be conducted; 
(17)  That corporate or other business entity applicants are of bad business reputation; 
(18)  That applicant, or any person who shall have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license, has had any city license revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application; 
(19)  Any other matters which the city clerk or designee in his/her sole discretion, may choose to consider; 
(20)  That the facility where the business entity applicants propose to sell alcoholic beverages does not meet city zoning requirements. 
(b)  All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. 
(c)  A license may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(d)  The city clerk or designee has discretionary authority to consider any extenuating circumstances, which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or the proposed location of the business. If in the judgment of the city clerk or designee, circumstances are such that granting the license would not be in the best interest of the general health, safety, meets all current ordinance codes, including all building codes, and public welfare, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(e)  All decisions of the city clerk or designee either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by certified mail. 
(f)  Whenever the city clerk or designee shall deny an application for a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, the applicant shall be notified of the right to a hearing under this chapter upon timely application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-27. - Moral character criminal record of owners, officers, shareholders, managers. 
(a)  Where the applicant is a corporation or other business entity other than an individual, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its stockholders or principals owning more than a ten percent financial interest, and all partners, officers, and managers. 
(b)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city clerk or designee that such person, partners in the firm, or officers and directors of the corporation are of good moral character and reputation. In no event shall any license be granted to any applicant when a person to whom this section applies has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felon involving moral turpitude, lottery, illegal gambling, illegal possession or sale of illegal drugs or alcoholic beverages, or any felony of the United States or any state or municipality within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by duly sworn affidavit, certify that the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, nor the manager of such establishment has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any of the crimes enumerated above within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. Should any person to whom this section applies, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes enumerated above, the license shall be suspended pending a revocation hearing as provided for under this chapter. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense to which defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered and adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(d)  A licensee denied a license under subsection (b) of this section may reapply for such license upon the expiration of two calendar years from the date of the original application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-28. - Payment of taxes and other debts to the city. 
The city clerk or designee shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records of the city to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued, nor shall a license be renewed, until all such debts are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-29. - Change in relationships and/or ownership interest. 
Any change in any of the relationships and/or ownership interest contained on the application must be filed with the city clerk or designee within 30 days after such change is made and the failure to do so shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of an alcohol license as provided for under this chapter or for the immediate denial of any application for such a license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-30. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
Where a building in which an applicant proposes to operate under a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages is at the time of application for such license not in existence, not yet completed, or under renovation a license may be issued for such location providing the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city clerk and show clear compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city and an occupancy permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-31. - Application for new license in existing license location. 
An application for a new license in an existing license location shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this chapter for granting of a new license except as provided in section 4-18(e). 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-32. - Managers and employees; responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all licensees who sell alcoholic beverages to file two submittals annually; on or before June 1, and again on or before December 1 with the chief of police. Such submittal shall include the name of the establishment, the license number and the following information regarding: (1) all licensees, owners, and managers, and (2) all employees working on the premises and connected with the sale of alcoholic beverages: name, birth date; social security number; home address; home telephone number; race; gender; place of birth (if outside the United States, Alien Registration Number); driver's license number and state of issuance; height; weight; hair color; eye color; alias used presently or in the past, and places of employment. 
(b)  No licensee shall allow any manager or employee required under this section to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises beyond 30 days after their first week beyond February 1, 2011 unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid alcohol handling permit of each such manager or employee. An individual working on the premises beyond 30 days after their first week beyond February 1, 2011 in an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages without the required permit shall be considered in violation of this chapter and the employee and licensee punishable as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  In the event that any permit holder leaves the employ or withdraws from ownership of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the alcohol handling permit to the chief of police. 
(d)  The licensee is responsible for the conduct and action of his/her employees while his/her employment. Should an employee be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to the charge of sale or attempted sale of alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age, the licensee employing such employee shall return to the chief of police that employee's alcohol handling permit and shall not permit such employee to sell, take orders for delivery, or to aid or assist in the sale or delivery, directly or indirectly, of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-33. - Employment of persons with certain prior convictions prohibited. 
No licensee shall employ in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity whatsoever, who has been convicted in the courts of this state or any other state, or the courts of the United States or any other country, within ten years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting of premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegal dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or other charges related to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, any felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude. For purposes of this chapter, a plea of nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-34. - Licensees, owners, managers, and employees; alcohol handling permit. 
(a)  All licensees, owners, and managers must make application for and obtain an alcohol handling permit prior to being granted a license to sell alcoholic beverages. In addition, all persons employed to work on the premises in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages shall, within three days after the date of their first week beyond February 1, 2011 in an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages, file a signed application and provide an authorization for release of personal information and criminal history record information to the chief of police or authorized representative. Said application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The licensee shall also be noted. Any arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. No permit shall be issued until such time as a search of the criminal record of the applicant has been completed. The applicant must also certify that he or she has read and understands the legal restrictions on alcohol handling and sales and the potential penalties that may apply if such requirements are not met. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person to be cleared. No alcohol handling permit may be issued to any person who has been convicted in this state or any other state, or in any country, within ten years immediately prior to the application of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting of premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegal dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or other charges related to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs, any felony, any crime involving more turpitude or a second offense for driving under the influence of alcohol. In the event there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the chief of police shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall be specific as to the licensee. The chief of police may prescribe reasonable fees for processing such permits which shall be paid at the time application is made. If it is found that the person to be cleared is not eligible for a permit, the chief of police shall notify the applicant and city clerk or designee, and in the case of manager or employee applicants, the applicant's employer, that this person is not eligible for a permit and/or employment. The applicant who is denied an alcohol handling permit may appeal such ruling to the alcoholic beverage review board. 
(c)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the chief of police, the city clerk, or an agent designated by either. Such permit shall be present on the premises at all times while the permittee is working. All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the chief of police or the city clerk or designee. 
(d)  No person shall be issued an alcohol handling permit and it shall be considered a violation of this article if it is determined that the person knowingly and willfully falsified, concealed, or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the chief of police for an alcohol handling permit under this article. Any person convicted of this offense shall be punished by a fine of up to but not more than $500.00. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to licensed wholesalers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-35. - Alcohol handling permit; renewal. 
(a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall expire one year from the date of issuance (two years for non-managerial employees of package stores) unless earlier revoked by the city clerk or designee, or chief of police. All individuals (if still employed in such establishment) holding alcohol handling permits shall be required to submit an application to renew their permits in advance of the expiration date on forms prescribed by the chief of police. A minimum of 14 days shall be required for review prior to issuance of a renewed permit. If such renewal application is not made prior to the expiration date, a penalty of 50 percent of the renewal fee shall be imposed. Handling alcohol without a valid permit is expressly prohibited. 
(b)  The penalty for an individual being convicted or pleading guilty or entering a plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of up to but not more than $250.00 unless otherwise stated. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Secs. 4-36—4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-61. - License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises or distributed for educational or instructional purposes in a wine tasting room except under a license granted by the city clerk or designee, as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Only the following shall be licensed under the City of Cleveland Alcohol Ordinance as defined in section 4-4: 
(1)  Sixty percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises of restaurants, indoor civic/cultural facility, or restaurant within a hotel. Said establishments shall be prepared to serve food every hour they are open; 
(2)  Wine tasting rooms for consumption of samples at specialty gift shops; 
(3)  Malt beverages and wine only for consumption at a special event for a nonprofit civic group; 
(4)  Malt beverages and wine only for consumption through outdoor golf course sales; 
(5)  Malt beverages and wine only for consumption off the premises by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer; 
(6)  Performing arts facility; 
(7)  Malt beverages only for package on the premises of convenience stores, and grocery stores/supermarkets; 
(8)  Wine beverages only for package on the premises of convenience stores and grocery/supermarkets and specialty gift shops; 
(9)  Malt beverages and wine beverages only for consumption with meals at a special events facility; and 
(10)  Distilled spirits beverages only for consumption with the purchase of meals on the premises of restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014; Ord. No. 2018-16, 11-13-2018) 
Secs. 4-62—4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSUMPTION 

Sec. 4-81. - Issuance of consumption on premises license limited to designated area occupational tax certificate—Consumption on premises. 
(a)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any person unless the business or the proposed business to be licensed hereunder is a restaurant, performing arts facility, golf course, special events facility, or brewpub as each of these terms is defined in section 4-4 and in the following sections. 
(b)  In the case of outdoor golf course, sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption, only the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be permitted. 
(c)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be granted except when the business is located in the commercial zoning classifications and fronts state routes with the exception of Inside City Square Area as drawn on Attachment I (square map) and city streets with the following specifications: 
(1)  In no case shall the city street be less than three lanes including a center turn lane with the width, back of curb to back of curb being no less than 37 feet. 
(d)  Licenses for performing arts facilities shall only be issued where the facility is located in the commercial zoning classification and has obtained a special use permit to operate as a performing arts facility. Licenses shall only be issued for a business that is a permitted use in that particular zoning district and no license for the sale of alcoholic beverage or consumption on the premises may be issued to any business licensed for operating as any type of adult entertainment establishment as set forth in ordinances of the City of Cleveland. 
(e)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any person unless the business or the proposed business to be licensed hereunder has made application for and received an occupation tax certificate as a restaurant, performing arts facility, caterer, golf course, or brew pub. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-82. - Distances for consumption license. 
(a)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be issued hereunder where the place of business of the applicant is located within a distance of 300 feet of any school property, college campus property, housing authority property, church building, or alcohol treatment facility building or public library building. Any location licensed hereunder may continue to operate any of the businesses described in this section in the event that any such school property, college campus property, housing authority property, city park property, church building, or alcohol treatment facility building is subsequent to the date of the granting of such license for such premises, located closer than the distances set forth herein. 
(b)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises will be issued if the regulated business building and the residential building is closer than 50 feet. If the regulated business building is between 50 feet and 200 feet from a residential building a permanent six-foot privacy fence shall be erected and extend the full length of the business property line. The face or finished side of the privacy fence shall face the residential property and shall be maintained by the licensee. The fence shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector. 
(c)  Said distance for the purpose of this section shall be measured as defined under the definition section 4-4. The term "property" shall mean property line to property line and the term building shall mean building wall to building wall. Because of the unique nature of the Cleveland City Square commercial area and the desire to encourage economic health and stability in that area, all distance limitations set forth in this section shall be reduced to zero feet for businesses located on the area known as inside square area as drawn on Attachment I (map). 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-83. - Special event licenses. 
(a)  Special event licenses shall be limited to no more than a two-day license, shall be limited to four special event licenses per civic organization per year, and shall permit sales only at locations in areas zoned commercial or industrial. 
(b)  Special event licenses shall be granted to nonprofit civic organizations in conjunction with a person or business possessing a current alcoholic beverage license permitting consumption of malt beverages and wine on the premises ("for-profit licensee"). The for-profit licensee or the licensee's employees shall supervise all aspects of the special event pertaining to the handling and storage of alcoholic beverages and the distribution of alcoholic beverages to consumers. Both the nonprofit licensee and the for-profit licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all aspects of this chapter and state law, and liable for infractions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-84. - Brewpub licenses. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without first obtaining a brewpub license from the city clerk or designee pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in sections 4-151—4-160, and each brewpub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. 
(b)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
(1)  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 5,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail on the premises and solely in draft form in an open container; 
(2)  Operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer. Such outlet may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are separately authorized for consumption on the premises by this chapter, including wine, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises only; and, provided, further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers for consumption on the premises only; and 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, sell up to a maximum of 500 barrels annually of such beer to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers. 
(c)  Possession of a brewpub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining another license authorized under section 4-61 (license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises) for the same premises. 
(d)  A brewpub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail by package for consumption off the premises. 
(e)  A brewpub licensee shall not offer or permit any free sampling of beer by its customers on the premises. 
(f)  A brewpub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed as manufacturers, retailers, and, where applicable, wholesalers. 
(g)  A brewpub licensee shall measure all beer manufactured on the premises and otherwise comply with applicable regulations respecting excise and enforcement tax determination of such beer as required. 
(h)  Except as set forth above in this section, a brewpub license holder shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  A brewpub license shall be a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-85. - Wine tasting room licenses. 
(a)  A wine tasting room for purposes of this chapter shall be limited to entities possessing: 
(1)  Specialty gift shop license and shall be defined as any retail gift shop that derives not more than 15 percent of its gross sales from the sale of package gift baskets containing non-alcohol related items such as flowers, plants, food or similar items which also contain unbroken containers of wine or malt beverages. 
(2)  Restaurants possessing a license for consumption on the premises shall not be eligible for a wine tasting room permit. 
(3)  No wine tasting shall be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken container. Any wine tasting occurring on the premises of a business possessing a specialty gift shop license shall be limited to a confined area with single means of ingress and egress into such area. The applicant's proposed measures to segregate the wine tasting area along with proposed staffing and oversight shall be submitted to and approved by the city police department. 
(4)  An eligible licensee may petition the city for a wine tasting room license provided it meets all present requirements of the city's alcohol beverage ordinance. A wine tasting room license shall allow the license holder to offer wine samples and sell wine samples only if offered or sold in connection with an instructional or education promotion. A wine tasting room license is intended to allow such activity on a limited basis and shall not be part of the core operations of such establishment or occur on a daily basis. A wine tasting room license shall be subjected to all other laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, including Rule 560-2-5-05 of the Department of Revenue, Alcohol and Tobacco Division, and is subject to license revocation for violation thereof. Samples cannot leave premises. Sunday sales permitted, with proper licensing, between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-86. - Performing arts facility. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages at a performing arts facility without first obtaining performing arts facility alcohol license from the city clerk or designee pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in Article I of this chapter and each performing arts facility alcohol license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold at a performing arts facility only where the facility has obtained a special use permit to allow for the presentation of mainline dramatic arts, plays, and theatre productions within the commercial zoning classification. 
(c)  A performing arts facility which is licensed to serve alcohol shall only dispense alcoholic beverages at a bar located in the lobby area of the facility or by a waiter or waitress serving patrons within the facility on days where a performance will take place in the facility. 
(d)  In addition to the hours of sale requirements set out in section 4-97, a performing arts facility which is licensed to serve alcohol shall not dispense alcoholic beverages earlier than 5:30 p.m. or later than 10:30 p.m. on Monday through Friday. Alcohol may be sold Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. In no event shall a performing arts facility dispense alcoholic beverages earlier than one hour before the start of performance or after the performance has ended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-87. - Special events facility. 
The city clerk or designee may issue a special events facility license for consumption on the premises with meals. The license shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where special events including, but not limited to, weddings, wedding receptions, private parties and similar events are held and which provides meals or food services in connection with such events. Any such facility shall be equipped with an adequate sanitary kitchen with dining room facility and have a seating capacity of at least 50 people, and shall be capable of preparing, cooking, and serving meals and other food products associated with its special events on site. Any such facility open to the public for the service of at least one meal per day for three or more days per week, shall be considered a restaurant. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-88. - Outdoor golf course sales. 
Outdoor golf course sales are permitted for retail consumption licensees operating such golf course provided such sales are made on or immediately adjacent to the golf course itself from a mobile or satellite location between the first and final hole on the course. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-89. - Licensed caterers. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a caterer shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a duly authorized catered event, if the caterer is a retailer dealer licensed pursuant to state law and has obtained the following licenses and permits: 
(1)  A license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in addition to an alcoholic beverage catering license issued by the city or another licensing jurisdiction; and 
(2)  An off-premises permit for the specific event being catered. 
(b)  All licensed alcoholic beverage caterers desiring to engage in activities permitted by this section shall make written application to the city clerk or designee for the appropriate off-premises permit. The application shall include, but not to be limited to, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the date, address and time of the proposed catered event and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's state license number. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If an applicant has had their license to sell alcohol beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises issued by another jurisdiction, the application shall be accompanied by an off-premises permit fee of $50.00. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded. If an applicant has had their license to sell alcoholic beverage by the drink for consumption on the premises issued by the city, such off-premises permit fee is waived. However, such permit must still be obtained. 
(c)  The city clerk or designee shall have authority to prescribe forms for applications. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original or renewal application for a off-premises permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. 
(e)  If such off-premises permit is granted by the city clerk or designee, it shall be good only for the specific event at the specified address and time set forth in the application, not in excess of five days. 
(f)  Except as set forth above in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-90. - Partially consumed bottle of wine from a restaurant. 
A licensee, if licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine from a restaurant if the patron purchased the bottle of wine and a meal and consumed a portion of wine on the premises. The licensee and patron must comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-4 and 40-6-253(2) as they may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-91. - Consumption sales by the drink only. 
Persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not sell alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-92. - Pitchers. 
No licensee shall sell, offer to sell or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages in any container which holds more than 32 fluid ounces (0.947 liters), except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-93. - Sales restricted to premises only. 
No retail consumption dealer shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in said licensee's place of business, except as provided for in licensed caterers and outdoor golf course sales. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-94. - Patio sales/outside temporary events. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee may issue a patio sales license to restaurant establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a patio sales license, such patios or open areas shall be enclosed by some structure the height of which shall be a minimum of four feet above ground level. Such structure may be constructed of material which permits visibility into and out of the patio or open area. Such structure must comply with all applicable city codes, including, but not limited to, building and fire codes, and shall function to prevent patrons from leaving the patio or open area with an alcoholic beverage without the knowledge of the licensee. 
(c)  The licensee shall require patrons to enter and exit licensed patio or open areas through the licensed establishment's main premises. Licensed patio or open areas shall have an approved fire exit for emergency use only, equipped with an audible alarm triggered by unauthorized use of such fire exit. 
(d)  Establishments duly licensed by the city clerk or designee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises must submit an application to the city clerk or designee to engage in outside special events. The applicant must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The licensed establishment must have an existing license of the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. The only entrance and exit to the event must be through a controlled entry point which allows for easy monitoring of patrons entering and leaving the event. 
(2)  The entire outside event must be enclosed by a temporary chain link fence. The fence shall be a minimum of four feet in height. 
(3)  The temporary fence must have an entrance and emergency exit with a uniformed off duty police officer stationed at the entrance and emergency exit. 
(4)  The temporary fence must be installed and inspected at least one day prior to the event. Alcohol beverage sales will not be approved for the event without inspection and approval of the temporary fence by the building inspector. 
(5)  A site plan must be submitted to the city clerk's or designee's office as well as the county fire marshal's office for approval. If the site plan provides for an area to accommodate more than 25 persons, a crowd control and security plan must be submitted to the city police department for approval. The fire department must approve any temporary structures, such as tents, within the fenced area. 
(6)  A signed and notarized letter from the property owner must be submitted to the city clerk's office or designee's office authorizing the use of the property for the event. 
(7)  All outside points of sale of alcoholic beverages must be licensed and the required fees paid. The outside event shall not exceed two days. 
(8)  All outside events for an individual licensed establishment will be restricted to two events per year. 
(9)  A nonrefundable fee of $50.00 per event must be paid at the time of filing of the application. 
(10)  Completed application must be submitted to the city clerk's office 45 days prior to the scheduled event. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to waive or repeal any other requirements ordained under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-95. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed to sell alcoholic beverages hereunder shall require, permit, suffer, encourage or indulge any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay any commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agents or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-96. - "Happy hour" promotions and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at one time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverages at a price less than the price regularly charged for such beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding alcoholic beverages as a prize; or 
(8)  Require or allow the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the previous alcoholic beverage has been consumed or otherwise discarded. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in a room or part thereof including outdoor or patio sales where permitted. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public and said schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-97. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  No retail consumption dealer shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage at any time except during the following hours: 9:00 a.m. Monday through 12:00 a.m. Tuesday; 9:00 a.m. Tuesday through 12:00 a.m. Wednesday; 9:00 a.m. Wednesday through 12:00 a.m. Thursday; 9:00 a.m. Thursday through 12:00 a.m. Friday; 9:00 a.m. Friday through 12:00 a.m. Saturday; 9:00 a.m. Saturday through 11:55 p.m. Saturday; Sunday 12:30 p.m. through 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  Christmas Day sales. 
(c)  No retail consumption dealer shall furnish, sell or offer for sale through outdoor golf course sales any alcoholic beverage at any time except during the following hours: 9:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Further, no retail consumption dealer shall furnish, sell or offer for sale through outdoor golf course sales any alcoholic beverage on Sunday. 
(d)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-98. - Sale of alcoholic beverages on election day; distance from polling place. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be legal on any election day. This authorization is approved by the city pursuant to the provisions of Georgia Laws 1985, page 1508. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Secs. 4-99—4-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PACKAGE 

Sec. 4-121. - Issuance of package licenses limited to designated areas. 
(a)  No license permitting the retail sale of package malt beverages or wine or both shall be granted to any applicant hereunder unless the proposed premises is located in an area of the city which is zoned for commercial and fronts a state route with the exception of city streets with the following specifications: 
(1)  In no case shall the city street be less than three lanes including a center turn lane with the width, back of curb to back of curb being no less than 37 feet. 
(2)  No issuance of package licenses for the inside square area as drawn on Attachment I (map). The defined area known as inside square area can only be changed by an amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived. This shall not apply to specialty gift shops located in the inside square area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-122. - Distance from schools, churches, residences, etc. 
(a)  No license permitting the sale of package malt beverages or wine or both shall be issued for any proposed location which: 
(1)  If the regulated business building and the residential building is closer than 50 feet. If the regulated business building is between 50 feet and 200 feet from a residential building a permanent six-foot privacy fence shall be erected and extend the full length of the business property line. The face or finished side of the privacy fence shall face the residential property and shall be maintained by the licensee. The fence shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector; 
(2)  Is within a distance of 300 feet of any church building; 
(3)  Is within a distance of 300 feet of any public library building or library branch building, alcohol treatment facility building; 
(4)  Is within a distance of 300 feet of a public park property owned or maintained by the City of Cleveland; 
(5)  Is within a distance of 300 feet of any school property, or college campus property, housing authority property; or 
(6)  Is within a distance of 100 feet of any business licensed to sell package malt beverages or wine or both pursuant to this chapter unless other such business is a hotel/motel. 
(b)  Said distance for the purpose of this section shall be measured as defined in section 4-4 (distance). The term property shall mean property line to property line and the term building shall mean building wall to building wall. Any location licensed hereunder may continue to operate any of the businesses described in this section in the event that any such school property, college campus property, public park property, housing authority property, church building, or alcohol treatment facility building is subsequent to the date of the granting of such license for such premises, located closer than the distances set forth herein. 
(c)  The alcoholic beverage review board may grant reductions of the distance requirements set forth in subsection (a) above upon request of the applicant if the alcoholic beverage review board determines that the reduction of the distance requirements will not have an adverse effect on the surrounding community or the properties provided protection by the distance requirements and that sufficient buffering or separation of the two properties exists under the reduced distance requirements. No reduction of the distance requirements may be for an amount greater than 50 percent of the original required distance or to a distance less than the distance required by the general laws of the state. In its consideration of the requested distance reduction, the alcoholic beverage review board may consider whether the applicant has obtained the consent of properties provided protection by the distance requirements, but such content shall not be required to grant the reduction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-123. - Hours of sale. 
Retail dealers in package malt beverages or package wine or both shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine or both except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m. Monday through Saturday and Sunday 12:30 p.m. through 11:30 p.m. No malt beverage or wine shall be sold on Christmas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-124. - Handling not to include bagging and carrying out. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-125. - Security cameras required. 
Each business licensed by the city to sale alcohol by the package shall install and maintain security cameras in the outlet of a type and number approved by the chief of police. Such cameras: 
(1)  Shall be placed in the business to record activities in the checkout or cash register area(s). 
(2)  Shall be capable of producing a retrievable image on film, tape, or any readable medium that can be made a permanent record and enlarged through a projector or other means. 
Such cameras shall be maintained in proper working order at all times. If a robbery or other violation occurs in such outlet, the film, disk or tape recording of such event shall immediately be made available to the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-126. - Specialty gift shop licenses. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, limited exceptions from this chapter shall exist for the owners of specialty gift shops provided that the owner obtains a specialty gift shop alcohol beverage license as hereinafter provided; and the only sale of alcohol beverages by the owner is through the sale of gift items as specified and not for consumption on the premises. These exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  In lieu of section 4-16(h) (application fee), subsection (b) of this section shall apply to applications for specialty gift shop licenses; 
(2)  Section 4-122 (distance from schools, churches, residences, etc.), subsections (a)(1) (private residences), (a)(2) (churches), (a)(3) (public libraries), (a)(4) (public parks), and (a)(5) (another licensee) shall not apply for specialty gift shops. 
(b)  Each application for a specialty gift shop license under this chapter shall be accomplished by a certified check or cash for the full amount of the license fee in accordance with the scale fixed by the city council, together with a separate certified check or cash in the amount of $100.00 payable to the city and shall be paid over to the clerk of the city or designee who shall note the payment of such application fee upon the original application for such license. The application fee provided for herein is to be used to defray the investigative and administrative costs and expenses of investigating and considering the application. If the application is denied and the license refused or if the applicant withdraws his application after submission to the city clerk or designee, the application fee provided herein shall not be refundable, however, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, an employee who sells any gift item containing alcohol must be at least 18 years of age. 
(d)  Except as set forth above in this section, a specialty gift shop alcohol licensee must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  Sales of packaged distilled spirits is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-127. - Consumption prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the sale of package alcohol beverages. For the purpose of this section, "premises" shall include the parking area immediately adjoining the premises licensed for the sale of package alcohol beverage and available for the use of the customers of the licensed premises, whether or not the same are owned or leased by the licensed holder. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises or to sell unsealed (broken) alcohol beverage containers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-128. - Distilled spirits or spirituous liquors packaged sales prohibited. 
The sale of packaged distilled spirits or spirituous liquors is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Secs. 4-129—4-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WHOLESALE 

Sec. 4-151. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesale dealers or distributors shall be licensed by the state revenue department and shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages in the city. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to retailers licensed under the provisions of this chapter and all deliveries shall be made in conveyances owned and operated by such wholesale dealers or distributors. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-152. - Wholesale licensees prohibited from interest in other licenses. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold or have an interest in a license issued permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises issued under the terms of this and other city alcohol beverage ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-153. - Other licenses. 
The licenses and taxes provided for in this chapter are not levied in lieu of any other license fees or taxes that may be levied upon licensees, but are in addition thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-154. - Wholesalers sales within the city limits. 
Wholesale dealers or distributors shall not sell nor make deliveries of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine within the city to retailers except those licensed by the city and the state revenue department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-155. - Issuance of licenses limited to designated area—Wholesales. 
(a)  No license permitting the wholesale distribution of alcohol shall be granted to any applicant proposing to locate within the city unless the premise is located in an area of the city, which is zoned for commercial, with the exception of city streets with the following specifications: 
(1)  In no case shall the city street be less than three lanes including a center turn lane with the width, back of curb to back of curb being no less than 37 feet. 
(2)  Within the inside square area as drawn on Attachment I (map). 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-156. - Distances for wholesale sales. 
(a)  No license permitting the wholesale sale of malt beverages or wine or both shall be issued for any proposed location located within the city which is within a distance of 300 feet of any school property, city parks property, or college campus property, housing authority property, churches building, library building, or alcohol treatment facility building. 
(b)  No license permitting the wholesale distribution of spirituous liquors shall be issued for any proposed location to be located within the city. 
(c)  No license shall be issued if the regulated business building is 200 feet or less from a residential building. 
(d)  Said distance for the purpose of this section shall be measured as defined in section 4-4, definitions. Any location licensed to operate any of the businesses described in this section, where a different method of ascertaining distances was used, may continue to operate such business at its present location without committing a violation of this section. Any location licensed under this chapter may continue to operate any of the businesses described in this section in the event that any such private residence, public school, library, park or church is, subsequent to the date of the granting of the license for such premises, located closer than the distances set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-157. - Annual renewals. 
All licensees holding licenses permitting the wholesale distribution of alcohol shall be required to file their application to renew their licenses by January 1 of each year on forms prescribed by the city clerk or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-158. - Regulations governing retail storage. 
All licensed retailers shall store all alcoholic beverages on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. No wholesaler shall store for any retail dealer those alcoholic beverages which have been ordered or purchased. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-159. - Minimum legal container. 
No wholesale dealer may sell to a holder of a license for sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises spirituous liquors in containers smaller than 750 milliliters. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-160. - Consumption prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises located within the city licensed for the wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this section, "premises" shall include the parking area immediately adjoining the premises licensed for the sale of package alcohol and available for the use of the customers of the licensed premises, whether or not the same are owned or leased by the licensed holder. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises or to sell unsealed (broken) alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-161. - Hours of sale. 
The hours during which the sale of alcoholic beverages may be conducted in the city by any wholesale dealer licensed hereunder shall be from sunup to sundown, exclusive of Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Secs. 4-162—4-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Sale of liquor, App. A, Art. II. 
Cross reference— Fees, fines and other charges, ch. 24 et seq. 

Sec. 4-181. - Classification of licenses; fees. 
The licenses listed below are the only licenses authorized to be issued by this chapter and each such license is a separate and distinct license and shall require the payment of separate license fees as provided for in this chapter. The types of licenses, the restrictions on the issuance of each, and the fees for such licenses are as follows: 
(1)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine only for consumption on the premises, $2,600.00, Monday through Sunday sales. 
(2)  License permitting the sale of wine only for consumption on the premises, $1,300.00, Monday through Sunday sales. 
(3)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages only for consumption on the premises, $1,300.00, Monday through Sunday sales. 
(4)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine only for consumption through outdoor golf course sales, $150.00. Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in section 4-61(b)(1)—(3). 
(5)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine only for consumption on the premises at a special event by a civic nonprofit organization, $50.00. Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in section 4-61(b)(1)—(3). 
(6)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, and manufacture or brewing of beer for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form through operation of a brewpub, $250.00. Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in section 4-61(b)(1)—(3). 
(7)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages or wine only for consumption off the premises by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer, $150.00. Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in section 4-61(b)(1)—(3). 
(8)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a special events facility, $1,500.00, described in section 4-61. 
(9)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption at a special event by special events vendor, $150.00. Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in section 4-61(b)(1)—(3). 
(10)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a performing arts facility as described in section 4-61, or a specialty gift shop $200.00. 
(11)  License permitting the sale of wine for consumption on the premises of a wine tasting room, $100.00, described in section 4-61. 
(12)  License permitting the retail sale of package malt beverages, $1,300.00, described in section 4-61 Monday through Sunday sales. 
(13)  License permitting the retail sale of package wine, $1,300.00, described in section 4-61 Monday through Sunday sales. 
(14)  Any request to amend any provision of a license granted under this chapter is subject to an additional $150.00 administrative application fee. 
(15)  License permitting the sale of distilled spirits or spirituous liquors only for consumption on the premises, $2,600.00, Monday through Sunday sales. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-182. - Annual fees. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage licenses are valid from January 1 through December 31 of the following year. Each licensee holding a license listed in section 4-181 permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages shall pay the fee listed in the above section, as may be amended, annually. 
(b)  All annual license fees herein shall be paid in advance, on or before January 1 of each year and any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration; provided, however, that if a license is granted after July 1, the license fee shall be ½ of the annual license for such calendar year. 
(c)  Any person licensed hereunder shall be required to submit a complete application to renew his/her license on the forms prescribed by the city clerk or designee on or before January 1 of each year. For those applicants who fail to submit a complete application and license fee before January 1 but do so on or before January 30, a penalty of ten percent of the license fee shall be imposed for said failure in addition to any other penalties that may be authorized. Further, those renewal applicants who fail to submit a complete application and license fee prior to the January 1 deadline may not receive the new license prior to the expiration of the old license. A minimum of 14 days shall be required for review prior to issuance of a renewed license. Unlicensed sales of alcohol are prohibited. 
(d)  Any license holder who fails to submit a complete application for a license renewal prior to January 30 of each year shall be required to undergo the application process as a new license applicant. Unlicensed sales of alcohol are prohibited. 
(e)  Those applicants applying for a special event license shall submit the application and license fee 45 days in advance of the date of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-183. - Lounges and bars. 
Lounge means a room in which people may relax or wait, or a room where cocktails and other drinks are served. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served or consumed in a lounge. Bars are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-184. - Drive-in window or curb service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages from a "drive-in," "service" window, or vending machine. 
(b)  Curb service or other sales of alcoholic beverages outside the building licensed to sell is expressly prohibited except as may be permitted by section 4-89 (licensed caterers), section 4-88 (outdoor golf course sales), and section 4-94 (patio sales). 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-185. - Alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while in or upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways or property. 
(b)  No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or open container containing alcoholic beverages on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any other public way or property. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall permit any person to remove from such premises, any alcoholic beverage in any open container. 
(d)  No person shall have in his or her possession an open container containing alcoholic beverages while within or on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion. 
(e)  This section does not apply to nor shall it affect the lawful sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by licensees operating under a valid license issued under the terms of the city alcoholic beverage consumption ordinance. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to nor shall it affect the sale or possession of a partially consumed bottle of wine purchased with a meal from a restaurant and resealed as permitted by O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-4 and 40-6-253(2). 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages are prohibited for sale or consumption at city parks owned or maintained by the City of Cleveland. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-186. - Bring your own bottle "brown bagging" prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring his or her own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) into any establishment which is subject to any of the occupational tax provisions of the city or elsewhere, or specifically exempted from occupational taxes as provided for in the city occupational tax ordinance, whether or not such establishment is licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any corporation, partnership, individual or other entity who maintains a business which is subject to any of the occupational tax provisions of the city, or elsewhere, or specifically exempted from occupational taxes as provided for in the city occupational tax ordinance, to permit, allow or suffer the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages within any such premises. This subsection shall not apply to nor shall it affect the lawful sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by licensees operating under a valid license issued under the terms of this or other ordinances providing for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Cross reference— Occupation taxes, ch. 12, art. II et seq. 
Sec. 4-187. - Adult entertainment prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning, or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale: 
(1)  To suffer or permit any person 18 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof. 
(2)  To suffer or permit any person 18 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of human female breasts. 
(3)  To suffer or permit any person 18 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft. 
(4)  To suffer or permit any person 18 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft. 
(5)  To suffer or permit any person 18 years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to: (i) perform acts or acts which simulate sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation; (ii) touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, anus or genitals; or (iii) display pubic hair, the anus or vulva. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breasts at or below the top of the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breasts as described herein. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to hold, promote or allow any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the above prohibited conduct. 
(e)  Businesses which are licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises by the city are prohibited from permitting totally nude dancing as defined in the city adult entertainment ordinance. 
(f)  Nothing in this section adopted by the mayor and council of the city shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, ballet, or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher education, or other similar establishment as a form of an expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. This chapter specifically applies to establishments licensed by the city to sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and is intended solely to regulate the conduct of individuals physically present in such establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment, ch. 6, art. II et seq. 
Sec. 4-188. - Underage persons on licensed premises. 
(a)  No licensee shall employ any person under 21 years of age, in or about the premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale, to sell, take orders for delivery, or to aid or assist in the sale or delivery, directly or indirectly, of alcoholic beverages unless the said person under 21 years of age is at least 18 years of age and shall be under direct supervision of a person who shall be both employed by said establishment and who shall be over the age of 21 years of age and shall be on site at all times during which the underage employee is working. Such employee shall be trained and supervised periodically with respect to the procedure for requesting proper age identification and declining to sell alcoholic beverages to those under 21 years of age failing to produce proper identification. The employee's supervisor shall periodically monitor and review the employee's request of proper age identification and decision to sell or not sell alcoholic beverages to various customers. This section shall not apply to those employees who clear tableware between customers, also known as "busboys," nor shall it apply to those employees who are cooks or dishwashers. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed hereunder without a written notarized consent form from parents or guardian. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit any person to loiter about the licensed premises and no person shall loiter about the premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in grocery stores/supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises; however, the licensee shall ensure that said person under 18 years of age shall be under direct supervision of a person who shall be both employed by said establishment and who shall be over the age of 21 years of age and shall be on site at all times during which the underage employee is working. Such underage employee shall be trained and supervised periodically with respect to the procedure for requesting proper age identification and declining to sell alcoholic beverages to those under 21 years of age failing to produce proper identification. The underage employee's supervisor shall periodically monitor and review the employee's request of proper age identification and decision to sell or not sell alcoholic beverages to various customers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-189. - Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to underage persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase for, attempt to purchase for, or to furnish any alcoholic beverages to any person who has not attained 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-190. - Purchase, consumption or possession by or for underage persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages within the city unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where any person under 21 years of age is allowed or permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess an alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or other person to buy alcoholic beverages and furnish the same to persons under 21 years of age for consumption unless the parent or guardian gives the alcoholic beverage to the underage person and when possession is in the home or the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(e)  The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (a), (b), and (d) of this Code section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the house of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-191. - Misrepresentation of age by person under 21 years of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-192. - Sales to underage or intoxicated persons prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee hereunder shall sell alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  Any person under the age of 21 years of age; or 
(2)  Any person in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  The prohibition in subsection (a)(1) above shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverages are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purpose of this subsection, "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photography or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including but not limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate, or any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(c)  No licensee or employee thereof shall sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(d)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served, or has in his or her possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. For the purpose of this subsection, "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including but not limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate, or any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(e)  The penalty for an individual found in violation of this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense in a 36-month period, a fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(2)  For the second offense within a 36-month period, a fine of $1,000.00. In addition, the individual's alcohol handling permit shall be revoked for a period of three months. 
(3)  For the third offense within a 36-month period, a fine of not less than $1,000.00. In addition, the individual's alcohol handling permit shall be revoked permanently. 
(f)  Any licensee who has an establishment where a violation of this section or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 has occurred by employees, managers, or owners of a license shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation within any 36-month period, a fine of not less than $500.00 and not greater than $1,000.00. In addition, the alcohol license of the establishment shall be suspended for a period of two weeks and during the period of this suspension, the establishment shall be required to post a sign in a conspicuous location in such size and font that is easily observed announcing to customers that no alcohol sales are available and the period of the suspension. 
(2)  For the second violation within any 36-month period, a fine of not less than $500.00 and not greater than $1,000.00. In addition, the alcohol license of the establishment shall be suspended for a period of not less than 30 nor more than 180 days and during the period of this suspension the establishment shall be required to post a sign in a conspicuous location in such size and font that is easily observed announcing to customers that no alcohol sales are available and the period of the suspension. 
(3)  For the third violation within any 36-month period, a fine of $1,000.00. In addition, the establishment's alcohol license(s) shall be revoked. 
(4)  In addition to the above penalties, the city clerk or designee shall have the discretion to initiate revocation hearings as outlined in this chapter. 
(5)  As to the penalties in this subsection (f), if there is a complete change in the licensed establishment's owners, or a changed in partners or stockholders representing 75 percent of the outstanding stock or shares of the firm owning the licensed establishment, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners. 
(g)  Any licensed establishment where a violation of this section or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 has occurred by employees, managers, or owners shall be required to post signs, to be provided by the city clerk or designee, on the exterior doors of the establishment which contains the following language: "An employee or owner of this store has violated state law and City of Cleveland ordinances by selling alcoholic beverages to a minor" for the period of the suspension imposed in subsection (f). 
(h)  Any licensed establishment where a second violation of this section or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 has occurred by employees, managers, or owners within any 36-month period shall not be used as a vendor by the city for any purchases by the city until such time as there are no violations within the previous 36-month period. 
(i)  The city clerk or designee may relieve the licensee of any penalties that otherwise may be assessed under subsections (f), (g), or (h) of this section if it can be shown to the city clerk's or designee's satisfaction that such licensee freely and of its own volition reported such specific violations for which it may be charged to the chief of police or city clerk or designee prior to such violation coming to the attention of the authorities. Such a report must have been specific and not speculative or general in nature. Documented evidence of such activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, written evidence that the licensee has promptly reported such violations or attempted violations of this chapter. In addition, the licensee must have fully cooperated with authorities in correcting such violations and participating in the prosecution of any other violators. 
(j)  The chief of police, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1, shall notify the state department of revenue of any violation (violation being defined as a conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere) of this section or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 by any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-193. - Gambling on premises prohibited. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, slot machines, or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place of business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or any room adjoining the same, owned, leased, or controlled by a licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-194. - Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only. 
No licensed retail consumption dealer shall buy, arrange to buy, accept deliveries or in any way affect the transfer of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine except from a wholesaler licensed by the state revenue department and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-195. - Storage on grounds of retail establishment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation not holding an alcoholic beverage license granted by the city to store any alcoholic beverages on the grounds of any retail establishment excluding alcoholic beverages for personal consumption in accordance with all applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-196. - Keeping or storing without appropriate license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating under a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine or both to store or have therein any spirituous liquors without an appropriate license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-197. - Regulations governing retail storage. 
(a)  All licensed retailers shall store all alcoholic beverages, malt beverage or wine on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. No licensee shall be permitted to enter any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by licensee are store by licensed wholesaler. 
(b)  All alcoholic beverages, malt beverage, or wine stock shall be available at all times for inspection by the chief of police of the city, or duly authorized representatives. Any alcoholic beverages, malt beverage or wine found in any retailer's stock that is sold or distributed by a wholesaler who is not licensed in accordance with the laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation and disposal in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-198. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any manner misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand names of any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-199. - Tax levied, amount, payment; duties of dealers and wholesalers. 
(a)  Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fee heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and/or wine, there is imposed and levied upon all hereinafter described dealers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to the following: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental service only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or 
(4)  Wines or malt beverages which contain less than one-half of one (0.5) percent alcohol by volume. 
(b)  Basis for computation of tax. 
(1)  The tax levied hereunder shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter for wine sold or delivered as hereinafter set forth. The $0.22 per liter shall be pro-rated down on fractional parts of liters, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any such licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any wine on which such tax has not been paid. 
(2)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold from a barrel or bulk container, the tax levied hereunder shall be computed at the rate of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces shall be imposed. 
(c)  Computations, payment, duties of wholesale dealer and distributor. The tax imposed shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering wine and/or malt beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business in the city: 
(1)  Keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of wine and malt beverages to each retail dealer in the city. Such records are to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)  Collect from each retail dealer in the city at time of delivery of wine or malt beverages, the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold the same in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as herein provided. 
(3)  On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of said report. Said report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retailer dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on said report. 
(d)  Noncompliance by wholesale dealer; distributor. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes are not remitted within five days from the date of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited form making any further deliveries in the city and the retail licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor for whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having their license suspended or revoked as herein provided. 
(e)  Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the city alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine on which the taxes herein provided for have not been paid. 
(f)  Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesale dealer or distributor to deliver any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine to any retail dealer in the city without at the time of such delivery collecting the excise taxes herein provided for. 
(g)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages or wine or malt beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this section and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined or sentenced as provided by this chapter and any such person so convicted shall also by subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-200. - Excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink there is imposed an excise tax upon the sale of said drinks in the amount of three percent of the total cost of such drink which is charged to the public. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee under this chapter and any such licensees shall remit the same to the clerk of the city on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with the appropriate returns showing a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Gross sales shall include, all credit card sales and those sales shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the city clerk or designee to the same extent as required of cash sales. 
(b)  It shall be duty of each licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levy hereunder to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this section, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years and to provide such returns and reports as may be required by the city clerk or designee. Licensees collecting the tax provided for in this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction should be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under chapter 8 of title 48 as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-133. The city clerk is hereby authorized to create such reports and returns as may be necessary to adequately provide for the collection of the excise tax provided in this section. 
(c)  In the event the city clerk or designee deems it necessary to verify the excise tax submitted to the city pursuant to this section, for any month, he or she shall notify the licensee of such need for verification and the licensee shall submit a verified comprehensive report to the city clerk or designee, prepared by an auditor, reflecting all sales under this section by the licensee and the taxes submitted to the city. The licensee shall have 30 days to submit such a report to the city clerk or designee following such a request. 
(d)  Regional economic assistance project or REAP shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 50-8-190 and shall specifically include any certified project or facility locate in a REAP. The City of Cleveland shall levy and collect any local taxes on any sale of alcoholic beverages to include distilled sprits made within its jurisdiction by a licensee as are otherwise authorized by law to include regional economic assistance projects. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties set forth under section 1-16 of this Code, licensees failing to remit excise taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in of this section shall be charged a ten percent penalty and interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent per month (12 percent per annum) until all fees are collected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2014-17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 4-201. - Suspension or revocation; notice of hearing; refund. 
(a)  Any license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be revoked or suspended by the city clerk or designee for due cause as hereinafter defined beginning 30 days after notification without a hearing unless the licensee appeals such suspension as provided for in this chapter within 15 days after such notification. 
(b)  The city administrator of the city or his/her designee is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued hereunder for any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the city administrator or his/her designee deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor and council call a meeting prior to the next regular meeting at which time such suspension may be ended by a majority vote of the council. 
(c)  Where a license, identified in subsection (a), is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-202. - Suspension/revocation of license; causes. 
(a)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of the licenses identified in section 4-201 (suspension or revocation; notice of hearing; refund), shall include a violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinances other than traffic ordinances or failure of licensee or employees to report promptly to the police department any violation of the law or ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring inside the premises or for any other legal and sufficient cause. 
(b)  The violation of any term, condition, or provision of this chapter in any particular, or as to any detail whatsoever, shall be cause for the suspension or revocation of any license as provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell, at wholesale or retail, any alcoholic beverages, or suspend or revoke a state retail consumption dealer's license, said action shall automatically serve to suspend the applicable city license issued under the terms of this chapter pending a revocation as provided for in this chapter. 
(d)  Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original, renewal or transfer application for a license permitting the consumption of alcohol on the premises hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. Any failure to notify of the change in any relationship as specified in section 4-29 (change in relationships and/or ownership interest) within 30 days within such change is made shall likewise constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder. Further, failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder. 
(e)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of sections 4-187 (types of entertainment, attire, and conduct prohibited), and 4-96 ("happy hour" promotions and sales) of this code shall be subject to immediate license suspension and the city clerk or designee shall take action to revoke the license as provided for in this chapter, in addition to all other penalties provided for in this chapter. 
(f)  Except as provided in section 4-192(f) (illegal sales of alcohol to minors), the city clerk or designee shall take action to revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 36-month period. 
(g)  The city clerk or designee shall take action to revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(h)  The city clerk or designee may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter any time such knowledge becomes known to him or her as provided for in this chapter. 
(i)  In the case of an act of an employee, rather than the licensee, which presents cause for the suspension or revocation of a license, in determining whether to initiate such suspension or revocation hearings, the city clerk or designee may take into consideration any documented evidence that the licensee has on prior occasions, undertaken proactive efforts to promote compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions of this chapter prohibiting the sale or serving of alcohol to minors. Documented evidence of such activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, written evidence that the licensee has promptly reported freely and of its own volition violations or attempted violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-203. - Removal of signs. 
When any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased shall immediately be removed from both inside and outside the place of business. Upon receipt by the chief of police of notice of revocation, the chief of police shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-204. - Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation. 
When any application, license or permit authorizing the consumption of alcohol on the premises is rejected or revoked, it shall be unlawful for the city clerk or designee to accept and/or consider any application from the same applicant for a license within two years from the time of such rejection or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-205. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license or permit shall be denied, suspended, or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The city clerk or designee shall provide written notice to the applicant, licensee or employee of his or her order or the chief of police's decision to deny, suspend, or revoke the license or permit. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant, licensee, or employee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant, licensee, or employee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk or designee may have a review thereof by appeal to the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk or designee within 15 days after the final order or action of the city clerk or designee and in order to defray administrative costs must be accompanied by a filing fee of $500.00. The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland may at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal with 30 days of the date of filing with the city clerk or designee, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk or designee. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. All testimony shall be sworn. The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland shall be authorized to hire independent counsel to serve as a hearing officer and/or counsel to the council with the approval of the city council. 
(d)  The written findings of the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland shall be forwarded to the city clerk or designee by Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the city clerk or designee to notify the appellant of the action of the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland. 
(e)  In hearings as set forth in this section, the city clerk or designee bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. The findings of the city clerk or designee shall not be set aside unless the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland finds them to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(f)  The findings of the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2018-16, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-206. - Notice. 
For the purpose of section 4-201 (suspension or revocation; notice of hearing; refund) and section 4-205 (hearings), notice shall be deemed delivered the date when personally served or by the date three days following the date of deposit in the United States mail when such deposit is by registered mail and/or certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-207. - Physical requirement of applicant's premises. 
No license shall be granted to a retailer under the provision of this chapter, unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee has a location in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-208. - Sanitary regulations, immoral conduct, etc; inspection and report by fire department. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or public indecency on the premises. 
(b)  The fire department shall, upon request of the city clerk or designee, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk or designee. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-209. - Interior visibility required. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or opening of any door of any convenience store selling retail package alcoholic beverages. No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-210. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishment. 
No licensee operating premises wherein package wine or malt beverages are sold shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Sec. 4-211. - Prohibited advertising. 
(a)  No advertising of alcoholic beverages shall be published or disseminated in the city which: 
(1)  Contains any statement, design, or pictorial representation which falsely implies that the product has been endorsed, made, or used by, or produced for, or under the supervision of or in association with the specification of any religious organization, the city, or any other local government entity. 
(2)  Contains any reference, directly or indirectly, which falsely implies an endorsement by, or relationship with, any school, college or university. 
(3)  Is directed to, or promotes in any way the sale of alcoholic beverages to, persons under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 

ATTACHMENT I: MAP
(Ord. No. 2011-18, 11-14-2011) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to restrict adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; state regulation of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; state regulation of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state regulation of carnivals, circuses and itinerant entertainers, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate adult entertainment establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform content-neutral regulations of adult entertainment establishments within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such adult entertainment establishments. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. This article is not intended to interfere with or suppress legitimate expression or any speech activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or the state constitution, nor is it intended to permit any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law. 
(b)  The regulations that follow and that otherwise are contained in this Code regarding adult entertainment establishments constitute content-neutral requirements carefully designed to minimize adverse impacts caused by secondary effects of these establishments. Studies in other jurisdictions demonstrate a correlation between these establishments and negative effects such as diminishing market values, increasing crime rates, and difficulty in securing residential and related financing. An influx of patrons to these establishments from outside the immediate neighboring areas and similar negative effects are pertinent and relevant to the situation that exists in the city. These studies, as well as other evidence from the public and professional staff, have been carefully reviewed by the city prior to adoption of these regulations. The city further finds that there is evidence considered by the city prior to adoption of these and other city regulations regarding the combined effects of adult entertainment establishments and alcohol, and showing that the combination of such activities create additional pernicious secondary effects upon surrounding communities. The city finds that adoption of regulations imposing distance and development standards is consistent with the general comprehensive planning standards and policies of the city. These regulations will reduce the negative secondary effects caused by these establishments and will afford protection to residential uses and other uses consistent with residential uses so as to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morality while respecting and protecting the free speech rights of these establishments. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 1.0) 
Sec. 6-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business. The term "adult business" means: 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fewer than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in video tapes or movies or their reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Bathhouse. 
(1)  The term "bathhouse" means any commercial establishment that offers its area for: 
a.  Administered baths; 
b.  Engagement in any method of washing or cleansing the human body; or 
c.  Washing or cleansing any external part of the human body with steam, vapor, water or other liquid. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to include a duly permitted: 
Hospital; 
Nursing home; 
Medical clinic; 
School; 
Physical fitness facility; 
Health club; 
Physician; 
Massage establishment; 
Surgeon; 
Physical therapist; 
Chiropractor; 
Osteopath; 
Naturopath; 
Podiatrist; or 
Person holding a drugless practitioner's certificate under the laws of the state. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. The term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to nursery school, early learning center, prekindergarten, private kindergarten, play school, or preschool. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency, or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means, when used to describe a person, that said person has not been convicted of a felony or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of an applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Government building means any building or structure used or operated by any local, state, or federal government or agency thereof. 
Lingerie modeling establishment means an establishment wherein a patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar garments. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Owner means the proprietor, if a sole proprietorship; all general partners, if a partnership; all officers, directors, and persons holding outstanding shares if a corporation; or all members, if a limited liability company. 
Premises means the entire area within the property lines of any lot upon which an adult entertainment establishment is located or within which any conduct or activity regulated by this article occurs. 
Public park. 
(1)  The term "public park" means: 
a.  A publicly owned or leased tract of land designated, dedicated, controlled, maintained and operated for use by the general public for active or passive recreational or leisure purposes; and 
b.  Natural areas used for recreational purposes which may contain improvements, pathways, access or facilities intended for public recreational use. 
(2)  The term "public park" shall not include parkways, public roads, rights-of-way, traffic circles or easements. 
Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and related religious activities. 
School means a building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with the playgrounds, stadiums and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term "school" is limited to public and private schools used for primary or secondary education in which any regular pre-kindergarten, kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught using a curriculum authorized by the state. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal acts means: 
(1)  Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, drug-related offenses, or kidnapping; 
(2)  Crimes connected with another adult entertainment establishment, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, or pandering; or 
(3)  Conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the county or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this article. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, saphism, and zooerasty; 
(2)  An activity, when performed in a sexual context, which clearly depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 2.0) 
Secs. 6-21—6-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS PERMIT 

Sec. 6-44. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 5.0) 
Sec. 6-45. - Operation of unpermitted premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishments unless such business shall have a currently valid permit or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this division, provided that such permit shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 6.0) 
Sec. 6-46. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
No permit provided by this division shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issues shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
Sec. 6-47. - Aggregate number of permits limited. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young vs. American Mini Theaters, Inc. , 427 U.S. 50, 70-71, 96 S.Ct. 2440, 49 L.Ed.2d 310 (1976). 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 15.0) 
Sec. 6-48. - Application—Required; fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, as set forth in the city's fee schedule, shall be paid to the city clerk or his designee to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. The city clerk or his designee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk or his designee at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  There shall also be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment permitted within the city in an amount as set forth in the city's fee schedule. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the city clerk or his designated representative no later than November 30 of the year preceding the year for which the renewal is to be effective. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 11.0) 
Sec. 6-49. - Same—Contents. 
(a)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches, taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application, including business or employment records of the applicant, partners, if a partnership, or of directors, officers, and all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding, if a corporation; 
(8)  The business permit history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in the city or in any other city, state or territory under permit, has had such permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses, and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessee of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, including the names and dates of birth of any partners, any and all officers, any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, and any directors of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, including any partners, officers, or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or directors of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms or disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  Legible fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the applicant if the permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city clerk or his designee shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be permitted; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, permitted by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, and its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(b)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  The individual, if the applicant is an individual; 
(2)  By the manager or general partner, if a partnership; 
(3)  By the president of the corporation, if a corporation; 
(4)  By the chief administrative official, if any other organization or association. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 12.0) 
Sec. 6-50. - Same—Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or the designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, as set forth in the city's fee schedule, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in section 6-49. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 13.0) 
Sec. 6-51. - Same—Investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city clerk or his designee may grant the permit if he finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this division; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the aforementioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the aforementioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar permit denied or revoked for cause by the city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  The applicant or his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any specified sexual activities to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for specified sexual activities openly occur; 
(10)  On the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  The proposed premises shall not be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder and is within the approved zoning; 
(12)  The grant of such permit will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods has been satisfied. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 14.0) 
Sec. 6-52. - Display. 
 An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall conspicuously display all permits required by this division. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-53. - Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be as set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 17.0) 
Sec. 6-54. - Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 18.0) 
Sec. 6-55. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, as set forth in the city's fee schedule, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city clerk or his designee and the zoning board. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 19.0) 
Sec. 6-56. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this division, it shall notify the city clerk or his designee of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk or his designee. The city clerk or his designee shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 16.0) 
Secs. 6-57—6-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-86. - Qualifications. 
Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a crime that is a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any permitted premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. For the purposes of this section, the term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the premises" and "work on any permitted premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than the permitted premises. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 10.0) 
Sec. 6-87. - Approval for employment. 
Before any person may work on a permitted premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk or his designee of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk or his designee and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk or his designee. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk or his designee requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the permitted premises; if approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city clerk or his designee in writing for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk or his designee after the hearing may be appealed to the mayor and city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 10.0) 
Sec. 6-88. - Investigative and permit fee. 
An investigation and permit fee in the amount set forth in the city's fee schedule shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk or his designee evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 10.0(b)) 
Sec. 6-89. - Suspension or revocation. 
Violation of the provisions of this division, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 10.0) 
Sec. 6-90. - Independent contractors considered employees. 
For the purpose of this division, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or permittee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 10.0) 
Sec. 6-91. - Annual report of gross receipts and compensation to dancers. 
No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment permittee shall file a verified report with the city clerk or his designee showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-92. - Retention of employee records. 
An erotic dance establishment permittee shall maintain and retain, for a period of two years, the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. It is the responsibility of the owner to verify the ages of all employees. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-93. - Underage dancers prohibited. 
No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not permitted pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Secs. 6-94—6-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPEALS 

Sec. 6-115. - Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit in writing a notice of appeal to the city clerk or his designee. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The city clerk or his designee shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for mayor and city council action. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 20.0) 
Sec. 6-116. - Mayor and city council determine procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the mayor and city council agenda, the mayor and city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk or his designee to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this division. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 21.0) 
Sec. 6-117. - Mayor and city council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk or his designee has scheduled an appeal before the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council shall receive, at the time and date set therefor, all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 22.0) 
Sec. 6-118. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this division may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 23.0) 
Sec. 6-119. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The mayor, city council and hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this division. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 24.0) 
Sec. 6-120. - Hearing officer report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the mayor and city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk or his designee and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk or his designee, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk or his designee shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 25.0) 
Sec. 6-121. - Action by mayor and city council. 
The mayor and city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the mayor and city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this division; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 26.0) 
Secs. 6-122—6-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PHYSICAL PREMISES 

Sec. 6-141. - Location. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment, business, or use shall be located within 1,000 feet, measured from the closest point of the real property on which the adult entertainment establishment is sought to be erected and operated in a straight line to the closest point of the real property, of the following: 
(1)  Any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  A church, school, government owned or operated public facility, library, public park, child day care facility or hospital; 
(3)  Any other adult entertainment establishment; 
(4)  An establishment permitted to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment, business, or use shall be located outside of the industrial zoning area. 
(c)  If the adult entertainment establishment or the activity to which a measurement is required is a part of a tract of land occupied by other uses, the measurements shall be from the closest point of the total tract of land and not the building in which the activities are located. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 9.0) 
Sec. 6-142. - Hours and days of operation. 
An erotic establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Friday, and from 8:00 a.m. Saturday through 1:00 a.m. Sunday. No permittee shall permit his place of business to open on Christmas Day or on Sundays between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-143. - Lighting. 
All areas of an establishment permitted hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-144. - Parking. 
All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult entertainment establishment shall be illuminated from sunset to one hour following the time of closing of the adult entertainment establishment with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of ten footcandles of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult entertainment for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce criminal conduct. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-145. - Cleaning of permitted premises. 
Each permitted premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the permitted premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the permitted premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire permitted premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the permitted premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 28.0) 
Sec. 6-146. - Self-inspection of permitted premises. 
The permittee of a permitted premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the permitted premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city clerk or his designee. Each permitted premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 29.0) 
Sec. 6-147. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A permitted premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city clerk or his designee on his finding of a violation of this division resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city clerk or his designee shall serve on the permittee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the permitted premises, a notice of the violations and order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city clerk or his designee may physically seal that portion of the permitted premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city clerk or his designee. The city clerk or his designee shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 30.0) 
Sec. 6-148. - Inspection of premises. 
It shall be the duty of any permittee and manager of an adult entertainment establishment to allow for regulatory inspection during business hours of all portions of the premises upon request of the city police department, city code enforcement officer, city fire department, and the county health department and other regulatory local, state, and federal agencies. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Secs. 6-149—6-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-180. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 27.0) 
Sec. 6-181. - Advertisement prohibited without permit. 
No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-182. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No erotic dance establishment permittee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, malt beverage, wine, any other alcoholic beverage, or controlled substance upon the premises of the permittee. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-183. - Dancing regulations. 
(a)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. All platforms must comply with all building codes. 
(b)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(c)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. There shall be no physical contact of any kind between employees and patrons. 
(d)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or employee. 
(e)  No dancer or employee shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 6-184. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 4.0) 
Sec. 6-185. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a permittee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a permitted premises. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 7.0) 
Sec. 6-186. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult business or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2008, § 8.0) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - County regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city adopts, as if fully set forth herein, that portion of the county Code of ordinances regarding the regulation of animals (currently chapter 10 of the county Code), as they exist on the date of adoption of this Code, currently containing the following articles: 

 
(b)  Whenever the county regulations adopted herein prohibit or prescribe acts within the county, the provision shall be construed to prohibit or prescribe the same act within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
(c)  Whenever the county regulations adopted herein refer to a penalty for violations, the penalty shall be construed to be the penalties provided in section 1-18. In the event state laws provides a greater penalty, then the maximum penalty provided by state law shall be imposed; provided, however, that enforcement and disposition of fines, forfeitures and other revenues shall be as provided in this Code to the extent authorized by state law or, in the absence of controlling provisions in this Code, then as provided by state law. 
(d)  A copy of the county regulations adopted in this section shall be available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOG LICENSES 

Secs. 8-21—8-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-44. - Animal control board. 
The city has designated the county board of health as and for its animal control board as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22. The county board of health is authorized and shall have jurisdiction to conduct the hearings and to determine the matter provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1989, § III) 
State Law reference— Animal control board authorized, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d). 
Sec. 8-45. - Assignment of duties to police chief or county rabies control officer. 
The mayor and city council may assign the additional duties of the dog control officer to the chief of police or to any city police officer. Alternatively, with the consent of the county board of health and the county rabies control officer, the mayor and city council may assign the duties of the city dog control officer to a county rabies control officer appointed under O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1989, § IV) 
Sec. 8-46. - Arrest authority of dog control officer. 
The person carrying out the duties of dog control officer under this article may make arrests if the person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1989, § IV) 
Sec. 8-47. - Investigations to identify dangerous dogs. 
The dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs and owners of dangerous dogs within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1989, § V) 
Sec. 8-48. - Notice to owner of dangerous dog classification. 
When the dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification or reclassification in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1989, § V) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; minimum standards codes to have uniform application throughout the state, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-25, 8-2-28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 10-19. - Adopted by reference; copies to be made publicly available. 
(a)  The following state minimum standard codes and permissive codes, as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20 and 8-2-21, are adopted by the city as though fully set forth herein; ordinance by reference as fully and completely as if set out verbatim herein: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments, including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments and including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(3)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments and including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(4)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments and including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(5)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments and including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(6)  National Electrical Code, NFPA 70, 2011 Edition, with State of Georgia amendments; 
(7)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments, including Chapter 1, Administration; 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments (2003), Georgia Supplements and Amendments (2006), Georgia Supplements and Amendments (2007), Georgia Supplements and Amendments (2009); 
(9)  Standard Swimming Pool Code, 2012 Edition, with amendments, including Chapter 1, Administration. 
(b)  Subsequent editions or amendments to the adopted publications and state amendments and errata shall become effective 30 days after the city council receives notice that copies of such publications have been obtained, unless the council, within such 30-day period, disapproves the subsequent edition or amendment. 
(c)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk and kept on file in the office of the clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection, all as required by the city Charter. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. B; Ord. No. 2014-02, § I, 6-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Fire codes for the city are adopted in section 26-19. 
Sec. 10-20. - Applicability of adopted codes. 
(a)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, 2006 Edition, with amendments, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(b)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with amendments, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(c)  Gas. The provisions of the national International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, with amendments contained in NFPA pamphlet 54/57/58 shall apply to the installation of consumers gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this article. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(d)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, with amendments, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. If fiber duct board is used, it shall be prominently labeled as such. ANSI-approved dated duct tape shall be used. 
(e)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, with amendments, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(f)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted in section 26-19, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every commercial building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(g)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition, with amendments, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(h)  Construction of one- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(i)  Property maintenance .The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, with amendments, as published by the International Code Council, or latest version adopted by the Department of Community Affairs for the State of Georgia, is adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Cleveland, in the State of Georgia, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures. 
(j)  Nuisance ordinance. The provisions of this Code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. The nuisance ordinance is found in article IV of chapter 36. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 3(A); Ord. No. 2018-04, 3-5-2018) 
Sec. 10-21. - Codes remedial in nature. 
The city's technical codes are remedial in nature and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems (herein "service systems"). 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 3(A)) 
Sec. 10-22. - Quality control. 
Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the city's technical codes except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 1) 
Sec. 10-23. - Liability of city. 
The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of the city's technical codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, that may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 2) 
Sec. 10-24. - Conflict of regulations. 
Where, in any specific case, sections of the technical codes, of the city's technical codes, and of state or federal law or regulation specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 3(A)) 
Sec. 10-25. - Appendices to technical codes. 
Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 3(C)) 
Sec. 10-26. - Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 3(D)) 
Sec. 10-27. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter or of the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. A, § 5(6)) 
Sec. 10-28. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes adopted by this article are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. A, § 5(7)) 
Sec. 10-29. - Existing buildings to comply. 
Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. A, § 4) 
Sec. 10-30. - Maintenance. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 3(E)) 
Sec. 10-31. - Change of occupancy. 
If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 5(B)) 
Sec. 10-32. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
Sec. 10-33. - Federal and state authority. 
The provisions of this article shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from this article is derived or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 3(B)) 
Secs. 10-34—10-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-54. - Required. 
Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes adopted by reference in this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. Fees for issuance of permits shall be in the amounts established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-55. - Accessory buildings or remodeling. 
Accessory buildings or remodeling which are ten feet by 12 feet or less and valued at less than $1,000.00 do not require a permit. However, any accessory building which requires a branch circuit panel board and/or a utility service shall be required to have a building permit. Accessory buildings which do not require a building permit are still required to meet all setback requirements as defined in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-56. - Exceptions; minor repairs. 
(a)  Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(5)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(6)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(b)  Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-57. - Fees; accounting. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the necessary fees for such permit have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the size of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. All fees shall be as provided in the city fee schedule and shall be posted in the building inspection department. 
(b)  Accounting. The building inspection department shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-58. - Work begun before issuance of permit. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-59. - Required notice to be included on permits; posting; providing copy to owner. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, any building permit issued under this chapter to a general contractor or homebuilder for residential or commercial construction shall have prominently printed thereon, at least one inch apart from any other text on the permit and in type size and boldness equal to or greater than any other type size and boldness in the body of the permit, the following: 
"The issuance of this permit authorizes improvements of the real property designated herein which improvements may subject such property to mechanics' and materialmen's liens pursuant to Part 3 of Article 8 of Chapter 14 of Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. In order to protect any interest in such property and to avoid encumbrances thereon, the owner or any person with an interest in such property should consider contacting an attorney or purchasing a consumer's guide to the lien laws which may be available at building supply home centers." 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, any person or entity which is issued a permit which authorizes improvements to new or existing residential or commercial real property shall be required to post a copy of such permit in a conspicuous place in the vicinity of such property where such improvements are being undertaken or deliver a copy of the permit to the property owner within ten days after the permit is received. 
Sec. 10-60. - Work authorized. 
A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-61. - Information required. 
Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building inspection department on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)  The size of the building to be erected; 
(3)  The location of the building on the lot; 
(4)  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
(5)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
(6)  The layout of off-street parking and loading spaces; 
(7)  Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this article are being observed; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be requested by the building inspector or required by any other city ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-62. - Time limitations. 
(a)  An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit unless, before then, a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Any building permit or other permit issued pursuant to this article shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of the date of issuance or, if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned, for a period of six months. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-63. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation on application. The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this article in any case where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of provisions. The building inspector may revoke a permit upon determination by the building inspector that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of or not in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. A, § 5(4)) 
Secs. 10-64—10-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 10-85. - Requirements. 
When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-86. - Additional data. 
The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with such architect's or engineer's official seal. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-87. - Design professional. 
(a)  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A (assembly), group E (educational), and group I (institutional) occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet or more in area. 
(b)  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-88. - Structural and fire resistance integrity. 
Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall floor-ceiling partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-89. - Site drawings. 
Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-90. - Hazardous occupancies. 
The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan, drawn at a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan, drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Secs. 10-91—10-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 10-109. - Plan review. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicted and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-110. - Building permit valuations. 
If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-111. - Affidavits. 
(a)  The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. 
(b)  The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided that the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or articles. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Secs. 10-112—10-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ISSUANCE 

Sec. 10-136. - Action on permits. 
The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and articles, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-137. - Refusal to issue permit. 
If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or articles, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-138. - Special foundation permit. 
When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is not proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted or that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
Sec. 10-139. - Public right-of-way. 
A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided in the standard building code. 
Sec. 10-140. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems for which a permit is required to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the city may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the city with its license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Secs. 10-141—10-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS 

Sec. 10-164. - Intent. 
A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Permission for extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-165. - Issuance on basis of reports from approved agencies or individuals. 
Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building inspector shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-166. - Plans. 
When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Secs. 10-167—10-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 10-186. - Fees. 
The fee for all inspections required or permitted under this division shall be as established by the city council. 
Sec. 10-187. - Existing buildings. 
Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-188. - Manufacturers and fabricators. 
When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make or cause to be made an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
Sec. 10-189. - Inspection services. 
The building official may make or cause to be made the inspections required herein. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
Sec. 10-190. - Condition for issuance of certificates. 
The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected, at various intervals, all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
Sec. 10-191. - Posting of permit. 
Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
Sec. 10-192. - Required inspections. 
The building inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code. The builder shall request an inspection by means of a telephone call or fax to the office of the building inspector. All requests received shall immediately have a time and date stamp affixed to them. The building inspector shall inspect the site within 24 hours of the request or at the inspector's earliest appointment date. 
(1)  Foundation. A foundation shall be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and before concrete is poured. All footings should be on firm ground with a minimum width of 16 inches and a minimum poured depth of eight inches. 
a.  The builder shall request an inspection by means of a telephone call or fax to the office of the building inspector. 
b.  The building inspector shall inspect the site within 24 hours of the request or at the inspector's earliest appointment date. 
(2)  Frame. A frame shall be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, and the house is "dried-in." 
a.  Foundation walls shall be no less than eight-inch block, which, if the same are to be backfilled against, shall have concrete poured at least every four feet. A recommendation of 12-inch block is made for extensive areas requiring backfill. Six-inch block can be used for the brick offset but not to extend more than 12 inches below the backfill. 
b.  Sills are to be constructed of pressure-treated materials. 
c.  All crawl space shall be a minimum of 24 inches above grade and vented every eight to ten feet at a minimum. 
d.  Floor framing shall be two inches by eight inches on 16-inch centers to a maximum of 12 feet; any longer spans shall be at a minimum of two by ten feet or a truss system. 
e.  Subflooring shall be "Va" plywood or OSB if on 16-foot centers with at least three-quarter-inch total if carpet or vinyl is to be used; five-eighths-inch subfloors shall be required if hardwood floors are to be used. 
f.  All outside walls and loadbearing walls shall be framed with two-inch by four-inch material on 16-inch centers. 
g.  All outside walls and loadbearing walls shall be double plated. 
h.  All loadbearing headers shall be at least double, two inches by ten inches. 
i.  All rafters shall be at least two inches by six inches to a maximum span of 16 feet; with two inches by eight inches being required if the span is greater than 16 feet. (Span charts are available at building supply centers.) 
j.  Decking shall be a minimum of V2% 1N L 1/85/8 - N L% C R L F with H clips required on two-foot centers. 
k.  All roofs are to be properly vented. 
l.  All decking shall be made of materials labeled for exterior use and are to be secured or bolted at least every four feet and by at least three 40-penny nails every 16 inches. All decking shall be properly flashed. 
m.  Rough-in plumbing shall be inspected to ascertain adequate fall. 
(3)  Electrical. 
a.  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
b.  Final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  The building inspector shall inspect the site within 24 hours of the request or at the inspector's earliest appointment date. 
(4)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. This inspection is optional. 
b.  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. This inspection shall include a pressure test, which shall be performed by the contractor. 
c.  No water pipes are to be installed in the outside walls except for those servicing outside facets. 
d.  The building inspector shall inspect the site within 24 hours of the request or at the inspector's earliest appointment date. 
(5)  Mechanical. 
a.  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
b.  Final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  The building inspector shall inspect the site within 24 hours of the request or at the inspector's earliest appointment date. 
(6)  Gas. 
a.  Gas fuel installation shall follow the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA pamphlet 54/57/58. 
b.  A gas check form shall be placed on file with the building inspection department following completion of the installation. 
c.  The building inspector shall inspect the site within 24 hours of the request or at the inspector's earliest appointment date. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-193. - Written release. 
(a)  Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building inspector. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(b)  Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, or plumbing work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building inspector. 
(c)  In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building inspector after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building inspector has been received. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Secs. 10-194—10-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLETION 

Sec. 10-225. - Required. 
A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. The certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and articles and released by the building official. 
Sec. 10-226. - Inspections prior to issuance. 
The building inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-227. - Issuance. 
Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. The fee for issuance of the certificate shall be as set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
Sec. 10-228. - Temporary partial occupancy. 
A temporary partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building that may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. Certificates issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of issuance. 
Sec. 10-229. - Existing building occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and articles for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
Sec. 10-230. - Certificate of completion. 
Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building such as a shell building prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Secs. 10-231—10-253. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SERVICE UTILITIES 

Sec. 10-254. - Connection. 
No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-255. - Temporary connection. 
The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to utilities for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 10-256. - Authority to disconnect. 
The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure of system regulated by the technical codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. C, § 6) 
Sec. 10-257. - Building permit rates. 
Rates for building permits shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Secs. 10-258—10-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITED STRUCTURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-276. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe or unsanitary, which do not provide an adequate egress, which constitute a fire hazard, which are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of article IV, chapter 36. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. A, § 5(5)) 
Secs. 10-277—10-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GARAGES AND SERVICE STATIONS 

Sec. 10-301. - Building of garages and service stations regulated. 
It shall be unlawful to erect, build, construct or maintain any filling station, service station, gasoline station or garage or place of repairing, servicing, washing or in any wise working on automobiles or other machinery within 100 feet of the public square in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-118) 
Sec. 10-302. - Existing structures exempt. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to any such structure or building in existence on the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived except in the event of change of occupancy or removal of the structure. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-120) 
Secs. 10-303—10-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-325. - Building inspection department. 
(a)  There is established the city building inspection office. This office shall be staffed as prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall appoint the building inspectors and staff. Said individuals shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The compensation paid to said individuals shall be set by the members of the mayor and council. In the event that a building code inspector is not available, an elected member of the mayor and council may act as said inspector. 
(c)  The building inspector, his department, and code enforcement officers shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(d)  The building inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(e)  Any employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting on the behalf of the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. A, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 10-326. - Powers and duties of the building inspector and code enforcement officers. 
(a)  Generally. The building inspector, his department and code enforcement officers are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building inspector and his department are further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building inspector may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building inspector by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building inspector and code enforcement officers shall have first obtained a proper administrative search warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article and for regulatory purposes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building inspector, work on any building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. In no case may work be resumed without the prior approval of the building inspector. Where any emergency exists, the building inspector shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. A, §§ 5(1)—5(3)) 
Sec. 10-327. - Administration by building inspection department; duties. 
In carrying out its duties under this chapter, the building inspection department shall have the following specific duties, in addition to such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the city council: 
(1)  The building inspection department shall receive applications and issue permits and certificates required by this chapter. 
(2)  The building inspection department shall enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal, demolition, use, location, and maintenance of properties, buildings, equipment, appliances, or systems, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or regulatory measures. 
Sec. 10-328. - Coordination of enforcement. 
(a)  Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive responsibility of the building inspection department. 
(b)  Wherever, in the opinion of the director, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other building inspection department, the director shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. 
(c)  An order for correction of any violation under this chapter shall not be issued without the approval of the director, who shall have the responsibility before issuing any such order to determine that it has the concurrence of any other building inspection department or official of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question. 
Sec. 10-329. - Civil liability. 
No officer or member of the city council or employee of the city charged with the enforcement of this chapter in the discharge of duties shall be rendered liable personally, and such officer, member, or employee is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this chapter. 
Sec. 10-330. - Contents and service of notice. 
(a)  The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  An enumeration of conditions which the building inspection department has determined are in violation of this article; 
(2)  An enumeration of remedial action required for each determined violation; 
(3)  A specified period of time within which such remedial action shall be completed, such period of time for completion to be determined by the building inspection department as the period of time reasonably required under the known circumstances for the completion of the remedial action; 
(4)  A statement adequate to notify the person served that a failure to comply with the provisions of this article within the time specified in the notice is unlawful and the penalty for such failure. 
(b)  A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the director. 
(c)  Notice shall be deemed perfected if served upon the owner or occupant, as may be appropriate, in person or by certified mail with return receipt attached and posting of a copy of the notice upon the property. 
(d)  Whenever the building inspection department determines that property, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this chapter is being erected, installed, altered, repaired, stored, maintained, or demolished in violation of this chapter, the building inspection department shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefore directing the discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation. 
(e)  A purchaser, transferee, lessee, or mortgagee who has actual or constructive knowledge of the issuance of a notice shall be bound by such notice as of the date of such sale, transfer, lease, or mortgage. 
Sec. 10-331. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspections required under the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the building inspection department. Upon evidence of probable cause and presentation of proper credentials, authorized agents of the building inspection department may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the city in order to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Any property, building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in the city shall be subject to inspection by the building inspection department. 
(c)  No official or employee of the building inspection department making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required by this chapter. 
Sec. 10-332. - Inspection warrant. 
(a)  The building inspection department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this chapter. The warrant shall authorize the director or agents thereof to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this article. 
(b)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. 
(2)  The issuing judge must determine that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this article. 
(c)  The inspection warrant shall be issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
(2)  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
(3)  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
(4)  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the provisions sought to be enforced. 
Sec. 10-333. - Placarding premises. 
(a)  The building inspection department may place a dated and signed placard on property which is in violation of this chapter and notify the owner of such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known address that the building has been placarded. Such notice shall specify the reason therefor and the owner's right of appeal as provided in this chapter. Such placard shall contain the following words: "The city has declared this building dangerous and unfit for human habitation. The use or habitation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to occupy the dwelling, structure, or premises or for an owner to allow occupancy of a dwelling, structure, or premises which has been placarded if such dwelling, structure, or premises is or becomes vacant after placarding or, in all events, within 60 days from the date of placarding unless the violation has been corrected. 
(c)  The posting of the placard and the recording of same in the records of the building inspection department shall be notice to the general public that it is unlawful for any owner to allow the dwelling or structure to be occupied, as provided herein. No further notice shall be required to be given to any subsequent owner. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to deface, alter, destroy, cover, or remove such placards. The building inspection department shall remove the placards when compliance with this article has been effected. 
Sec. 10-334. - Records. 
The building inspection department shall keep comprehensive records of applications received, permits and certificate issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection at office hours observed by the building inspection department but shall not be removed from the office of the director. 
Sec. 10-335. - Stopping work. 
Whenever the building inspection department determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this chapter, it shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped until such defective or illegal work is corrected. 
Sec. 10-336. - Failure of owner to correct; abatement by city; lien on property. 
(a)  In the event the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure and clean the premises, or remedy any other condition found to exist in violation of this chapter or any other relevant ordinance of the city, the city may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished, or the conditions existing in violation abated as provided in said order. 
(b)  If the city has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The city and its personnel shall have no liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(c)  The amount of the cost of correction of the violation, including, but not limited to, demolition, and including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after any demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(d)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this chapter may be initiated at any time following receipt by the city tax collector of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
Secs. 10-337—10-357. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - APPEALS 

Sec. 10-358. - Public forum; quorum; duties of clerk; powers of mayor and council. 
(a)  Appeals will be heard at a public forum with the mayor and city council. 
(b)  A simple majority of the mayor and council shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this article, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building inspector, not less than three affirmative votes, but not less than a majority of the board, shall be required. 
(c)  The city clerk shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(d)  The mayor and city council shall have the power to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building inspector and to consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. P(1)—(4)) 
Sec. 10-359. - Decision of the building inspector. 
The owner of a building, structure or service system or his duly authorized agent may appeal a decision of the building inspector to the mayor and city council whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building inspector rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations hereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. P(5)(a)) 
Sec. 10-360. - Variances. 
(a)  Factors considered in granting. The mayor and city council, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this chapter to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this code or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  Such special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other buildings, structures or service systems. 
(4)  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Conditions. In granting the variance, the mayor and city council may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the mayor and city council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Any variance which is granted by the mayor and city council shall be for only that specific matter which is presented to the board and shall not apply to other situations or circumstances which are not before the mayor and city council. Any applications for a variance must be presented to the mayor and city council on a case-by-case basis. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 15 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building inspector. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building inspector. 
(d)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building inspector, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building inspector may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. P(5)(b)) 
Sec. 10-361. - Procedures of mayor and city council. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The mayor and city council shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. The mayor and city council shall meet on call of the chairman. The mayor and city council shall meet within seven calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The mayor and city council shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the mayor and city council shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building inspector or varies the application of any provision of this chapter, the building inspector shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building inspector and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building inspector for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the mayor and city council shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2008, art. P(7)(a), (b)) 
ARTICLE VII. - MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, adopted Aug. 9, 2010, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 34-52—34-61. For purposes of classification, and at the city's direction, these provisions have been included as §§ 10-381—10-390. 

Sec. 10-381. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings given in this section. Terms not defined herein shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context, or as set forth in a previous resolution. The term "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. Words used in the singular include the plural and those used in the plural include the singular. 
Mobile or manufactured home . A single-family structure, built to conform to national standards embodied in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. Administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet wide and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-382. - Federal standards. 
(a)  In addition to the other regulations hereinafter set out, each newly installed mobile or manufactured home in the city shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the United States Housing and Urban Development Department before that mobile or manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to such unit. It is the intent of this section to prohibit moving mobile or manufactured homes into the city that do not conform to the applicable United States Housing and Urban Development Department's construction standards. To that end, no mobile or manufactured home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this city unless that mobile or manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the United States Housing and Urban Development Department and has been inspected by the city building inspection department as to the criteria hereinafter set out. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-383. - Permit requirements. 
A permit shall be issued under this article under all circumstances. A septic tank permit must be obtained from the White County Health Department or the facility is connected to the City of Cleveland sewage system. All mobile homes being moved into the city shall conform to all permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-384. - Payment of current taxes. 
No mobile or manufactured home permit will be issued unless proof of payment of current year's taxes is provided for the land upon which it will be situated and on the mobile or manufactured home itself. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-385. - Certificate of occupancy. 
No person may occupy a home described in this article after September 2, 1997 without a certificate of occupancy issued by the city building inspection department. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within five working days after satisfactory final inspection by the city building inspection department. Final connection of utilities will not be performed by any public utility provider to such a home until a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-386. - Conditions for moving into city. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a mobile or manufactured home may be moved into this city provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A mobile or manufactured home that does not meet the requirements of this article and a mobile or manufactured home that is located in this city and was manufactured prior to United States Housing and Urban Development Department standards may be transferred to a city licensed dealer authorized to buy and sell mobile homes for location at such dealer's place of business for sale or transfer outside of this city. 
In no event shall this exception allow any person to live in such mobile or manufactured home or allow such home to receive any utility service. 
(2)  All mobile or manufactured homes must be installed in this city in compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured housing of the state commissioner of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-387. - Inspection checklist for location of mobile homes in the city. 
All used mobile or manufactured homes being located in the city under this article must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Electric: 
a.  All light fixtures must be in good condition to work properly; 
b.  Plugs and switches must be installed and have cover plates in place; 
c.  No loose wiring will be permitted; 
d.  Panel box must meet NEC regulations; 
e.  Mobile or manufactured home must be checked underneath for any violations as to wiring or installation; 
f.  Smoke alarms must be installed and working properly; 
g.  All applicable NEC codes, 2008 edition or revision, must be adhered to. 
(2)  Plumbing: 
a.  Fixtures must be installed and working properly; 
b.  Water and drain lines must be free of leaks; 
c.  Water heater must be in good condition and installed properly; 
d.  Must meet all applicable standard plumbing codes, 2006 edition or revision. 
(3)  HVAC—Heating system: 
a.  Venting, if required on heat unit, must be properly installed and working properly; 
b.  Grills must be installed properly; 
c.  Only heating systems allowed by standard mechanical code shall be acceptable; 
d.  Must meet all applicable standard mechanical codes, 2006 edition or revision. 
(4)  Mobile or manufactured home unit: 
a.  Glass must be in doors and windows; 
b.  Doors must open and close properly; 
c.  No missing doors or windows will be allowed; 
d.  Roof must be in good condition with no leaks; 
e.  Floor must be in good condition with no holes or decay; 
f.  Ceilings must be in good condition with no missing drywall or other materials; 
g.  Outside of unit must not have missing metal sheets, panels, siding, etc. 
h.  Any major damage which occurs from removing decks and porches must be repaired; 
i.  Any kitchen appliances must pass applicable electric/plumbing codes and to installation and condition; 
j.  Floor coverings must be free from any damage that would cause possible injury or health problems, such as loose seams in vinyl or tile or loose seams or torn places in carpet; 
k.  All applicable standard building codes must be adhered to; 
l.  Must have the appropriate housing and urban development decal affixed. 
Note: Newly manufactured units that have never been used must be verified as such by manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-388. - Installation requirements. 
In addition to the other requirements set out herein, all mobile or manufactured homes located in the city, including new units, must be installed according to the following regulations before any certificate of occupancy can be issued: 
(1)  Must obtain footer inspection before pouring of concrete; 
(2)  Must meet all standard building code requirements according to manufacturer as to set up, including appropriate tie-downs, sewer and water connections, piers, porches, decks and skirting; 
(3)  Must have appropriate skirting or underpinning as required by code and manufacturer; however, if the height from the ground to the bottom of the unit frame will average more than 36 inches after set up, concrete block shall be used for underpinning; 
(4)  Must meet all standard building codes and requirements of manufacturer for porches at all entrance and exit doors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-389. - Inspections outside the city. 
Mobile or manufactured homes can be moved into the city only after passing an inspection on all requirements hereinabove set out. These inspections outside the city shall be: 
(1)  Limited to a 50-mile radius of Cleveland, Georgia, with none accepted outside this radius; 
(2)  Inspections to be conducted by the city building inspection department; 
(3)  Scheduled by building inspector; 
(4)  Subject to the following fees: $500.00 inspection fee plus $0.48 per mile or as provided the Internal Revenue Department. These fees are in addition to the building permit fee schedule for mobile homes, which includes inspection fees on mobile homes after being located inside the city. If needed, one re-inspection may be performed by the building inspector outside the city at a cost of $0.48 per mile or as provided the Internal Revenue Department; however, if other inspections are requested, another inspection fee of $500.00, plus $0.48 per mile or as provided the Internal Revenue Department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-390. - Violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by the Municipal Court of the City of Cleveland. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by that person and shall be punished up to $1,000.00 per day for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, Exh. A, 8-9-2010) 
Secs. 10-391—10-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-09, adopted Dec. 12, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as Article VII. To avoid duplication of article numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Article VIII. 

Sec. 10-400. - Permit required. 
The demolition of any structure shall require a permit, which has been reviewed and approved by the department of building and code enforcement in conformance with this article. Nothing contained within this article shall limit the authority of the director of building and code enforcement to order a structure demolished in a life or health threatening emergency situation or as may be otherwise authorized by state statute, other city ordinance, or common law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-401. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the term demolition shall mean the razing and removal of all or substantially all of a structure. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, the term accessory structure shall mean a structure which is subordinate to and serves a principle structure; is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principle structure; contributes or has contributed to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the principle structure, and is located on the same parcel of property as the principle structure. 
(c)  For the purposes of this article, the term structure shall mean any covered structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, which is affixed to the land. 
(d)  For the purposes of this article, the term principal structure shall mean the building in which the principal or primary use on the lot is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-402. - Application. 
(a)  Principal structure. In order to obtain a building demolition permit for the demolition of any principal structure, a permit application form must be completed and submitted to the director of building and code enforcement. The building demolition permit application must include the following information: 
(1)  Location of property; legal description; legal owner of property. 
(2)  Plat of survey for the property. 
(3)  Plan identifying structure(s) to be demolished. 
(4)  Specific plans for the reuse of the property if the demolition permit is approved. If the reuse plan contemplates construction of a structure, an application shall include building plans and specifications prepared in compliance with the provisions of this chapter for any structure to be built on the subject property. If commencement of construction of such structure is not planned to occur within 60 days after completion of demolition, then the application also shall include a detailed site restoration plan as provided in section 10-402(a)(5). 
(5)  Site restoration plans and specifications. If commencement of construction of a new structure is not planned to occur within 30 days after completion of demolition, then the application shall include a detailed site restoration and maintenance plan depicting all work required to restore the subject property, within 30 days after completion of demolition, to a safe, clean condition until construction of a new structure has commenced, including without limitation backfilling of any excavation, grading, seeding, fencing, storm water management, utility disconnections and the like. 
(6)  Storm water management plans. In addition to all other required plans and specifications, the application shall include detailed plans and specifications for storm water management, soil erosion control, and grading on the subject property if new construction is commenced. Such plans and specifications shall be on a drawing or drawings separate from all other plans and specifications, labeled as "storm water management plans." Such plans and specifications shall be made in conformance with the requirements of the city's storm water management ordinance. 
(7)  The building and code enforcement department shall not consider any application for a principal structure unless the applicant furnishes all information required by this article. 
(8)  Utility disconnect plan. A utility disconnect plan shall be submitted which identifies the location of all utilities. Cleveland Public Works must be contacted for water and sewer disconnects before demolition begins. 
(9)  Traffic control. The applicant may be required to provide traffic control. The Georgia Department of Transportation may need to be contacted before demolition for those properties located on state routes. 
(b)  Accessory structure. Demolition permit applications for accessory structures must be submitted to the director of building and code enforcement. Demolition permit applications for accessory structures must be submitted along with information identified in section 10-402(a)(1) through (5), and (9). 
(c)  Interior demolition. Demolition permit applications for interior demolition (except single-family structures) must include a description of the demolition work and a floor plan identifying the location demolition including any structural components scheduled for demolition. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-403. - Hazardous structure. 
Whenever the director of building and code enforcement, the city manager, or other city official designated to be in charge of enforcing the city's building code, determines that a residential, commercial, industrial, or other structure is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested ("hazardous structure") that it creates a serious hazard to the health and safety of the community, then that city official may placard the hazardous structure with a notice of demolition, repair or enclosure. The notice shall be dated as of the date of the posting and shall state that unless the hazardous structure is demolished, repaired, or enclosed, or unless any garbage, debris, and other hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials ("hazardous materials") are removed so that the serious hazard to the health and safety of the community no longer exists, then the hazardous structure may be demolished, repaired, or enclosed, or any hazardous materials may be removed by the city. Such notice shall be posted on the front of the hazardous structure. 
(1)  Notice . Within 30 days of the posting of the notice of demolition, repair or enclosure, the city shall: 
a.  Send a notice by certified mail, return receipt required, to all owners of record of the property, to the beneficial owners of any state land trust having title to the property, and to all lien holders of record in the property, stating that it is the intent of the city to demolish, repair, or enclose the hazardous structure or remove any hazardous materials if that action is not taken by the owner or owners; and 
b.  Provide constructive notice by publishing notice in a newspaper published or circulated in the city setting forth: 
1.  The permanent tax index number and the address of the hazardous structure; 
2.  A statement that the property constitutes a serious hazard to the health and safety of the community; and 
3.  A statement that the city intends to demolish, repair, or enclose the hazardous structure or remove any hazardous materials if the owner or owners or lien holders of record fail to do so. This notice shall be published in the legal organ of White County. 
(2)  Objection . A person objecting to the proposed actions of the city may file his or her objection in an appropriate forum in the Ninth Judicial Circuit Court, White County Georgia. 
(3)  Demolition or remedial action. If the hazardous structure is not demolished, repaired, or enclosed, or if the hazardous materials are not removed within 30 days of mailing the notice to the owners of record, to the beneficial owners of any state land trust having title to the property, and to all lien holders of record in the property, or within 30 days of the last day of publication of the notice, whichever is later, the city shall have the right and power, but not the obligation, to demolish, repair, or enclose the hazardous structure or to remove any hazardous materials. 
The city may proceed to demolish, repair, or enclose a hazardous structure or remove any hazardous materials under this division anytime within a 90-day period following the date of the mailing of the notice. If any person seeks a judicial hearing and has served a copy of the complaint on the city before the city proceeds with the authorized actions set forth in this division, then the city shall not proceed with the demolition, repair, enclosure, of the hazardous structure or removal of hazardous materials until the court issues an order authorizing the city to do so. 
(4)  Lien . Following the demolition, repair, or enclosure of a hazardous structure, or the hazardous materials under this chapter, the city may file a notice of lien against the real estate for the cost of the demolition, repair, enclosure or removal within 180 days after the repair, demolition, enclosure, or removal occurred, for the cost and expense incurred, including attorney's and consultant fees, in the office of the county recorder of deeds. 
The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth: 
a.  A description of the real estate such as the address or other description of the property, sufficient for its identification; 
b.  The expenses incurred by the city in undertaking the remedial actions authorized under this division; 
c.  The dates the expenses were incurred by the city; 
d.  A statement by the city official responsible for enforcing the building code that the structure constituted a serious hazard to the health and safety of the community; 
e.  A statement by the city official that the required sign was posted on the structure, that notice was sent by certified mail to the owners of record, and that constructive notice was published in accordance with this division; and 
f.  A statement as to when and where the notice was published. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-404. - Emergency demolition. 
(a)  Immediate danger. Where the director of building and code enforcement, the city manager or other city official designated to be in charge of enforcing the city's building code determines that a residential, commercial or industrial structure has been so damaged by a catastrophic event as to constitute an immediate danger or threat to persons or adjacent properties, and further determines that it would be impractical to enclose the structure itself to eliminate the immediate danger or threat, city official shall placard the structure with either a notice of perimeter enclosure or demolition and undertake reasonable steps to promptly notify the owner of the necessity of the erection of a perimeter enclosure or demolition a perimeter enclosure shall mean the erection of a cyclone or similar fence on the lot on which the damaged structure is located which is of sufficient strength, permanency and location to stop the entry of unauthorized persons to the lot and/or the structure pending further action. If the owner cannot be found, or refuses to erect the perimeter enclosure so as to eliminate the immediate danger or threat to persons or adjacent properties or cannot be found within a reasonable period of time due to the nature of the danger or threat the city official shall have the right and power, but not the obligation, to eliminate the immediate danger or threat by erecting a perimeter enclosure as described by this division or if such perimeter enclosure is not adequate to respond to the eminent danger or threat to persons or adjacent properties the city official may demolish the structure. If any person seeks a judicial hearing and has served a copy of the complaint on this city before the city proceeds with authorized actions set forth in this section then the city shall not proceed with the secure perimeter enclosure or demolition until a court issues an order that authorizes the city to do so. 
(b)  Lien . Following the erection of perimeter enclosure or demolition, the city may file a notice of lien against the real estate for the cost of the erection of the perimeter enclosure or demolition within 180 days after the erection of the perimeter enclosure or demolition of the structure for any and all costs and expenses incurred by the city attorneys and consultants' fees in the office of the county recorder of deeds. 
The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth: 
(1)  A description of the real estate such as the address or other description of the property, sufficient for its identification; 
(2)  The expenses incurred by the city in undertaking the remedial actions authorized under this division; 
(3)  The dates the expenses were incurred by the city; 
(4)  A statement by the city official responsible for enforcing the building code that the structure constituted an eminent danger or threat to persons or adjacent properties; 
(5)  A statement by the city official that the required sign was posted on this structure and a description of service of the notice or the attempts to serve notice upon the owners. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-405. - Procedures for permit approval. 
(a)  Application review. The building and code enforcement department will be responsible for the processing and review of any building demolition permit application. As part of the review process, an inspection of the property may be performed by the building and code enforcement department. 
(b)  Notification . A general sign shall be placed on the subject property by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-406. - Review standards, requirements. 
(a)  General standards. The building and code enforcement department will review all building demolition permit applications in accordance with this article and the ordinances of the city, together with the following standards: 
(1)  The granting of a permit shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
(2)  Adequate utilities, access ways, drainage, and other necessary facilities must be provided in order for a permit to be granted. 
(3)  The granting of the permit should promote the policies contained in the city's comprehensive plan, and the use of the subject property should be consistent with the designated comprehensive plan land use. 
(4)  Any new structure or use to be constructed on the subject property must conform to the applicable requirements of this Code and the city-zoning ordinance, except as may be varied in accordance with zoning ordinance regulations. 
(5)  Meeting requirement. Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, a meeting shall be conducted between city director of building and code enforcement or his designee and the demolition contractor to review the requirements for demolition. 
The building and code enforcement department may also impose such conditions and restrictions upon the issuance of the permit as may be necessary in order to comply with the standards recited in this article. 
(b)  General requirement. If a building demolition permit application is approved by the building and code enforcement department, any demolition which takes place shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the ICC International Building Code in force at the time, the requirements of this Code, and any additional requirements or conditions as placed on the applicant by the city building and code enforcement department. The applicant shall also be required to submit to the city proof of disconnection of utilities prior to commencing demolition of the building. 
(c)  EPA approval. If the application includes demolition of a building subject to state environment protection agency (the "EPA") regulations, the demolition permit application to the city shall include completed copies of any applications or other documents required by the EPA. 
(d)  All principal structures, accessory structures and structures proposed for demolition shall be examined by an state-licensed asbestos building inspector at the owners expense who shall inspect all accessible areas of the dwelling proposed for demolition to determine if asbestos containing building materials are present. The inspection shall include, but not be limited to, pipes, beams, walls, ceilings, floors, furnace, boiler, water storage tanks, wall panels, insulation, siding, roofing and other potential asbestos containing materials. A copy of the inspector's license and report certifying the condition of the premises shall be submitted with the demolition permit application. In the event that suspect asbestos is found at the property, laboratory testing shall be performed, and if regulated friable asbestos material is present, removal and disposal of the asbestos shall be undertaken in conformance with all applicable laws, rules and regulation. Any plan for removal and disposal shall be confirmed in a report submitted to the city by the applicant's state-licensed asbestos building inspector. The city director of building and code enforcement may in his/her discretion submit the findings of any such inspector for review by an environmental consultant of its choice prior to approval of demolition permit. The review costs by any environmental consultant retained by the city shall be paid by the demolition permit applicant prior to issuance of the demolition permit. 
(e)  Safety fencing. Fencing shall be installed as required by city code. Such fencing shall be removed no later than the completion of restoration as required by subsection (g) of this section. Required restoration or rough grading, when allowed by the code official, shall be completed no later than 45 days after completion of the demolition. 
(f)  Restoration . If construction of a new principal structure has not commenced within 30 days of demolition, the property shall be restored within 15 days thereafter. Restoration of the property shall include without limitation: permanent disconnection of sewer and water at mains, final grading and seeding, the removal of dangerous conditions, rubbish and debris, restoration of damaged public property and removal of safety and tree protection fencing. If weather does not allows final grading and seeding the code official may allow rough grading until weather conditions permit final grading. Slit fencing and other storm water measures shall remain in place in accordance with city storm water ordinance. 
(g)  The city shall have the right at all times, enact a lien on the property for the costs, including legal fees, labor and administrative expenses, incurred or to be incurred by the city in exercising any of its rights under this article in the event the applicant undertakes any work in violation of any provisions of this article or of any permit issued or plan approved pursuant to this article, or the applicant fails or refuses to complete any work authorized by any permit issued under this article in accordance with all plans approved in connection with said permit. 
(h)  Notification of demolition activities. The person/entity obtaining a demolition permit shall contact the city building and code enforcement department at least one business day prior to the commencement of any approved demolition activities and identify the date(s) and time(s) of all scheduled demolition. In the event that the schedule is altered in any way, the city shall be provided notice of any and all such alterations, at least one business day prior to the alteration, in the same manner provided herein. The person/entity referenced above shall also notify the city on the day that demolition has been completed, in the same manner provide herein. A failure to comply with this section results in a separate violation for each day in which demolition activities proceed without proper notice. 
(i)  One brightly colored placard shall be provided by the city and posted in a conspicuous location by the permit holder or property owner. The placard shall identify the scheduled date of the demolition and shall be posted no more that ten days prior and not less than three days prior to the scheduled demolition date. 
(j)  Portable toilet. During demolition, the site shall be provided with portable temporary restroom facilities. The location of the portable toilet(s) shall be located as close to the center of the lot as possible and away from the adjacent properties, and shall not be placed on city or state right-of-way, including but not limited to, parkways or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-407. - Fees. 
(a)  A nonrefundable fee shall be required for a building demolition permit, and the fee must be submitted with the building demolition permit application required by section 10-402. The permit fee for a demolition permit involving a structure shall be $50.00 base fee, plus $0.12 per square footage of building(s) to demolish. 
(b)  Permit fees as required by other codes and ordinances of the city may also be required. 
(c)  Labor and material fees will be charged to cap the water and/or sewer lines, Rates will be determine after review of the proposed demolition. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-408. - Penalty for violation of article. 
If any structure is demolished without complying with this article: 
(1)  The owner of the subject property, demolition permit applicant and any other person or entity participating in any demolition activities on the subject property, including those involved in particulate control, shall each be subject to a separate fine in accordance to section 1-16 of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances; and 
(2)  Until the owner of the subject property pays any and all fines for violations of the provisions of this article, no building permits shall be issued for the construction of any improvement on the subject property and any active permits shall be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19, 12-12-2011) 
Secs. 10-409—10-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 10-500. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as Article IX, Unfit Buildings and Structures Ordinance, and made part of Chapter 10, Buildings and Building Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-501. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Cleveland, Georgia. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  The "owner"; 
(2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Municipality means the City of Cleveland, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the building official, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he or the city manager delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-502. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-503. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Every dwelling, building or structure within the city which: (i) is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; (ii) is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; (iii) poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; (iv) is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; (v) is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; (vi) is abandoned; or (vii) otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property which may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-504. - Powers of city building official or his designee. 
(a)  In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, under the direction of the city administrator, the building official or his designee, to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists; 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants and attorneys; 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the building official or his designee(s) may issue a notice of violation(s) of state minimum standard codes, all optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such notices. The building official may also direct the police department to issue citations for violations of the above referenced codes, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-505. - Complaint in notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; or 
(7)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file and post a notice of violation against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The notice shall notify the interested parties that an investigation has been conducted and a violation has been found where the property is located. The public officer shall provide a report of the investigation and violation(s) to the interested parties and shall establish a remedy to address all violations found and documented in the public officer's report. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and within 30 days of notice of violation. The public officer shall meet with the interested parties to discuss the report and remedies required to address the violation(s). The meeting shall determine: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the notice, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the documented violation(s); and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with any occupied use, and, within an established time frame; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the documented violation(s) cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-506. - Citation, complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a complaint request has been investigated, a report has been filed, a notice of violation has been established and no response or remedy has been fulfilled by the interested parties the public officer shall request that citation for violation(s) of the applicable city codes be issued by the City of Cleveland Police Department charging that such dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such citation shall be guided by the investigation of documented conditions, which include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; or 
(7)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, in addition to the citation, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in White County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The tax commissioner may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-507. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of any hearing; 
(2)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in municipal court. 
(b)  The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-508. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-509. - General cleanliness of premises. 
The owner and occupant of property within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the premises, including all buildings thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-510. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-511. - Violations; enforcement penalties. 
Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.00 and up to $1,000.00; each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines, upon conviction, the water superintendent shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-512. - Prior ordinances relating to repair, closing or demolition of unfit buildings or structures. 
Ordinances and sections of this Code relating to the subject matter of this article and in effect prior to March 5, 2018, being the effective date of this article, shall continue in force and effect for actions commenced thereunder and have the same force and effect after said date as this article. All new actions commenced on or after March 5, 2018 shall be brought pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 10-513. - Burned structures. 
(a)  In the event that a structure burns or has substantial fire damage, the building official or fire official may declare that the structure constitutes a public hazard if in its after condition, it is a fire hazard, pursuant to the city building and/or fire codes, to the health, safety and welfare of the public and is considered to be an unsafe building pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Upon service of the notice, either by a duly appointed police officer, process server or by certified mail, the property owner shall within 30 days of the notice submit a written plan of corrective action to the fire official and building official according to the specifications contained in the notice. 
(c)  The building official and fire official shall then make a determination if the plans, as submitted, comply with all local, state and federal codes, laws, regulations and ordinances. If they are not in compliance, the applicant shall then have 14 days from receipt of comments and suggested revisions to resubmit the final corrected plans for re-habitation. Once the plans, as submitted, are approved, the building official and the applicant shall agree on a re-habitation schedule for said building. The city shall have 21 days from receipt of the plans to approve, disapprove or return for corrections. 
(d)  If plans are not submitted or are not approved or have not been approved within 90 days from receipt of the notice as provided for in this section, the city is authorized to begin condemnation proceedings under this chapter. 
(e)  Any denial of plans and/or variances may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals within 14 days of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, 3-12-2018) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESS REGULATION AND LICENSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to license self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1; certain persons required to provide proof of state licensure before issuance of city or county business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; limitations regarding persons performing investigations related to city and county business licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; taxation of insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.; licensing and taxation of certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means any person that exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
Business location means the physical location of a business. The term "business location" does not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. The term "business location" does include a temporary work site which serves multiple customers, and any business operating at such location is subject to the requirements of this chapter. For the purposes of this article, a separate location shall exist if there is a separation of buildings of a business by the property of another, not including public streets. 
Certificate holder means any person who has obtained a tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax or whose employer issues to such an individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. For purposes of calculating occupation taxes based on number of employees, parttime employees' total hours will be divided by 40 to determine the number of fulltime-equivalent employees. 
Engaged in business means doing or performing of any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property, all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
Life insurance company means a company which is authorized to transact only the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5 as class (1). 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business profession or occupation is conducted, but excludes a construction work site and a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization which is formed for a purpose not involving pecuniary remuneration, directly or indirectly, to its shareholders or members as such. Such organizations encompass those which are truly altruistic as well as those whose aid is limited to its membership. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure for regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, that are assessed by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business and which fees are designed to approximate the reasonable cost of the regulatory activity performed by the city. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 12-20. - Duty to keep information current. 
Any person required by this article to register his business shall notify the clerk in writing within 30 days of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change of address of the business, in which case the same occupation tax certificate shall be valid at the new location; 
(2)  Any change of ownership, in which case the transfer shall be treated as the termination of one business and the establishment of a new business for the purposes of this article; 
(3)  The termination of any business. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 37) 
Sec. 12-21. - Compliance with other ordinances and laws. 
(a)  All businesses registered under this article are required to comply with the provisions of this Code and all other ordinances of the city and applicable state and federal law. The issuance of an occupation tax certificate to any business by the city shall not authorize that business to engage in or carry on business or to perform any other activity in violation law nor shall it relieve that business from obtaining any certificate or permit required by the provision of other laws or ordinances. 
(b)  No certificate shall be issued or renewed until any delinquent property taxes and other debts to the city have been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 38) 
Sec. 12-22. - Evidence of state license required, if applicable; state license to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 of the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city tax certificate is issued. 
(b)  Each person who is subject to a city tax certificate and also is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the certificate holder's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the tax certificate remains valid. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 12) 
Sec. 12-23. - Evidence of qualification required. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business tax certificate, show evidence of qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of such business shall do so before the tax certificate is issued. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 13) 
Sec. 12-24. - Liability of officers and agents; failure to register and obtain certificate. 
(a)  All persons subject to licensure and taxation provided in this article shall be required to take out the necessary tax certificate for said business prescribed in this article, and in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a tax certificate. 
(b)  Every person commencing business in the city after April 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the tax certificate herein provided for before commencing the same, and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said tax certificate shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 14) 
Sec. 12-25. - Methods of payment. 
(a)  The City of Cleveland shall accept as payment for amounts due under this section the following methods of payment: 
(1)  Cash; 
(2)  Check; 
(3)  Money order; 
(4)  Credit card/debit card (Visa, MasterCard, Discover). 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall require the City of Cleveland to accept a particular type of credit card for the payment of amounts due under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 2, 8-14-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-10, § 2, adopted Aug. 14, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as § 12-215. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 12-25. 
Secs. 12-26—12-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12-52. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-18; provided, however, that violator whose qualification to practice his profession are determined by state law and who fails to pay occupation tax as required in this article shall be subject only to collection by the clerk in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(b)  In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the tax certificate issued hereunder. However, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until written notice of the violations have been provided to the certificate holder not less than 48 hours prior to time of the hearing before the city council. If the evidence before the city council at the hearing shall demonstrate a violation likely to continue which poses an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of any citizen, then it shall be grounds for an immediate suspension of the tax certificate pending a full administrative hearing on the issue. 
(c)  At the time set for hearing, the city council shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from the city personnel, from interested parties, and from the certificate holder. The city council shall make findings of fact as to whether or not the alleged violation of this article has occurred. 
(d)  The below enumerated periods of mandatory minimum suspension shall be imposed and enforced for each violation. The enumerated periods represent a minimum penalty, and additional periods of suspension and revocation may be imposed as determined by the city council on a case by case basis. The minimum suspension and revocation periods are as follows: 
First offense: Suspension for four months. 
Second offense: Suspension for one year. 
Third offense: Revocation for a period not less than five years. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 16) 
Sec. 12-53. - Enforcement authority. 
The city clerk and his duly designated officers and inspectors, including, but not limited to, the city code enforcement officer, shall be classified as business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest authority in conjunction with any violation relating to the occupation tax of the city. 
Sec. 12-54. - Enforcement duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy, assessment, and collection of fees, taxes, and penalties imposed herein. In carrying out his responsibility, the city clerk shall have the following specific duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for licensing and registration of a business and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article; 
(2)  To ensure to each person an occupation tax certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the occupation tax; provided, however, that if permits, certifications, and compliance with enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the clerk shall not issue said certificate until the applicant exhibits to the clerk full compliance therewith; 
(3)  To audit periodically, and when he deems necessary, the books and records of the businesses subject to the provisions of this article, and to require the submission of such additional information as may be necessary to correctly determine the amount of the occupation tax due and to ensure the collection of the same; and 
(4)  To make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or any federal, state, county, or city law or rule for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the fees, taxes, and penalties due hereunder. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 17) 
Sec. 12-55. - Inspection of books and records; deficiencies. 
(a)  Each business subject to taxation under this article shall keep adequate records for examination by the city clerk or his designee as provided in this section. 
(b)  The city clerk, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, including any independent contractors as may be employed by the city from time to time, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made as required in this article. 
(c)  Upon demand of the city clerk or his designee, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection within 30 days. Failure to submit books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. 
(d)  If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency, and an additional one percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid, shall be assessed. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 25) 
Sec. 12-56. - Grounds for revocation. 
Except for a person whose qualifications to practice his profession is determined by general state law, the failure of any business to pay an occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 12-55, any business tax certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax is at that time unpaid or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 26) 
Sec. 12-57. - Tax certificate revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any business to obtain or renew, in a timely manner, a tax certificate hereunder, or to pay an occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make and file returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided herein, any business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. 
(b)  No new business tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any fees or any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the revenue collection officer in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 27) 
Sec. 12-58. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent. 
(b)  The lien shall cover the property of the person liable for the delinquent tax as provided by this Code and state law. The lien shall become fixed from the date the tax or any installment thereof became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of the person liable for the tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. 
(c)  All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as provided in this Code and by state law. The defendant shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, as may be provided by law. 
(d)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 28) 
Secs. 12-59—12-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 12-90. - Businesses not subject to taxation under this article. 
(a)  The following businesses are not subject to fees or taxes under this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax or fee pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.; 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production, from or on the land, of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; 
(9)  Disabled veterans and blind persons with proof of exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-12-1; 
(10)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 49-6-93; 
(11)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55; 
(12)  Established churches, religious, charitable, civic and fraternal organizations chartered or operated as nonprofit organizations and which are not engaged in daily selling of goods or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of the provisions of this division; 
(13)  Any person engaging in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where such involve personal assets and are not an occupation for the individual. 
(b)  In regard to yard/garage sales, this exemption shall apply to persons or nonprofit organizations conducting such sales at a private residence or at a commercial location with an occupancy permit and with permission of the property owner, not exceeding four events per year. 
(c)  In regard to the rental of personally owned residences, this exemption shall apply to persons renting a maximum of five residences within the state. 
(d)  The city may require any business claiming not to be covered by the provisions of this article to provide specific and detailed evidence showing such noncoverage. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 18) 
Sec. 12-91. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the state or federal government, a municipality or county of the state, an instrumentality of the state or federal government, or an instrumentality of a municipality or county of this state, shall not be required to obtain a tax certificate for that purpose. 
Sec. 12-92. - Exemption for charitable purpose businesses. 
No business on which a business fee or an occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said fees or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 11) 
Sec. 12-93. - Option to establish exemption or reduction. 
The city council may, by subsequent ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 33) 
Sec. 12-94. - Tax exemption for certain persons 65 years of age or older. 
The city recognizes and encourages the fact that there are individuals within the city who have reached the age of 65 wish to remain involved in the economy of the area without pursuing a fulltime business or occupation. This involvement contributes to the economic development of the city, and as a means of encouraging this involvement, the city declares that any person 65 years of age or older conducting business from his home and having an annual gross income of less than $10,000.00 may conduct such business by paying one-half of the otherwise required occupation tax. Proof of qualification for this status must be provided to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 21) 
Sec. 12-95. - Tax not applicable where prohibited by law. 
The occupation tax assessed in this article is not levied upon any part of a business to the extent that such levy is prohibited or exempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 19) 
Secs. 12-96—12-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION AND FEES 

Sec. 12-119. - Business registration and tax certificate required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on any business, trade, profession, or occupation from a location in the city, regardless of whether the location in the city is a main office or main place of business, and including home businesses, without registering with the city and obtaining a tax certificate. No tax certificate so issued shall condone or make legal an activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under state or federal law. 
Sec. 12-120. - Administrative and regulatory fees; additional occupation taxes. 
(a)  Administrative fee. Each certificate holder under this chapter shall pay an administrative fee in the amount established by the city council, and such fees shall be used by the city to administer the occupation tax system. 
(b)  Regulatory fee. Certain certificate holders under this article may be required to pay, in addition to administrative fees and occupation taxes, a regulatory fee to defray, in part, the city's cost in regulating the activities of the certificate holder by providing such services as background investigations, inspections, and similar regulatory activities; provided, however, that the regulatory fee assessed pursuant to this section shall approximate the reasonable cost of the regulatory activity performed by the city. Examples of businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations that may be subject to regulatory fees of under this section include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, and workers; 
(2)  Carnivals; 
(3)  Taxicab and limousine operators; 
(4)  Tattoo artists; 
(5)  Stables; 
(6)  Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 
(7)  Scrap metal processors; 
(8)  Pawnbrokers; 
(9)  Food service establishments; 
(10)  Dealers in precious metals; 
(11)  Firearms dealers; 
(12)  Peddlers; 
(13)  Parking lots; 
(14)  Nursing and personal care homes; 
(15)  Newspaper vending boxes; 
(16)  Modeling agencies; 
(17)  Massage parlors; 
(18)  Landfills; 
(19)  Auto and motorcycle racing; 
(20)  Boardinghouses; 
(21)  Businesses which provide appearance bonds; 
(22)  Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
(23)  Hotels and motels; 
(24)  Hypnotists; 
(25)  Handwriting analysts; 
(26)  Health clubs, gyms, and spas; 
(27)  Fortunetellers; 
(28)  Garbage collectors; 
(29)  Escort services; 
(30)  Burglar and fire alarm installers; and 
(31)  Locksmiths. 
(c)  Exceptions. Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations not subject to regulatory fees under this chapter include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed by the state; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed by the state; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
(19)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); 
(20)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9; 
(21)  Merchants or dealers, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(22)  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(d)  Flat rate, per employee, and gross receipts occupation taxes. In addition to administrative and any applicable regulatory fees, each certificate holder under this article shall be required to pay either an annual flat rate occupation tax, an occupation tax based on the number of employees of the certificate holder, or an occupation tax based on the gross receipts of the licensed business. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 3) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; limitations on imposition of regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 12-121. - Application for tax certificate. 
(a)  An application for a tax certificate under this article shall be made to the city clerk, on the form provided by the clerk, accompanied by an administrative fee and any applicable regulatory fee. 
(b)  The application shall identify the line of business that the business conducts, including an identification of the dominant line, if more than one. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the revenue collection division and that line of business being imprinted by the revenue collection division upon the business tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 6) 
Sec. 12-122. - Number of businesses operating in city considered. 
(a)  If a person conducts business at more than one store or place, each store or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of business fees and occupation tax. 
(b)  If a business is operated at more than one place or if the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return, and each different line of business will have the gross receipts of that line of business identified on a form to be furnished by the revenue collection officer. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 7) 
Sec. 12-123. - Tax certificate and tax due date; delinquency penalties. 
(a)  Tax certificate applications, together with administrative fees and applicable regulatory fees, and occupation taxes are payable by January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year. 
(b)  Delinquent tax certificate renewals shall be subject to a penalty equal to ten percent of applicable fees for the first 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency and an additional one percent of applicable fees for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
(c)  Delinquent occupation taxes shall be subject to a penalty equal to ten percent of the tax due for the first 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency and an additional five percent of applicable fees for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency, plus interest at the rate of nine percent per annum. 
(d)  Any new business, profession, or occupation commenced within the city shall obtain a tax certificate and pay applicable fees before commencing business. If business is commenced before issuance of a tax certificate under this article and payment of applicable fees, a ten percent penalty shall be added to the applicable fees. 
(e)  In addition to all other penalties specified in this section, any business that fails to obtain or renew a tax certificate in a timely manner as required in this article or who becomes delinquent in the payment of occupation taxes due hereunder shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-18. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, §§ 9, 15) 
Secs. 12-124—12-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TAX LEVY GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-147. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general or local law and ordinance. 
Sec. 12-148. - Occupation tax levied. 
Except for those business and practitioners of professions and occupations excluded from local taxation by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-16(a), 43-12-1, and 48-13-5—48-13-26, each business subject to the provisions of this article shall pay occupational taxes based on the number of employees or gross receipts, subject to the following: 
(1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have, nor shall the city require that a business pay occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the business' gross receipts. 
(2)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states. 
(3)  The city shall not require a business tax certificate from those real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the city and sell property inside the limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, §§ 1, 5) 
Secs. 12-149—12-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TAXES BASED ON NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 12-180. - Applicability to businesses with no physical location in the state. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, the occupation taxes levied in this article shall be applicable to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the corporate limits. 
(b)  For occupation taxes levied under this article based on a percentage of gross receipts, the gross receipts used for calculation of taxes shall include only those gross receipts reasonably attributable to sales or services in the state. 
(c)  For occupation taxes levied under this article based on the number of employees of the business, the number of employees shall include only those employees engaged in substantial efforts within the state, and nationwide profitability ratios shall apply only to types of business transacted within this state. 
(d)  All businesses and practitioners subject to this article and to local taxation in other counties or cities in this state shall be required to pay occupation tax only to the city in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner subject to taxation under this article provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from taxation under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 5) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 12-181. - Calculation of tax. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based the number of fulltime employees or their mathematical equivalent, calculated as follows: 
(1)  The total number of hours worked during the preceding calendar year by all employees shall be totaled and divided by 2,080 (40 hours per week times 52 weeks). The resulting number of fulltime employees shall be rounded to the nearest tenth. 
(2)  In making the calculation provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the hours of employees whose total number of hours worked are not available (such as salaried employees) shall be calculated at a rate of 40 hours per week. 
(3)  In businesses where it can be shown that calculation by this method would be impractical, an alternate method may be used, upon approval of the city clerk, that would provide an accurate count of fulltime-equivalent employees. 
(4)  If a business is operated at more than one place, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return furnished by the city. 
(5)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in this state, occupation taxes apply to the employees of the business that are reasonably attributed to sales or services in made or provided in this state. 
(b)  The amount of occupation tax due shall be as shown in the city fee schedule in chapter 24. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, §§ 4, 23) 
Sec. 12-182. - Number of employees determined for preceding calendar year. 
All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied based on the number of employees employed by the business during the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year for which the taxes are due. All persons conducting businesses subject to the provisions of this article shall file with the city clerk the returns hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the number of fulltime-equivalent employees of the business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for calculating the amount of occupation tax due from each business. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 20) 
Sec. 12-183. - Businesses not having conducted business the preceding calendar year. 
In the case of a business subject to the occupation tax for a calendar year that was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for the occupation tax shall estimate the number of fulltime-equivalent employees who will be employed when the business begins operation. Businesses beginning operation after July 1 of any calendar year shall pay a prorated occupation tax of 50 percent of the tax that would be due on an annual basis. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 22) 
Sec. 12-184. - Businesses having operated for portion of preceding calendar year only. 
If a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the number of fulltime-equivalent employees for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the number of fulltime-equivalent employees of the business for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 20) 
Sec. 12-185. - Filing return. 
The owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business subject to said occupation tax for the current calendar year shall, not earlier than the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth the number of fulltime-equivalent employees of such business for the preceding calendar year which number of employees shall be used as the basis of the calculation of the amount of occupation tax due in the current calendar year. For the purpose of this calculation the number of fulltime-equivalent employees of a business during the preceding calendar year is the number of fulltime-equivalent employees used in the calculation of the occupation tax due for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 20) 
Sec. 12-186. - Estimated number of employees upon failure to file return; notice; contest. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk may make an estimate of the number of fulltime-equivalent employees of the business. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk or his designee shall give to the operator of said business written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)  Should such person contest the city clerk's determination as to the number of fulltime-equivalent employees within ten days of the receipt of said notice, then, upon payment of a penalty equal to ten percent of the occupation tax due (based on the amended return), the clerk may accept the amended return and recalculate the occupation tax due from such person. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 20) 
Sec. 12-187. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple locations. 
(a)  For businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside the city where the number of employees can be allocated to each location, the number of employees used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each location within the city. If the number of employees attributed locally cannot be determined, the total number of employees will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. 
(b)  Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city with information necessary to allocate the number of employees of the business or practitioner and information relating to the allocation of the business or practitioner's number of employees by other local governments. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 10) 
Secs. 12-188—12-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ALTERNATIVE TAX FOR CERTAIN PROFESSIONALS 

Sec. 12-213. - Alternative flat tax for practitioners of certain professions. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  An occupation tax based on the number of employees; or 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at that practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner electing to pay a flat rate occupation tax according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the city relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Practitioners of professions subject to this section are currently designated by state law as: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed by the state; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed by the state; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
(c)  The tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9, 48-13-10. 
Secs. 12-214—12-261. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-16, §§ 1—5, adopted Nov. 3, 2011, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 12-286—12-289, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Comp. Ords. 1970, §§ 5-201, 5-202; Ord. of 10-20-1983(2), §§ 1, 3. 

Sec. 12-262. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Cleveland, Georgia, in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 12-263 of this article, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Cleveland, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this article, the term insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 1, 11-3-2011) 
Sec. 12-263. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2, 11-3-2011) 
Sec. 12-264. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident, and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-262 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 3, 11-3-2011) 
Sec. 12-265. - Gross premiums tax—All other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-262 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 4, 11-3-2011) 
Sec. 12-266. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 12-262 and 12-263 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 5, 11-3-2011) 
Secs. 12-267—12-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTION LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for license tax on financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 12-336. - License tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, the city has levied upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations operating with the city a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. The term "gross receipts," as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1983(1), § 1) 
Sec. 12-337. - Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city clerk on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by state law and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. Taxes due pursuant to the return shall be due and payable not later than April 1 of each year. Delinquent taxes shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent per month or fraction thereof that the tax is delinquent. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1983(1), § 2) 
Secs. 12-338—12-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LODGING TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, adopted July 29, 2010, repealed former §§ 12-364—12-375, and enacted new §§ 12-364—12-375 as set out herein. The former sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 2-13-1989, §§ II—XIII; Ord. of 12-11-2008(2). 
State Law reference— Authority for county to assess and collect excise taxes on rooms, lodgings, and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

Sec. 12-363. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. 
(1)  The term "hotel" means any structure or any portion of any structure, including, but not limited to, any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, bed and breakfast, public club or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. 
(2)  The term "hotel" shall not mean any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other building in which human beings are detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, or use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for more than ten consecutive days. No tax shall be levied for the use of rooms as meeting rooms or upon the fees or charges for any guest room used for a period of one or more days by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 2-13-1989, § I; Ord. of 12-11-2008(2)) 
Sec. 12-364. - Levied. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax at the rate of eight percent of the rent paid for the occupancy of any room, lodging or accommodation furnished by any person or legal entity within the incorporated portions of the city. The tax applies to hotels, motels, inns, lodges, tourist camps, tourist cabins or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are available. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-365. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No tax shall be levied as provided in this article upon: 
(1)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations provided to any persons who certifies that they are staying in such room, lodging or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by a fire or other casualty; 
(2)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings or accommodations provided without charge; 
(3)  Any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding other means of identification, a person paying for rooms, lodgings or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card shall be a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business. For purpose of the exemption provided under this paragraph, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments or independent school districts; or 
(4)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-366. - Duty of operator to collect. 
Each operator maintaining a place of business in the incorporated portions of the city as provided in section 12-364 and renting occupancy, lodging or accommodations not exempted under section 12-365 shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-367. - Registration. 
(a)  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of any establishment pursuant to this article shall immediately register such business with the city, on a form provided by the city for such purpose. Such registration shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city. The owner if a natural person, a member or general partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership or an appropriate officer in the case of ownership by a corporation shall sign the registration. 
(b)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-368. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator pursuant to this article, the city shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. Such certificate of authority shall also constitute a license by the city to operate such an establishment; provided, however, that such license shall not relieve the operator from obtaining any other required licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-369. - Due, payable monthly. 
(a)  All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected. The payment and return for the preceding month confirming the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period as well as information requested by the city. 
(b)  The monthly report shall have attached thereto a copy of the corresponding month's state department of revenue sales and use tax report (Form ST-3). 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-370. - Compensation allowed for collection. 
Operators collecting the tax levied by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction for submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the total amount of tax collected. (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52) 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-371. - Delinquency; estimation; enforcement. 
(a)  If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals, which are subject to the tax. The estimate for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file a return shall include any information, which has or may come into the possession of the city. 
(b)  The Mayor and City Council of Cleveland or its designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination as herein provided. Service of the notice shall be in person or by mail. If by mail, the service shall be to the operator at the address appearing in the city's records. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)  The amount of the determination made under this section shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(d)  In addition, a penalty of five percent of the tax due or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each 30-day period or fraction thereof, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater, shall be assessed and paid by the operator to the city. 
(e)  The estimated tax, together with applicable penalties and interest is collectible utilizing any of the enforcement methods set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-372. - Required records. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy and such other information as the city may require. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-373. - Administration and enforcement, powers. 
The Mayor and City Council of Cleveland or its designated representative shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator subject to this article, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person having in his possession or custody information relating to rentals which are subject to the tax levied by this article; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons erroneously or illegally charged. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-374. - Collection by court action. 
Within three years after the tax or any portion of the tax becomes due and payable, the city attorney and/or city solicitor at the direction of the Mayor and City Council of Cleveland may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-375. - Effect of sale of establishment (successors or assignees of operator). 
If any operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this article and subsequent thereto sells out or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. If such purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefore to the extent of the tax owed, together with any applicable penalties and interest. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-376. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article or who fails to do anything required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the judicial court and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Code of Ordinances of Cleveland, Georgia, section 1-16. 
(b)  In order to enforce this article or to correct or abate any violation of this article, the Mayor and City Council of Cleveland, in addition to other remedies may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-377. - Proceeds for the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5l(b) and City of Cleveland Resolution 2009-3/9, duly passed by the Mayor and City Council of Cleveland at their March 9, 2009 regular meeting, and with said resolution attached as a part of the public minutes for said public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Sec. 12-378. - Repeal of prior tax rate and effective date of new rate. 
The eight percent excise tax imposed herein shall become effective on the first day of the second month following the passage of the ordinance from which this section was derived by the Mayor and City Council of Cleveland. The prior five percent excise tax levied under the previous sections of the Cleveland City Code shall continue in effect until the effective date of the eight percent excise tax, and then the prior five percent excise tax shall be repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-29-2010) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemetery and Funeral Services Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; grants to municipalities for improvement and preservation of cemeteries or burial lots, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-19. - Authority of city council to adopt, repeal, and change rules. 
The city council may from time to time adopt rules governing cemeteries within the city limits, including, but not limited to, rules governing interment, maintenance, monuments and markings, construction of walks and walls, and annual and perpetual care and maintenance, planting shrubbery and flowers, and such other rules that may be deemed wise in the judgment of the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-101) 
Sec. 14-20. - Maintenance; authority to employ necessary personnel. 
The city council may provide for and secure the employment of such personnel as it may deem necessary for effective maintenance and care of city cemeteries. Compensation for such employees shall be set by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-102) 
Sec. 14-21. - Exhumation permit required. 
No person shall exhume or remove any corpse in cemeteries of this city without notice to the city council, a court order authorizing exhumation and notice from the county coroner. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-105) 
Sec. 14-22. - Opening graves; persons permitted to open. 
No grave in city cemeteries shall be opened for the purpose of disinterment except by the sexton of city cemeteries or employees working under the sexton and only upon notice to the city council as herein provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-106) 
Sec. 14-23. - Monuments to have secure foundations. 
Each and every person erecting or causing to be erected any monument or gravestone within city cemeteries shall have first laid out, of brick or stone and in mortar or cement, a firm foundation, so that such monument or gravestone, when thus erected, shall not fall, sink, or lean. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-107) 
Sec. 14-24. - Prohibited acts. 
The following acts are positively prohibited in city cemeteries: discharging firearms, turning hogs, cattle, or other livestock loose in city cemeteries, injuring or defacing in any way the trees, flowers, shrubbery, graves, tombstones, monuments, seats, buildings, or structures of any kind in city cemeteries, or committing a nuisance or depositing trash or refuse matter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the discharge of firearms for purposes of military or law enforcement ceremonies. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-108) 
Sec. 14-25. - Livestock impounding. 
Any horses, cattle, hogs, or other livestock found running at large within city cemeteries shall be impounded by the sexton or police, subject to the charges and penalties imposed when same are found at large in the streets of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-109) 
Chapter 16 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; appointment of judges of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq.; training courses for judge of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-11; municipal court clerk training, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-13. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 16-19. - Name; court schedule. 
The city municipal court, created by the city Charter, shall be convened at regular intervals and at such other times as may be determined by the judge. A court schedule shall be published and made available to the public, either at city hall or at the city police department. 
Sec. 16-20. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Code, the city Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as permitted by general state law. 
(b)  The court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine as authorized by law or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction, not to exceed a fine of $1,000.00, or imprisonment for six months, or both a fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, community service, or any other form of alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. If state law authorizes punishment in excess of the fine and/or imprisonment specified herein, then the court may impose the greater punishment. 
(d)  The court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray its costs of operation and, with regard to prisoners bound over to any superior court for violations of state law, shall be entitled to reimbursement for the actual costs of meals, transportation, general caretaking expenses, court costs, administrative fees, and such other fees as are authorized to be collected by state law as presently enacted or hereafter amended. 
(e)  The court shall have the authority to establish bail and recognizance to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash, personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with such violations. Whenever any person gives bond for his appearance and fails to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4. 
(f)  The court shall have the same authority as the county superior court to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party, to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, or sentences, and to administer such oaths as may be necessary. 
(g)  The court shall have the authority to bind defendants over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated, or where a defendant makes a written request for a trial by jury, or under other circumstances in which a transfer is authorized by state law. 
(h)  The court is specifically vested with all jurisdiction and power throughout the corporate limits of the city as granted generally by law to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws that authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(i)  Subject to the approval of the mayor and council, the municipal court is further authorized to enter into any contracts or agreements it deems necessary or expedient for certain services, including, but not limited to, housing persons charged with city offenses in other jail facilities, probation and related supervision services, collection of fines, fees, and other delinquent payments, and similar such services. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 16-21. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decisions and judgments of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases, ordinance violation cases, and such other cases in which certiorari is appropriate under state law. Such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the county superior court, under the state law regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
State Law reference— When writ of certiorari will lie in superior court, O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
Secs. 16-22—16-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE 

Sec. 16-46. - Qualifications. 
The municipal court shall be presided over by a parttime municipal judge and any other standby or substitute judges as may be provided by ordinance. No person shall be qualified and eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless that person: 
(1)  Has attained the age of 30 years; 
(2)  Is a qualified and registered voter in the county; 
(3)  Has resided in the county for no fewer than five years immediately preceding appointment; and 
(4)  Possesses all other certifications and qualifications as may be required by law. 
State Law reference— Municipality to set qualifications and compensation of municipal judge, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2. 
Sec. 16-47. - Appointment; term; compensation. 
The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and shall serve until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. The mayor and council shall fix the compensation of the municipal judge. The municipal judge shall serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by majority vote of the city council, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
State Law reference— Appointment of judges of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2. 
Sec. 16-48. - Oath of office. 
Before assuming office, the municipal judge shall take an oath, to be administered by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of office to the best of his ability, and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council as maintained by the clerk. 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1. 
Sec. 16-49. - Authority. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall have all power and authority conferred upon municipal judges by state law and the city Charter including, but not by way of limitation, the specific additional authority set forth in this section. 
(b)  The municipal judge may compel the presence of all parties necessary for the proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas, and warrants, which may be served or executed by any officer as authorized by law of the city Charter. 
(c)  The municipal judge shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of any person charged with violations of this Code and any ordinances of the city. 
(d)  The judge shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state or county to issue warrants for violations of state laws committed within the corporate limits of the city. The judge shall also have the authority to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with violating any of the terms or conditions of any sentence of probation imposed upon such persons in the municipal court and revoke any or all of said persons' remaining probated sentence, if those persons are found to have violated the terms and conditions of their probation. 
State Law reference— Powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Secs. 16-50—16-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 16-72. - Applicability; suspended sentences. 
(a)  This article governs trials in the municipal court of the city for violations of city ordinances which may be punishable by incarceration or monetary penalty or a combination of both. The punishment imposed for any ordinance violation shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or 12 months imprisonment or both, provided that the judge of said municipal court shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, except as otherwise provided by general law, and shall not exceed the maximum punishment specified by this article. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall serve a sentence up to the maximum allowable under state law. 
(b)  Should the city, in conformity with state enabling statutes, have adopted certain ordinances which provide for larger fines and longer terms of imprisonment than specified in subsection (a) of this section, then the larger fines and longer terms of imprisonment authorized by said enabling statutes and the ordinances adopted in accordance therewith shall control. 
(c)  The municipal court of the city may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in any case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, for performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or for other conditions relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the municipal court of the city after a hearing, as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the municipal court of the city at any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by said court that the defendant has willfully failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 1; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 1) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 16-73. - No right to trial by jury; right of removal to superior court. 
There shall be no jury trials in the municipal court of the city. Any defendant who is charged with one or more ordinance violations may, at any time before trial, demand that the case be removed for a jury trial to the county superior court. Such a demand shall be written and served upon the solicitor of the municipal court and filed with the clerk of the municipal court. Upon such a demand, the municipal court of the city shall grant the demand. Failure to so demand removal of the case shall constitute a waiver of any right to trial by jury which the defendant may otherwise have. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 2; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 2) 
Sec. 16-74. - Prosecution upon citation or accusation; service. 
(a)  Prosecutions for violations of municipal ordinances shall be upon citation as provided in section 16-75 or upon accusation by the attorney designated to prosecute such cases by the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Accusations of violations of ordinances and citations shall be provided to the accused at or prior to arraignment as provided by state law. The clerk of the municipal court shall notify the defendant in writing, mailed via regular mail, to the address listed on any citation or bond entered into by the defendant, of the date and time of such defendant's arraignment prior to said arraignment. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 3; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 3) 
Sec. 16-75. - Use of citations; arrests. 
(a)  The mayor and council of the city expressly authorize that ordinance violations may be tried upon citations, with or without a prosecuting attorney, as well as upon accusations. 
(b)  Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the municipal court of the city, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the city agent who completes and serves it. For the purposes of this section, such person who signed the citation shall be deemed the person who issued such citation. 
(c)  Prosecutions for violations of ordinances upon citations shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation by any agent of the city who is authorized by the mayor and council of the city to issue citations. A copy of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, and the original shall promptly be filed with the municipal court for the city. For the purposes of this section, the mayor of the city, the city building inspector, the city fire marshal, the city code enforcement officer, and any police officer of the city shall be authorized to issue such a citation. 
(d)  Defendants may be arrested prior to trial pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-4-20 for any ordinance violation. Additionally, any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the judge of the municipal court of the city and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 4; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 4) 
Sec. 16-76. - Procedures. 
Prosecutions of ordinance violations in the municipal court of the city shall follow the procedures set out in the ordinance alleged to have been violated. In the absence of such procedures being set out in the city ordinance alleged to have been violated, then the procedures for the prosecution of such violations in the municipal court of the city shall be in conformity with the general procedures followed in the magistrate court of the county for violations of resolutions of the county. For the purposes of this section, the term "county resolutions" shall be deemed to include county ordinances. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 5; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 5) 
Sec. 16-77. - Cash bonds. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court of the city may by written order establish a schedule of cash bonds for the personal appearance in municipal court of any person charged with a violation of an ordinance. The judge of municipal court of the city shall designate the officer of the municipal court authorized to accept cash bonds pursuant to the schedule of bonds published by said court. The officer of said municipal court accepting a cash bond shall issue a receipt for the bond to the person charged with the violation. 
(b)  Any person who is accused by citation but has not been arrested may, but shall not be required to, give a cash bond for his personal appearance in court for trial. If a person who has given a cash bond fails to appear for trial, the failure to appear shall be deemed to constitute a guilty plea, and such cash bond shall be forfeited upon the call of the case for trial. It shall not be necessary for the city to take any further action to forfeit the cash bond. Forfeiture of a cash bond shall be deemed to constitute imposition and payment of a fine and shall be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. The municipal court of the city may, however, in any case enter an order pursuant to which bond forfeiture shall not be deemed to constitute imposition of a sentence, and subsequent prosecution shall not be barred, and in any such case, the amount of the bond forfeited shall be credited against any fine subsequently imposed. 
(c)  The receipts shall be completed by the officer of the municipal court when accepting a cash bond so as to show the name of the person cited or arrested, the date of citation or arrest, the nature of the offense, the amount of cash bond given, and the name of the receiving officer of the municipal court. The receiving officer of the municipal court shall deliver a copy of the receipt to the person cited or arrested at the time the cash bond is given and shall file the original, together with the cash bond, with the clerk of the municipal court not later than the next succeeding business day following the date of issuance of the receipt. For the purposes of this section, any member of the staff of the office of the city clerk shall be authorized to issue such receipts acting as an ex-officio officer of said municipal court. Receipts issued pursuant to this section may be in the form of a copy of a property receipt form. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 6; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 6) 
Sec. 16-78. - Execution upon unpaid fines. 
(a)  The county detention center will receive sentenced persons upon the request of the chief of police. 
(b)  Execution may issue immediately upon any fine imposed by the municipal court of the city and not immediately paid. 
(c)  The county detention center will receive and house all persons sentenced to confinement for contempt of court or arrested or sentenced to a period of confinement for violation of ordinances upon the request of the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 7; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 7) 
Sec. 16-79. - Certiorari to superior court. 
Review of convictions shall be by certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 8; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 8) 
State Law reference— When writ of certiorari will lie in superior court, O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
Sec. 16-80. - Prosecuting attorney. 
The city attorney or another attorney designated by the mayor and council of the city may act as prosecutor of criminal law violations or traffic law violations in said municipal court of the city, which attorney may also act under the title of "solicitor" or otherwise, and said attorney shall prosecute any and all violations of the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007, § 9; Ord. of 2-9-2009(2), § 9) 
Secs. 16-81—16-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICE OF PROSECUTING ATTORNEY OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 16-90. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Cleveland Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-91. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address requirements made under Georgia law for the city to pass an ordinance or resolution creating the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the Prosecuting Attorneys' Council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within 30 days of such appointment in order to maintain the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly O.C.G.A. Article 5 of Chapter 18 of Title 15, and to enact this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-92. - Establishment of office. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Cleveland in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a contracted part time position. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-93. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Cleveland shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-94. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Cleveland shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
'I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Cleveland.' 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-95. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the City of Cleveland, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of one year, [a year running January through December], and is reappointed annually by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-96. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
The Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Cleveland shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-97. - Assistant prosecuting attorney (substitute). 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys to substitute whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming a substitute prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in the O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-98. - Ratification. 
This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and his council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1; elections and primaries generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.; November election, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-9; registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq.; selection and qualification of candidates, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-130; subversive persons not to be nominated or elected, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-7; persons convicted of certain crimes not to be eligible for nomination or election to public office or to serve as primary or election official, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-8; qualifications and oath of election officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-214. 

Sec. 18-1. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections for any elected office in the city, or any other matter that is properly the subject of a municipal election, shall be held and conducted in accordance with general state law governing elections as contained in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
Chapter 20 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management generally, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Disaster Volunteer Leave Act, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this chapter from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. Emergency functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Essential officers and employees means and refers to the mayor, constitutional officers, the police chief, police officers, police and other dispatchers, emergency medical service providers, road department employees and code enforcement personnel. 
Exempt individuals, unless otherwise specified in any resolution implementing a curfew, means those individuals engaged in the provision of designated essential services, such as firefighting, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution implementing a curfew may, in the discretion of the city council, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, and building and repair contractors performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
Nonessential employees means all city personnel other than those identified as "essential employees." 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing that are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing were offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency means a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area by the disaster or emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the city council. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-69-2, 38-3-3. 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY AND OPERATIONS PLAN 

Sec. 20-21. - Membership in county agency. 
An emergency management agency has been created by the county that includes the city, among other cities within the county. The city hereby adopts the county emergency management plan to the extent applicable with the city, and the adopted plan, as supplemented by the provisions of this article, shall constitute the city's emergency operations plan (EOP). A copy of the county's emergency management plan is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Authority for establishment of local emergency management organization, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; local director required for state financial assistance, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority for nomination of local director of emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 20-22. - Mayor as city emergency management director and coordinator. 
For purposes of coordinating the city's participation in the county plan, the city council has appointed the mayor as the city emergency management director and coordinator. The mayor, as city emergency management director and coordinator, must meet the qualification and training requirements of and shall devote such hours to his position as city emergency management director as are required by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 20-23. - Emergency management organization. 
(a)  For purposes of coordinating the city's participation in the county plan, the city council has assigned city departments and personnel to be responsible for certain emergency functions, as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of city departments listed in this section are responsible for developing the plan, in cooperation as necessary with county emergency personnel, for their assigned emergency functions. Such plans will be submitted to the city council for approval. 
State Law reference— Local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 20-24. - Involvement of subversive persons prohibited; oath of emergency personnel. 
(a)  No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the city's emergency management agency who advocates a change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the government of the United States or in this state or the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or who has been convicted of or is under indictment or accusation charging any subversive act against the United States. 
(b)  Before entering upon his duties, each person who is appointed to serve in the city's emergency management agency shall take an oath in writing before a person authorized to administer oaths in the state, which oath shall be substantially as follows: 
"I, ____________ ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Georgia, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. 
I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates, the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am a member of the (name of emergency management organization) I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence." 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the mayor, as emergency management director and coordinator, and his duly appointed deputies and assistants are authorized to administer oaths to emergency management personnel. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-34. 
Sec. 20-25. - Emergency management office. 
To the extent necessary for carrying out the provisions of the city's EOP, the city fire department is designated as the physical location of the office of emergency management for the city. 
Sec. 20-26. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the city council, in cooperation with the county as contemplated by the county-city emergency management agency, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the emergency power to: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  Seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  Sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city; maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
State Law reference— Rules, etc., authorized, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; powers of local governing bodies during state of emergency or disaster, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 20-27. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter shall serve with or without compensation as may be determined by the city council. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
State Law reference— Immunity of emergency management personnel, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-35; rights, privileges, and immunities of emergency aid workers, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-30. 
Secs. 20-28—20-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-58. - Scope and applicability. 
The procedures applicable within the city during a state of emergency shall be as set forth in the county's emergency operations plan (EOP), as amended from time to time, and in this article. A copy of the county plan shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 20-59. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency, or subsequent recovery period in which the city has been designated as a disaster area, for any person located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the city. 
Sec. 20-60. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city, or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of the city. 
(3)  To wear, carry or display, without authority, any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
State Law reference— Authority for local rules and regulations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 20-61. - Meetings of city council. 
Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. The presiding officer or any two members of the council may call such meetings without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
State Law reference— Operation of local governing authority during emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 20-62. - Purchasing and public works contracts. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, or the board of commissioners of the county, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this section shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
Sec. 20-63. - Code enforcement. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council or its designee or the board of commissioners of White County of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code or any portion thereof, if: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
Sec. 20-64. - Temporary dwellings. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, its designee, or the board of commissioners of White County of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue a temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwelling or park permit is designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the city council or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
Sec. 20-65. - Curfew. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, its designee, or the board of commissioners of White County of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and the property of the city. All of the territory of the city shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
Sec. 20-66. - Prohibition of appearance in public places. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or any other delineated part of the city during the stated hours of the curfew. 
Sec. 20-67. - Continuity of city operations; essential and nonessential employees. 
To promote civil stability and to provide basic services to the city in the case of emergencies or hazardous inclement weather, it is essential that the city be able to maintain an adequate workforce. Toward that end, the following rules shall apply during any state of emergency declared by authorized state, county, or city officials: 
(1)  Essential employees shall be required to report to work at their regular shifts unless called in early by their immediate supervisors or the mayor. 
(2)  The mayor, in consultation as necessary with city department heads and county emergency management officials, shall decide whether to open the city hall and other city work facilities. It shall be their responsibility to notify city officers if city hall is to be closed. If city hall is open, all employees in all offices are expected to report for their assigned shifts. If city hall is not opened for business at the regular opening hour, all employees are required to check in periodically for updates. Employees will not be paid for regular hours that city hall is not in operation. 
(3)  Any employee not able to report for his assigned shift may take annual leave for those hours. If an employee reports for work and is then sent home by the closing of the city hall, the employee will be paid for the remainder of the day. 
Secs. 20-68—20-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR 

Sec. 20-93. - Authority to declare local state of emergency. 
The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  Extreme danger or likelihood of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions; 
(2)  Unusual or extreme weather conditions or public areas difficult or impossible; 
(3)  Civil unrest, commotion, or uprising is imminent or exists; 
(4)  Stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-106) 
Sec. 20-94. - Area of emergency to be exactly defined. 
The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-109) 
Sec. 20-95. - Powers of mayor after declaration of and during state of emergency. 
After declaration of emergency, the mayor shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
(1)  The power to use employees of the city to assist in providing for the safety of the community and preserving the lives, health, and property of its citizenry; 
(2)  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists; 
(3)  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations; 
(4)  The power to close business establishments within the affected area; 
(5)  The power to close any and all municipally owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public; 
(6)  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of the lives, health, and property of the citizenry of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 3-106) 
Sec. 20-96. - Duration of emergency powers. 
(a)  The emergency powers authorized in this article shall be exercised only in the event of an emergency as herein contemplated and only for such periods of time as the actual emergency exists or for such shorter period as provided in this section. Furthermore, said powers shall only be invoked after a declaration and proclamation of an emergency. 
(b)  No emergency power, as set forth herein, shall be effective for more than 72 hours following the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergency, the emergency powers set forth herein may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. 
(c)  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special, or called meeting of the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, §§ 3-105, 3-107, 3-108) 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; control of water pollution and surface water use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. (Also known as excavation.) 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. (Also known as the "plan.") 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 22-20(a)(4). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition, which is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First-order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing shortterm vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf or perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994, § II; Ord. of 4-12-2004, § B; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(B)) 
Sec. 22-20. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Mineral Resources and Caves Act; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individuals home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are construction by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 22-21. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first-order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 22-21 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including ,but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 22-21(c)(15) and (c)(16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving 1 1/10 acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 1 1/10 acres or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 22-21(b) and (c); provided further that construction of maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; and 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 22-21(b) and (c). 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 22-21(b) and (c), issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violation shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994, § III; Ord. of 4-12-2004, § C; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(C)) 
Sec. 22-21. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. All necessary erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed prior to initiation of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs shall be as follows: 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. All erosion and sedimentation control measures and BMPs must be in compliance with the state Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, latest edition. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges form land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this section. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994, § IV; Ord. of 4-12-2004, § D; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(D)) 
Sec. 22-22. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 22-21(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee, in an amount established by the city and found in the fee schedule in chapter 24, shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 22-21(c)(15) and (c)(16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)  Denial; bond. 
a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violation of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.  The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 22-21(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall be as follows: 
a.  Narrative or notes and other information to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes; 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project; 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner; 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls; 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres; 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, including a statement, in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities"; 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas; 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates shall be included in the drawings. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding and should include grass growing schedule, selection of grass seed, sodding, sprigging, seed germination, top soiling, mulching, nutrient addition, irrigation of the grass and who will supply the water for irrigation. The owner/developer will be responsible for supplying the water for irrigation. Grassed areas will be considered acceptable when a viable stand of grass covers at least 98 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. Grassing shall meet the requirements of the state department of transportation or the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia, latest edition; 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition; 
j.  The following maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computation shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north; 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets; 
c.  Boundary line survey; 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary; 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and features areas, such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan; 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas; 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas; 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable; 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6; 
k.  Show the soil types on the plans. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 22-21(c)(15) and (c)(16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the tax commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994, § V; Ord. of 4-12-2004, § E; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(E)) 
Sec. 22-23. - Installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be done in accordance with the methods described in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition. This section includes a partial listing of the sedimentation and erosion control measures typically used on construction sites and a discussion of the required materials and installation procedures. For more complete information, the aforementioned manual should be consulted. 
(1)  Sediment barrier. Sediment barriers are temporary structures typically constructed of silt fence supported by steel or wood posts. Other types of barriers may include sandbags, straw bales, brush piles or other filtering material. The purpose is to prevent sediment carried by stormwater in the form of sheet flow from leaving the site and entering natural drainageways or storm drainage systems by slowing stormwater runoff and causing the deposition of sediment at the structure. 
a.  Silt fences should be installed where runoff can be stored behind the barrier without damaging the fence or the submerged area behind the fence. Silt fence shall not be installed across streams, ditches, waterways or other concentrated flow areas. 
1.  Type A silt fence. This 36-inch-wide filter fabric shall be used on developments where the life of the project is greater than or equal to six months. The silt fence is to be installed with posts spaced a maximum of six feet on center. The bottom portion of fabric is to be buried a minimum of six inches deep with two inches folded beneath the soil covering on the upstream side of the fence. The installed height of the silt fence should be 28 inches, and the posts should be embedded a minimum of 18 inches into the ground. 
2.  Type C silt fence. Type C silt fence is 36 inches wide with wire reinforcement. The wire reinforcement is necessary because this fabric allows almost three times the flow rate as a type A silt fence. Type C silt fences shall be used where runoff flows or velocities are particularly high or where slopes exceed a vertical height of ten feet. Type C silt fences should be installed with the same dimensions as type A but with woven wire fence backing, and support post spacing should not exceed four feet on center. 
b.  For maintenance purposes, sediment shall be removed once it has accumulated to one-half the original height of the barrier. Filter fabric shall be replaced whenever it has deteriorated to such an extent that the effectiveness of the fabric is reduced (approximately six months). Temporary sediment barriers shall remain in place until disturbed areas have been permanently stabilized. All sediment accumulated at the barrier shall be removed and properly disposed of before the barrier is removed. 
(2)  Construction exit. A construction exit is a stone stabilized pad located at any point where traffic will be leaving a construction site to a public right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk or parking area or any other area where there is a transition from bare soil to a paved area. 
a.  The purpose is to reduce or eliminate the transport of mud from the construction area onto public right-of-way by motor vehicles or by runoff. 
b.  The practice is applied at appropriate points of construction egress. Geotextile underliners meeting AASHTO M288-96 are required to stabilize and support the pad aggregates. The stone shall be in accordance with National Stone Association R-2 (1.5- to 3.5-inch stone). The gravel pad shall have a minimum thickness of six inches. At a minimum, the width of the pad should equal the full width of all points of vehicular egress but not less than 20 feet wide and 50 feet long. 
c.  The exit shall be maintained in a condition which will prevent tracking or flow of mud onto public rights-of-way. This may require periodic top dressing with 1.5- to 3.5-inch stone as conditions demand, and repair and/or clean out any structures to trap sediment. All materials spilled, dropped, washed, or tracked from vehicles or sites, onto roadways or into storm drains must be removed immediately. 
(3)  Stone check dam. A check dam is a small temporary barrier, grade control structure or dam constructed across a swale, drainage ditch, or area of concentrated flow. The purpose is to minimize the erosion rate by reducing the velocity of the stormwater in areas of concentrated flow. This practice is applicable for use in small open channels and is not to be used in a live stream. 
a.  Check dams are used in temporary or permanent swales or ditches in need of protection during establishment of grass linings. Also in temporary or permanent swales or ditches which, due to their short length of service or other reasons, cannot receive a permanent nonerodible lining for an extended period of time and other locations where small localized erosion and resulting sedimentation problems exist. 
b.  Formal design is not required, but for stone check dams, the drainage area shall not exceed two acres. Stone check dams should be constructed of graded size two-inch to ten-inch stone. Mechanical or hand placement shall be required to insure complete coverage of the entire width of the ditch or swale and that the center of the dam is lower than the edges. The center of the check dam must be at least two inches lower than the outer edges. Dam height should be two feet maximum, measured to the center of the check dam. Side slopes shall be 2:1 or flatter. Two or more check dams in series shall be used for drainage areas greater than one acre. Maximum spacing between dams should be such that the toe of the upstream dam is at the same elevation as the top of the downstream dam. 
c.  A geotextile should be used as a separator between the graded stone and soil base and abutments. The geotextile will prevent the migration of soil particles from the subgrade into the graded stone. The geotextile shall be selected/specified in accordance with AASHTO M288-96. Geotextiles shall be set into the subgrade soils. The geotextile shall be placed immediately adjacent to the subgrade without any voids and extend five feet beyond the downstream toe of the dam to prevent scour. 
d.  Periodic inspection and maintenance must be provided. Sediment shall be removed when it reaches a depth of one-half the original dam height or before. If the area is to be mowed, check dams shall be removed once final stabilization has occurred. Otherwise, check dams may remain in place permanently. After removal, the area beneath the dam shall be seeded and mulched immediately. 
(4)  Riprap. Riprap is broken rock, cobbles or boulders placed on earth surfaces along ditches and channels for protection against the scouring action of flowing water or wave action where tail water conditions exist. Riprap serves to reduce the velocity of flow of water traveling through ditches and channels and exiting storm drainage pipes. 
a.  The material specification and the size of riprap are dependent upon the conditions under which it is to be applied and must be determined by the design professional. Riprap design and specification should be in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition as specified in section 6 and appendix C of the manual, regarding storm drain outlet protection and riprap, respectively. 
b.  Geotextiles should be used as a separator between the riprap and the soil base. The geotextile will prevent the migration of soil particles from the subgrade into the graded stone. The geotextile shall be specified in accordance with AASHTO M288-96 section 7.5, permanent erosion control recommendations. The geotextile should be placed immediately adjacent to the subgrade without any voids. 
c.  Prior to placing the riprap, ensure that the subgrade for the filter and riprap follows the required lines and grades shown in the plan. Compact any fill required in the subgrade to the density of the surrounding undisturbed material. Low areas in the subgrade on undisturbed soil may also be filled by increasing the riprap thickness. The riprap and gravel filter must conform to the specified grading limits shown on the plans. Geotextile must meet design requirements and be properly protected from punching or tearing during installation. Repair any damage by removing the riprap and placing another piece of filter fabric over the damaged area. All connecting joints should overlap a minimum of one foot. If the damage is extensive, replace the entire filter fabric. Riprap may be placed by equipment but take care not to damage the filter. The minimum thickness of the riprap should be 1.5 times the maximum stone diameter. Select stone for riprap from field stone or quarry stone. The stone should be hard, angular, and highly weather-resistant. The specific gravity of the individual stones should be at least 2.5. Install a filter to prevent soil movement through the openings in the riprap. The filter should consist of a graded gravel layer or a synthetic filter cloth meeting the requirements of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition, appendix C. 
d.  Inspect the riprapped area after heavy rains to see if any erosion around or below the riprap has taken place or if stones have been dislodged. Immediately make all needed repairs to prevent further damage. 
(5)  Retrofitting. A retrofit is a device placed in front of a permanent stormwater detention pond outlet structure to serve as a temporary sediment filter. This structure allows permanent stormwater detention basins to function as temporary sediment retention basins for sand disturbing projects. The device can consist of a perforated half-round pipe with a stone filter or a slotted board dam with a stone filter depending upon the drainage area that the detention pond serves and the pond outlet structure conditions. 
a.  Retrofits should only be used in detention basins large enough to store 67 cubic yards of sediment per acre of disturbed area in the project. The pond must be capable of storing the required volume of sediment in addition to the required stormwater volume. The required sediment storage volume shall be achieved by either excavating the basin or raising the outlet structure invert to achieve 67 cubic yards per acre of sediment storage. Retrofits are temporary structures and are to be removed as soon as the project is permanently stabilized with vegetation. 
b.  For effective trapping efficiency, the sediment delivery inlets should be at the upper end of the basin and the length to width ratio of the basin should be at least 2:1. If the length to width ratio is not at least 2:1, the flow length shall be increased with the use of baffles installed within the basin. 
c.  Perforated half-round retrofits should be used only in detention ponds with less than 30 acres total of drainage area and is never to be used on exposed pipe end or winged headwall. The diameter of the half-round pipe should be 1.5 times the diameter of the principal pipe outlet or wider than the greatest width of the concrete weir. Perforations shall be one-inch holes spaced eight inches to ten inches apart. Fill around the half-round pipe barrier with three-inch- to four-inch-stone to even with the top of the pipe. The half-round pipe structure is to be fixed by specified means (bolts, etc.) to the concrete outlet structure. 
d.  The slotted board dam with stone can be used in detention ponds with drainage areas up to 100 acres. It can also be used with open end pipe outlets, winged headwalls, or concrete weir outlets. It should be installed with minimum size or four-by-four-inch posts and two-by-four-inch horizontal boards which should have 0.5- to 1.0-inch spaces between them. Filter stone of a minimum size of three inches to four inches shall be installed around the upstream side of the board dam. 
e.  The retrofit structure shall be kept clear of trash and debris. This will require continuous monitoring and maintenance, which includes the removal of sediment when one-third of the sediment storage capacity has been lost. The structure is temporary and shall be removed when disturbed areas have been permanently stabilized. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2004, § F; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(F)) 
Sec. 22-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or the division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts, the commission, or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts, the commission, or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994, § VI; Ord. of 4-12-2004, § G; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(G)) 
Sec. 22-25. - Education and certification. 
All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2004, § H; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(H)) 
Sec. 22-26. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences and land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 22-22(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, any person who violates any provisions of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)  The following penalties shall apply to land-disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this article, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article: 
a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family swelling by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy. 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land-disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection (d)(2)a of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994, § VII; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(I)) 
Sec. 22-27. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city within 15 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994, § VIII; Ord. of 4-12-2004, § I; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(VIII)(J)) 
Secs. 22-28—22-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD PREVENTION AND CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-12, adopted Nov. 6, 2017, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 22-58—22-179, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 3-12-1989, §§ 2—12, 31—35, 51—55; Ord. of 10-14-2002, art. 1, §§ B—D, art. 2, §§ A—H, art. 3, §§ A—C, art. 4, §§ A—E, arts. 5, 6. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 22-58. - Authorization. 
Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Cleveland of Cleveland, White County, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-59. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Cleveland, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-60. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-61. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-62. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 22-82. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building . See definition for "structure." 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before April 11, 1975 (the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 12,1990 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after April 11, 1975 (the effective date of the initial FIRM) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after March 12, 1990 (the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after March 12, 1990 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Secs. 22-63—22-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22-81. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Cleveland, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-82. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated January 5, 2018, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated January 5, 2018, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for White County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City of Cleveland 85 South Main Street, Cleveland, GA 30528. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-83. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-84. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-85. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-86. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-87. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Cleveland or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-88. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Cleveland from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Secs. 22-89—22-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 22-120. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The city administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-121. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the city administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 22-144(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage . For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city administrator and staff shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-122. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 22-82, then the city administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 22-121(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 22-121(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 22-121(1)(c) and section 22-144(2) or section 22-146(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the city administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Secs. 22-123—22-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 22-143. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-144. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements . Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 22-143(4), "Elevated Buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 22-122(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles . Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. section 22-143(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)(a)—(c) above. 
(4)  Floodway . Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-82 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-145. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-82, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 22-82, then the city administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 22-143(4), "Elevated Buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The city administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-146. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-82, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 22-144. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-147. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-144 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 22-143(4), "Elevated Buildings." 
The city administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 22-121(1)(c) and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-148. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-149. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Secs. 22-150—22-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 22-171. - Requests for appeals. 
(a)  The planning commission as established by the Cleveland City Council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of White County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, 11-6-2017) 
Secs. 22-172—22-196. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 22-197. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits, including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resource; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopies to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitats; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare, to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution, and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed: 
(1)  To create buffer zones along the streams and ditches of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  To minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities within the buffer zones. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 2; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(2)) 
Sec. 22-198. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream or ditch, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 22-200(a)(1)) lying adjacent to the stream. 
Ditch means a swale or streambed which carries rainwater runoff. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the 100-year flood). 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. The term "impervious cover" includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the (local permitting authority) required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream or ditch, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Stream means any perennial or intermittent stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the intermittent or perennial base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 3; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(3)) 
Sec. 22-199. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law. State-regulated stream buffers are shown as blue and green lines on the stream classification map prepared by Rindt-McDuff Associates. The map is available for viewing in the city clerk's office. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements; 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property: 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line, crossing at an angle of 70 to 110 degrees to the stream or ditch centerline; 
2.  Public access facilities including foot trails leading directly to and/or across the stream; 
3.  Overlooks; 
4.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used; 
b.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article; 
c.  Within an easement of any utility existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures; 
d.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, this article shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(c)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 22-200(b). 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 4; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(4)) 
Sec. 22-200. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 15 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the centerline of the stream or ditch. Buffers covered under this article are shown as red lines on a stream buffer classification map prepared by Rindt-McDuff Associates. 
(2)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the buffer and setback requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the city may grant a variance from the buffer requirements of subsection (a) of this section, provided that such variance shall require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries, slope, topography and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the size, shape, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(3)  The following factors will be considered in determine whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 5; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(5)) 
Sec. 22-201. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annual any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 6; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(6)) 
Sec. 22-202. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof or with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property, nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers, or its employees for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 7; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(7)) 
Sec. 22-203. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article and, for this purpose, to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 8; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(8)) 
Sec. 22-204. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this section shall not prevent such equitable relief: 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan, or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed; provided that, before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation; and provided, furthermore, that, in the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order, which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 9; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(9)) 
Sec. 22-205. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city may appeal an enforcement action in writing within ten days after receipt of such action to the city council and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council at the next regular city council meeting. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city after exhausting all administrative remedies shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2002(2), § 10; Res. of 11-13-2006(3), exh. A(app. A)(10)) 
Chapter 24 - FEES, FINES AND OTHER CHARGES 

Sec. 24-1. - Established. 
The following fees, fines and charges are established by the city council: 
TBD = Fee, fine or charge amounts that are to be determined 

 
  

 
  

 

 

 
  

 
  

 
POABF (Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund): This fund pays to the state and helps pay police officer's retirement but, only if they are a member of the POAB and pay into the fund monthly themselves. 
DETF (Joshua's Law Driver's Education and Training Fund): This fund is paid to the state to help fund driver's education in the schools. At this time the county does not have a state funded driver's education program. 
POPTF (POPTF-A) (Peace Officer and Prosecutor Training Fund): This fund is paid to the state to fund educational classes for law enforcement and prosecutors. 
IDF (POPTF-B) (Indigent Defense Fund): This fund pays for the state to supply to the counties public defenders. Although municipalities contribute to the indigent defense fund, the city is left to pay for its own public defender. 
IDAF (Indigent Defense Application Fee Fund): IDAF fund is an application fee that is paid when someone pays for a public defender. The city keeps this money if it is determined that the person can afford to pay the fee, if not the fee can be waived or added to the fine if the person is found guilty. 
JAIL (County Jail Fund Jail Fund): This fund goes to the county to help maintain the jail although the city pays for boarding anyone that is arrested by the city police department. The additional boarding fee is paid from the city's general fund, but may be paid back through restitution by the arrested person. 
LVAP (Local Victim Assistance Program): Local Victim Assistance Program goes to the county to help support community programs for battered women and children, etc. 
LL (County Law Library): The Law Library goes to the county and supports the county Law Library which everyone has access to. 
COURT COST : Court cost is only one of two funds that the city retains. 
Tech Fee (Technology): Technology fee is the second portion of the fine that the city keeps. This fee is used for the purchase and maintenance of technical equipment for the police. 
CSI (Court/Police Software): CSI helps pay for the court and police department records information systems. 
CVEF (Crime Victim Emergency Fund): Crime Victims Emergency Fund goes to the state to help victims of DUI. 
DATE (Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund): This fund goes to the state to fund drug awareness in the schools and communities of this state. 
SGF (State General Fund): This fund goes to the state to help pay for the war on drugs and the GBI Crime Lab. 
BSITF (Brain and Spinal Injury Trust Fund): Brain and Spinal Injury Fund pays to the state to help victims of DUI's that have brain and spinal cord injuries. 
PHOTO (DUI Photo Publication): Photo fee is paid to the city which in turn pays it to the local news paper to run a picture of any convicted in this jurisdiction of a 2nd or more DUI. The city uses this fee to publish a photo, in the local newspaper, of jurisdictional convictions of two or more DUI violations. 
Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; fire protection and safety generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; authority to provide fire protection standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; false alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; volunteer firefighters eligible to serve as members of city and county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-23; prohibition and regulation of fireworks sales preempted by state, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-24. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODES 

Sec. 26-19. - Adoption of fire prevention codes. 
(a)  The International Fire Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), as amended and modified in this article, and including chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by the city council as though fully set forth herein. 
(b)  The editions of standards, recommended practices, guides and methods, as published in the National Fire Codes (NFC) by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), as amended and modified in this article, are hereby adopted by the city council as though fully set forth herein. 
(c)  The codes adopted in this section shall be the city minimum fire safety standards. 
(d)  Copies of the codes adopted in this section are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2006, exh. A(7-501), (7-505)) 
Sec. 26-20. - Enforcement. 
The codes hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department or his designee. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2006, exh. A(7-502)) 
Sec. 26-21. - Definitions. 
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the codes hereby adopted, it shall mean the city of Cleveland, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2006, exh. A(7-503)) 
Sec. 26-22. - Storage of explosives, blasting agents, and flammable liquids restricted. 
The limits referred to in the codes hereby adopted in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits referred to in the codes hereby adopted in which Class I liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in the codes hereby adopted in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted are applicable unless otherwise specifically provided by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2006, exh. A(7-504)) 
Sec. 26-23. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department or his designee shall have the power to modify any provisions of the codes hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department or his designee thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2006, exh. A(7-505)) 
Sec. 26-24. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department or his designee shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the codes do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department or his designee to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2006, exh. A(7-506)) 
Sec. 26-25. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any persons who shall violate any of the provisions of the codes hereby adopted or shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one day nor more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2006, exh. A(7-507)) 
Secs. 26-26—26-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 26-54. - Composition. 
The fire department shall consist of a chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for the mayor and city council. Subordinate officers shall include, in order of rank following the fire chief, the assistant fire chief, the lieutenants, and the firefighters, in order of seniority in each group. 
Sec. 26-55. - Fire chief. 
The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall be subject to the orders and regulations of the mayor and council. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the fire chief shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the city council. In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the fire chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed. 
Sec. 26-56. - Powers and duties of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city, and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To see to the proper and speedy extinguishment of all accidental or intentionally caused fires; 
(2)  To see to the enforcement of the fire prevention codes adopted by the mayor and council; 
(3)  To keep or cause to be kept adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts, and other activities of the department; 
(4)  To submit a monthly written report to the mayor and council on the activities of the department; 
(5)  To establish rules and regulations concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the fire department, subject to approval by the city council; 
(6)  To investigate the causes of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city; and 
(7)  To serve as fire inspectors for the city. 
Sec. 26-57. - Firefighter qualifications. 
Any person shall have the following qualifications to become a member of the volunteer fire department: 
(1)  Must be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  Must not have been convicted of a felony within ten years prior to employment. 
(3)  Must have good moral character as determined by investigation under procedure approved by the state firefighters standards and training council. 
(4)  Must be in good physical condition as determined by a medical examination by a licensed physician. 
(5)  Must train, drill or study in council-approved school, classes, or courses at least 80 hours in each calendar year following the first year of employment. 
(6)  Must be Basic Module 1 qualified within one year of enrollment. 
Sec. 26-58. - Firefighter duties. 
It shall be the duty of all firefighters to become familiar with and proficient in the handling of all of the apparatus of the fire department, to be prepared at a moment's notice to respond to all alarms of fire, to observe all rules and regulations of the fire department established by the fire chief, and to obey all orders of the commanding officer at all fires. 
Sec. 26-59. - Daily inspections. 
Each fire station and its equipment shall be examined daily. Inspections shall be rigidly made and shall ensure that all apparatus is maintained in excellent working condition at all times, ready for immediate service, and that all fire stations and surroundings are in a clean and sanitary condition. 
Sec. 26-60. - Fire vehicles. 
The fire department, including its apparatus, when going to any fire in the city or returning therefrom, shall have the right-of-way over the streets, lanes, and ways or the, city to the exclusion of all persons, vehicles, and railroad trains of every kind. No persons other than members of the fire department shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or returning from fires. 
Sec. 26-61. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
Sec. 26-62. - Fire service rolling fee. 
Anytime the city's fire equipment is dispatched for fires, medical emergencies, or any other emergency other than a motor vehicle accident, the department may charge a rolling fee, in the amount established by city council. If the dispatch results from an actual or threatened structural fire or a bomb threat, the rolling fee shall be billed to the owner and occupant of the property. If the dispatch is to the site of a medical emergency, the rolling fee shall be billed to the sick or injured person or any person legally responsible for the sick or injured person. 
Sec. 26-63. - Fees and charges for fire and other emergency services. 
The fees for fire and other emergency response services shall be as provided in chapter 24. The fire chief and city clerk are hereby directed to issue invoices to insurance companies for such fire services and to collect such fees on behalf of the city and to deposit such fees in the city's fire fund, which shall be used to purchase equipment, training, services and supplies for the city fire department. 
Secs. 26-64—26-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITED ACTS 

Sec. 26-85. - Tampering with fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any fire alarm except in case of fire, except by authority from the city or its authorized employees. 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Sec. 26-86. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, give, send or turn in, in any manner or way whatever, a false fire alarm or riot alarm, knowing the same to be false. 
Sec. 26-87. - Tampering with equipment. 
No persons other than those firefighters on official business shall tamper with firefighting equipment either on public or private property. 
Sec. 26-88. - Obstructing fire equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any firefighting apparatus or any of the officers or members of the fire department in the performance of their duties. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any fireplug so as to obstruct approaches to the same by the fire department. 
Sec. 26-89. - Persons permitted in vicinity of fire. 
No persons other than firefighters, city officials, police officers, and the property owner or his agent shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief. 
Sec. 26-90. - Extraordinary fire hazards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, maintain, suffer or permit an extraordinary fire hazard on his premises or on premises occupied or used by him, either in the construction of buildings, storage of inflammables, explosives or combustibles, the use of open flames, etc. The term "extraordinary fire hazard," as used herein, shall be construed to mean any condition that would be manifestly unsafe as a fire hazard or that would greatly increase the probability of fire or the injury of persons by fire. In this connection the minimum standards promulgated in such cases by the National Board of Fire Underwriters shall be considered as prima facie evidence of such hazard. 
Secs. 26-91—26-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 26-109—26-112, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 26-109. - Designation. 
The sections of this article shall be known and designated as the "fireworks regulations ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-110. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  "Consumer fireworks" means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. 
(2)  "Consumer fireworks retail sales facility" shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall not include a tent, canopy, or membrane structure. 
(3)  "Consumer fireworks retail sales stand" shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall not include a tent, canopy, or membrane structure. 
(4)  "Distributor" means any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership which sells consumer fireworks. 
(4.1)  "Electric plant" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 46-3A-l. 
(5)  "Fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
(6)  "NFPA 1124" means the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition. 
(7)  "Nonprofit group" means any entity exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, any entity incorporated under O.C.G.A. Chapter 3 of Title 14, Georgia Non-Profit Corporation Code, or a sponsored organization of a public or private elementary or secondary school in this state. 
(8)  "Proximate audience" means an audience closer to pyrotechnic devices than permitted by the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1123, Code for Fireworks Display, as adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. 
(9)  "Pyrotechnics" means fireworks. 
(10)  "Store" shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided however, that such term shall only include such buildings with at least 4,000 square feet of retail display space and wherefrom: 
a.  No more than 25 percent of such retail display space is used for consumer fireworks and items or products as provided for under subsection (b)(2) of this section; and 
b.  Other items or products which are not consumer fireworks or items or products as provided for under subsection (b)(2) of this section are sold; and provided further that such term means a person, film, corporation, association, or partnership with more than one mercantile location, with all such mercantile locations are collectively known to the public by the same name or share central management. 
(11)  "Wastewater treatment plant" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 43-51-2. 
(12)  "Water treatment plant" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 43-51-2. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of l00 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes, snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grams or less of explosive mixture. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-111. - Limited prohibition as to consumer fireworks or fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, to use or ignite or cause to be ignited, or to possess, manufacture, transport, or store any consumer fireworks or fireworks, within the city except as expressly authorized by the general law of the State of Georgia but also as limited by this article as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks or fireworks, within the city on any day after the time of 9:00 p.m., and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m., and during the morning hours of 12:00 midnight until l0:00 a.m. of any day pursuant to the noise ordinance of the city and this article, except as otherwise provided for under subparagraph of this section or such use or ignition is allowed pursuant to the issuance of a special use permit pursuant to section 26-112 of this article. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (a)(l) of this section, the use or ignition of any consumer fireworks or fireworks, within the city is further allowed for additional hours without a special use permit as follows: 
a.  The use or ignition of any consumer fireworks or fireworks is allowed on January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31 of each year after the time of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m. without a special use permit; and 
b.  The use or ignition of any consumer fireworks or fireworks, within the city is allowed on January 1 of each year for the additional time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. without a special use permit. 
(b)  The right to use or ignite or cause to be ignited, any consumer fireworks or fireworks, as provided herein, is further subject to any regulations and restrictions concerning the use of consumer fireworks due to a declaration of drought by the Georgia Governor, and with the municipal city limits being within the boundaries of the area covered by the drought declaration. The regulations and restrictions of the drought declaration shall not be effective on January 1, July 3, July 4, or December 31 of any year. The drought regulations and restrictions shall also be rescinded upon the expiration or conclusion of the drought declaration. Any person that violates the drought regulations and restrictions by the use or ignition of consumer fireworks or fireworks will also be subject to a violation of this article, and subject to the penalties for violation of this article as provided herein. 
(c)  It shall unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks or fireworks, within the city in violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 25-10-2 and 25-10-2.1, and such violation shall be deemed to be a violation of this article, besides being a violation of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-112. - Prohibition of consumer fireworks or fireworks in city public areas or the use of fireworks at a time not authorized by the general law of the State of Georgia except pursuant to a special use permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, to use or ignite or cause to be ignited, or to possess, manufacture, transport, or store any consumer fireworks or fireworks, on, upon, or above any city property, including, but not limited to, the public areas of the city including parks, or during the hours of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m. on any day, except as provided herein and except as allowed by a special use permit issued by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks on any day at a time not allowed by the general law of the State of Georgia or this article within the city, or upon any city public property, or both, unless such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership is issued a special use permit by the city council for the use or ignition of consumer fireworks in such ways. The applicant for a special use permit shall use the application forms of the city for said permit, and shall designate the time or times and/or location that such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership desires to use or ignite or cause to be ignited such consumer fireworks or fireworks. The city council shall consider the application, and considering reasonable factors such as the time requested, the proposed location of the fireworks display, prior experience concerning the applicant's use of fireworks, the potential for fires or wildfires, and other reasonable factors, and in its discretion based upon these factors grant or deny the issuance of a special use permit. If the special use permit is granted by the city council, then the applicant shall pay a special use permit fee of $500.00 to the city. If the application is denied, then the applicant shall have a right of appeal to the superior court of the applicable county pursuant to the procedures for the grant of a writ of certiorari by said court. The City of Cleveland, the city council, and the agents of the city shall have no liability as to any decision made pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-113. - Occupational tax for a licensed distributor operating a permanent consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store in the city. 
A licensed distributor operating a permanent consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store shall be entitled to receive a city occupational tax license for said facility or store upon making application for said license from the city pursuant to the city's procedure, and providing a copy of the license issued to the distributor and as to said permanent facility or store by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner or the judge of the probate court of the applicable county and as provided by general law. The occupational tax license fee for said licensed distributor shall be assessed for said licensed distributor upon the same basis as other businesses, professions, or occupations under the city's occupational tax ordinance. Any termination, revocation, or suspension of the license issued by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner shall act to automatically in similar fashion terminate, revoke, or suspend the city occupational tax license issued to said licensed distributor. If the licensed distributor selling consumer fireworks from a permanent consumer fireworks retails sales facility or store is a part of a store having multiple store locations as provided within O.C.G.A. § 25-10-51, then any city occupational tax license issued for said store location shall be sufficient to authorize the sale or the offer for sale at retail or wholesale any consumer fireworks or fireworks without having said store acquiring an additional occupational tax license from the city as to the sale of consumer fireworks or fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-114. - License for a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
The City of Cleveland is hereby authorized to issue a temporary license (and which shall also serve as a temporary occupational tax license) for a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand or stands, provided that the city fire department, or the fire department that is legally authorized to operate within the city, determines that the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand meets the requirements of the general law of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.l(c)(l) and O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.l(a)(l). In accordance with § 25-l0-5.l(c)(2), a temporarily license shall also be granted in the event that the judge of the probate court of the applicable county determines that such a temporary license should be issued due to an appeal of the decision by the applicable fire department. The application for the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be submitted to the applicable fire department, and with a copy provided to the administrative office of the city. Any temporary license issued shall identify the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand applicable to such license, and the temporary license shall expire on the next January 31 after the issuance of such license. The license fee for a distributor selling consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be $500.00 per location, payable to the governing authority of the city. The distributor shall provide a copy of the list of distributor's temporary consumer retail sales stands submitted to the safety fire commissioner to the applicable fire department and the administrative office of the city as a part of the temporary license application. All temporary licenses for a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall only be issued to licensed distributors where the sales of consumer fireworks from at least one (out of two permitted) such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands shall accrue to the benefit of a nonprofit group as agreed between the licensed distributor and the participating nonprofit group. A nonprofit group benefitting from the sale of consumer fireworks pursuant to this provision shall directly participate in operating the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. The regulations of this article applicable to the sale of consumer fireworks from temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands shall only be applicable until January 3l, 2018. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-115. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city fire department, or any applicable fire department that operates within the city, is authorized to refer cases for enforcement as to violations of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.l(c) to the state fire marshal. 
(b)  All fireworks or consumer fireworks manufactured, offered for sale, exposed for sale, stored, used, ignited or caused to be ignited in violation of this article or state law, or both, are declared to be contraband (including fireworks in the possession of the violator but not yet used, ignited or caused to be ignited) and may be seized, taken, and removed, or caused to be removed and destroyed or disposed of, by a sale with the proceeds of the sale to be used for public safety purposes, or destroyed at the expense of the owner thereof, or both, by any authorized law enforcement officer operating within the City of Cleveland. 
Any property declared as contraband pursuant to this article shall be forfeited in accordance with the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. Chapter 16 of Title 9. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer of the city, or any law enforcement officer authorized to provide law enforcement services within the city, shall be entitled to enforce the provisions of this article or state law, or both, relating to the use or igniting or causing to be ignited fireworks or consumer fireworks, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-116. - Certain devices unlawful that require a flame for propulsion or lighting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to release or cause to be released any balloon, bag, parachute, or other similar device which requires fire underneath for propulsion or to release or cause to be released any floating water lantern or wish lantern which uses a flame to create a lighting effect in any public waters within the City of Cleveland. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 26-117. - Penalties. 
Any person, film, corporation, association, or partnership that knowingly violates the provisions of this article may be punished by a fine, or imprisonment, or both, up to the maximum penalties allowed under the City Charter for the City of Cleveland, or pursuant to state law. Each act in violation of this article, including, but not limited to, each sales transaction, shall be deemed to be a separate offense, and subject to the maximum penalties as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Chapter 28 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 

Sec. 28-1. - Food service regulations adopted. 
The White County Board of Health Rules of the Department of Human Resources Public Health Chapter 511-6-1, Food Service Rules and Regulations, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section. A copy of said chapter is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 28-2. - Tourist accommodation regulations adopted. 
The White County Board of Health Rules of the Department of Human Resources Public Health Chapter 511-6-2, Tourist Accommodations Rules and Regulations, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section. A copy of said chapter is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 28-3. - Water park, swimming pool, spa and water park regulations adopted. 
The White County Board of Health Public Swimming Pools, Spas, and Recreational Water Parks Regulations, Chapter 511-3-5, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section. A copy of said chapter is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 28-4. - Body art and tattoo regulations adopted. 
The rules and regulations of the county board of health regarding body art establishments and tattoo studios, adopted by the county on March 13, 2006, are adopted as though fully set forth in this section. A copy of said rules are available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 28-5. - Portable sanitation contractors regulations adopted. 
The White County Board of Health Rules of the Department of Human Resources Chapter 511-3-6, Portable Sanitation Contractors, Rules and Regulations, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section. A copy of said chapter is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07, 6-5-2017) 
Chapter 30 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR DEBT COLLECTION PRACTICES 

Sec. 30-19. - Congressional findings and declarations of purpose. 
(a)  There is abundant evidence of the use of abusive, deceptive, and unfair debt collection practices by many debt collectors. Abusive debt collection practices contribute to the number of personal bankruptcies, to marital instability, to the loss of jobs, and to invasions of individual privacy. 
(b)  Existing laws and procedures for redressing these injuries are inadequate to protect consumers. 
(c)  Means other than misrepresentation or other abusive debt collection practices are available for the effective collection of debts. 
(d)  Abusive debt collection practices are carried on to a substantial extent in interstate commerce and through means and instrumentalities of such commerce. Even where abusive debt collection practices are purely intrastate in character, they nevertheless directly affect interstate commerce. 
(e)  It is the purpose of this article to eliminate abusive debt collection practices by debt collectors, to ensure that those debt collectors who refrain from using abusive debt collection practices are not competitively disadvantaged, and to promote consistent state action to protect consumers against debt collection abuses. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(802)) 
Sec. 30-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the Federal Trade Commission. 
Communication means the conveying of information regarding a debt directly or indirectly to any person through any medium. 
Consumer means any natural person obligated or allegedly obligated to pay any debt. 
Creditor means any person who offers or extends credit creating a debt or to whom a debt is owed, but such term does not include any person to the extent that he receives an assignment or transfer of a debt in default solely for the purpose of facilitating collection of such debt for another. 
Debt means any obligation or alleged obligation of a consumer to pay money arising out of a transaction in which the money, property, insurance or services which are the subject of the transaction are primarily for personal, family or household purposes, whether or not such obligation has been reduced to judgment. 
Debt collector means any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or mails in any business the principal purpose of which is the collection of any debts, or who regularly collects or attempts to collect, directly or indirectly, debts owed or due or asserted to be owed or due another. Notwithstanding the exclusion provided by subsection (6) of this definition, the term includes any creditor who, in the process of collecting his own debts, uses any name other than his own which would indicate that a third person is collecting or attempting to collect such debts. For the purpose of section 30-25(6), such term also includes any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or mails in any business the principal purpose of which is the enforcement of security interests. The term does not include: 
(1)  Any officer or employee of a creditor while, in the name of the creditor, collecting debts for such creditor; 
(2)  Any person while acting as a debt collector for another person, both of whom are related by common ownership or affiliated by corporate control, if the person acting as a debt collector does so only for persons to whom it is so related or affiliated and if the principal business of such person is not the collection of debts; 
(3)  Any officer or employee of the United States or any state to the extent that collecting or attempting to collect any debt is in the performance of his official duties; 
(4)  Any person while serving or attempting to serve legal process on any other person in connection with the judicial enforcement of any debt; 
(5)  Any nonprofit organization which, at the request of consumers, performs bona fide consumer credit counseling and assists consumers in the liquidation of their debts by receiving payments from such consumers and distributing such amounts to creditors; and 
(6)  Any person collecting or attempting to collect any debt owed or due or asserted to be owed or due another to the extent such activity: 
a.  Is incidental to a bona fide fiduciary obligation or a bona fide escrow arrangement; 
b.  Concerns a debt which was originated by such person; 
c.  Concerns a debt which was not in default at the time it was obtained by such person; or 
d.  Concerns a debt obtained by such person as a secured party in a commercial credit transaction involving the creditor. 
Location information means a consumer's place of abode and his telephone number at such place, or his place of employment. 
State means any state, territory, or possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any political subdivision of any of the foregoing. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(803)) 
Sec. 30-21. - Acquisition of location information. 
Any debt collector communicating with any person other than the consumer for the purpose of acquiring location information about the consumer shall: 
(1)  Identify himself, state that he is confirming or correcting location information concerning the consumer, and, only if expressly requested, identify his employer; 
(2)  Not state that such consumer owes any debt; 
(3)  Not communicate with any such person more than once unless requested to do so by such person or unless the debt collector reasonably believes that the earlier response of such person is erroneous or incomplete and that such person now has correct or complete location information; 
(4)  Not communicate by post card; 
(5)  Not use any language or symbol on any envelope or in the contents of any communication effected by the mails or telegram that indicates that the debt collector is in the debt collection business or that the communication relates to the collection of a debt; and 
(6)  After the debt collector knows the consumer is represented by an attorney with regard to the subject debt and has knowledge of, or can readily ascertain, such attorney's name and address, not communicate with any person other than that attorney, unless the attorney fails to respond within a reasonable period of time to the communication from the debt collector. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(804)) 
Sec. 30-22. - Communication in connection with debt collection. 
(a)  Communication with the consumer. Without the prior consent of the consumer given directly to the debt collector, or the express permission of a court of competent jurisdiction, a debt collector may not communicate with a consumer in connection with the collection of any debt: 
(1)  At any unusual time or place or a time or place known or which should be known to be inconvenient to the consumer. In the absence of knowledge of circumstances to the contrary, a debt collector shall assume that the convenient time for communicating with a consumer is after 8:00 a.m. and before 9:00 p.m., local time at the consumer's location; 
(2)  If the debt collector knows the consumer is represented by an attorney with respect to such debt and has knowledge of, or can readily ascertain, such attorney's name and address, unless the attorney fails to respond within a reasonable period of time to a communication from the debt collector or unless the attorney consents to direct communication with the consumer; or 
(3)  At the consumer's place of employment if the debt collector knows or has reason to know that the consumer's employer prohibits the consumer from receiving such communication. 
(b)  Communication with third parties. Except as provided in section 30-21, without the prior consent of the consumer given directly to the debt collector, or the express permission of a court of competent jurisdiction, or as reasonably necessary to effectuate a postjudgment judicial remedy, a debt collector may not communicate, in connection with the collection of any debt, with any person other than a consumer, his attorney, a consumer reporting agency if otherwise permitted by law, the creditor, the attorney of the creditor, or the attorney of the debt collector. 
(c)  Ceasing communication. If a consumer notifies a debt collector in writing that the consumer refuses to pay a debt or that the consumer wishes the debt collector to cease further communication with the consumer, the debt collector shall not communicate further with the consumer with respect to such debt, except: 
(1)  To advise the consumer that the debt collector's further efforts are being terminated; 
(2)  To notify the consumer that the debt collector or creditor may invoke specified remedies which are ordinarily invoked by such debt collector or creditor; or 
(3)  Where applicable, to notify the consumer that the debt collector or creditor intends to invoke a specified remedy. 
If such notice from the consumer is made by mail, notification shall be complete upon receipt. 
(d)  "Consumer" defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "consumer" includes the consumer's spouse, parent (if the consumer is a minor), guardian, executor, or administrator. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(805)) 
Sec. 30-23. - Harassment or abuse. 
A debt collector may not engage in any conduct the natural consequence of which is to harass, oppress, or abuse any person in connection with the collection of a debt. Without limiting the general application of the foregoing, the following conduct is a violation of this section: 
(1)  The use or threat of use of violence or other criminal means to harm the physical person, reputation, or property of any person. 
(2)  The use of obscene or profane language or language the natural consequence of which is to abuse the hearer or reader. 
(3)  The publication of a list of consumers who allegedly refuse to pay debts, except to a consumer reporting agency or to persons meeting the requirements of section 603(f) or 604(3) of this Act. 
(4)  The advertisement for sale of any debt to coerce payment of the debt. 
(5)  Causing a telephone to ring or engaging any person in telephone conversation repeatedly or continuously with intent to annoy, abuse, or harass any person at the called number. 
(6)  Except as provided in section 30-21, the placement of telephone calls without meaningful disclosure of the caller's identity. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(806)) 
Sec. 30-24. - False or misleading representations. 
A debt collector may not use any false, deceptive or misleading representation or means in connection with the collection of any debt. Without limiting the general application of the foregoing, the following conduct is a violation of this section: 
(1)  The false representation or implication that the debt collector is vouched for, bonded by, or affiliated with the United States or any state, including the use of any badge, uniform, or facsimile thereof. 
(2)  The false representation of: 
a.  The character, amount, or legal status of any debt; or 
b.  Any services rendered or compensation which may be lawfully received by any debt collector for the collection of a debt. 
(3)  The false representation or implication that any individual is an attorney or that any communication is from an attorney. 
(4)  The representation or implication that nonpayment of any debt will result in the arrest or imprisonment of any person or the seizure, garnishment, attachment, or sale of any property or wages of any person unless such action is lawful and the debt collector or creditor intends to take such action. 
(5)  The threat to take any action that cannot legally be taken or that is not intended to be taken. 
(6)  The false representation or implication that a sale, referral, or other transfer of any interest in a debt shall cause the consumer to: 
a.  Lose any claim or defense to payment of the debt; or 
b.  Become subject to any practice prohibited by this article. 
(7)  The false representation or implication that the consumer committed any crime or other conduct in order to disgrace the consumer. 
(8)  Communicating or threatening to communicate to any person credit information which is known or which should be known to be false, including the failure to communicate that a disputed debt is disputed. 
(9)  The use or distribution of any written communication which simulates or is falsely represented to be a document authorized, issued, or approved by any court, official, or agency of the United States or any state, or which creates a false impression as to its source, authorization, or approval. 
(10)  The use of any false representation or deceptive means to collect or attempt to collect any debt or to obtain information concerning a consumer. 
(11)  The failure to disclose in the initial written communication with the consumer and, in addition, if the initial communication with the consumer is oral, in that initial oral communication, that the debt collector is attempting to collect a debt and that any information obtained will be used for that purpose, and the failure to disclose in subsequent communications that the communication is from a debt collector, except that this paragraph shall not apply to a formal pleading made in connection with a legal action. 
(12)  The false representation or implication that accounts have been turned over to innocent purchasers for value. 
(13)  The false representation or implication that documents are legal process. 
(14)  The use of any business, company, or organization name other than the true name of the debt collector's business, company, or organization. 
(15)  The false representation or implication that documents are not legal process forms or do not require action by the consumer. 
(16)  The false representation or implication that a debt collector operates or is employed by a consumer reporting agency as defined by section 603(f) of this Act. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(807)) 
Sec. 30-25. - Unfair practices. 
A debt collector may not use unfair or unconscionable means to collect or attempt to collect any debt. Without limiting the general application of the foregoing, the following conduct is a violation of this section: 
(1)  The collection of any amount (including any interest, fee, charge, or expense incidental to the principal obligation) unless such amount is expressly authorized by the agreement creating the debt or permitted by law. 
(2)  The acceptance by a debt collector from any person of a check or other payment instrument postdated by more than five days unless such person is notified in writing of the debt collector's intent to deposit such check or instrument not more than ten nor less than three business days prior to such deposit. 
(3)  The solicitation by a debt collector of any postdated check or other postdated payment instrument for the purpose of threatening or instituting criminal prosecution. 
(4)  Depositing or threatening to deposit any postdated check or other postdated payment instrument prior to the date on such check or instrument. 
(5)  Causing charges to be made to any person for communications by concealment of the true propose of the communication. Such charges include, but are not limited to, collect telephone calls and telegram fees. 
(6)  Taking or threatening to take any nonjudicial action to effect dispossession or disablement of property if: 
a.  There is no present right to possession of the property claimed as collateral through an enforceable security interest; 
b.  There is no present intention to take possession of the property; or 
c.  The property is exempt by law from such dispossession or disablement. 
(7)  Communicating with a consumer regarding a debt by post card. 
(8)  Using any language or symbol, other than the debt collector's address, on any envelope when communicating with a consumer by use of the mails or by telegram, except that a debt collector may use his business name if such name does not indicate that he is in the debt collection business. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(808)) 
Sec. 30-26. - Validation of debts. 
(a)  Within five days after the initial communication with a consumer in connection with the collection of any debt, a debt collector shall, unless the following information is contained in the initial communication or the consumer has paid the debt, send the consumer a written notice containing: 
(1)  The amount of the debt; 
(2)  The name of the creditor to whom the debt is owed; 
(3)  A statement that unless the consumer, within 30 days after receipt of the notice, disputes the validity of the debt, or any portion thereof, the debt will be assumed to be valid by the debt collector; 
(4)  A statement that if the consumer notifies the debt collector in writing within the 30-day period that the debt, or any portion thereof, is disputed, the debt collector will obtain verification of the debt or a copy of a judgment against the consumer and a copy of such verification or judgment will be mailed to the consumer by the debt collector; and 
(5)  A statement that, upon the consumer's written request within the 30-day period, the debt collector will provide the consumer with the name and address of the original creditor, if different from the current creditor. 
(b)  If the consumer notifies the debt collector in writing within the 30-day period described in subsection (a) of this section that the debt, or any portion thereof, is disputed, or that the consumer requests the name and address of the original creditor, the debt collector shall cease collection of the debt, or any disputed portion thereof, until the debt collector obtains verification of the debt or any copy of a judgment, or the name and address of the original creditor, and a copy of such verification or judgment, or name and address of the original creditor, is mailed to the consumer by the debt collector. 
(c)  The failure of a consumer to dispute the validity of a debt under this section may not be construed by any court as an admission of liability by the consumer. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(809)) 
Sec. 30-27. - Multiple debts. 
If any consumer owes multiple debts and makes any single payment to any debt collector with respect to such debts, such debt collector may not apply such payment to any debt which is disputed by the consumer and, where applicable, shall apply such payment in accordance with the consumer's directions. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(810)) 
Sec. 30-28. - Legal actions by debt collectors. 
(a)  Any debt collector who brings any legal action on a debt against any consumer shall: 
(1)  In the case of an action to enforce an interest in real property securing the consumer's obligation, bring such action only in a judicial district or similar legal entity in which such real property is located; or 
(2)  In the case of an action not described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, bring such action only in the judicial district or similar legal entity: 
a.  In which such consumer signed the contract sued upon; or 
b.  In which such consumer resides at the commencement of the action. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the bringing of legal actions by debt collectors. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(811)) 
Sec. 30-29. - Furnishing certain deceptive forms. 
(a)  It is unlawful to design, compile, and furnish any form knowing that such form would be used to create the false belief in a consumer that a person other than the creditor of such consumer is participating in the collection of or in an attempt to collect a debt such consumer allegedly owes such creditor, when in fact such person is not so participating. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be liable to the same extent and in the same manner as a debt collector is liable under section 30-30 for failure to comply with a provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(812)) 
Sec. 30-30. - Civil liability. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this section, any debt collector who fails to comply with any provision of this article with respect to any person is liable to such person in an amount equal to the sum of: 
(1)  Any actual damage sustained by such person as a result of such failure; 
(2)  a.  In the case of any action by an individual, such additional damages as the court may allow, but not exceeding $1,000.00; or 
b.  In the case of a class action: 
1.  Such amount for each named plaintiff as could be recovered under subsection (a)(2)a of this section; and 
2.  Such amount as the court may allow for all other class members, without regard to a minimum individual recovery, not to exceed the lesser of $500,000.00 or one per centum of the net worth of the debt collector; and 
(3)  In the case of any successful action to enforce the foregoing liability, the costs of the action, together with a reasonable attorney's fee as determined by the court. On a finding by the court that an action under this section was brought in bad faith and for the purpose of harassment, the court may award to the defendant attorney's fees reasonable in relation to the work expended and costs. 
(b)  In determining the amount of liability in any action under subsection (a) of this section, the court shall consider, among other relevant factors: 
(1)  In any individual action under subsection (a)(2)a of this section, the frequency and persistence of noncompliance by the debt collector, the nature of such noncompliance, and the extent to which such noncompliance was intentional; or 
(2)  In any class action under subsection (a)(2)b of this section, the frequency and persistence of noncompliance by the debt collector, the nature of such noncompliance, the resources of the debt collector, the number of persons adversely affected, and the extent to which the debt collector's noncompliance was intentional. 
(c)  A debt collector may not be held liable in any action brought under this article if the debt collector shows by a preponderance of evidence that the violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid any such error. 
(d)  An action to enforce any liability created by this article may be brought in any appropriate United States district court without regard to the amount in controversy, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction, within one year from the date on which the violation occurs. 
(e)  No provision of this section imposing any liability shall apply to any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity with any advisory opinion of the Federal Trade Commission (commission), notwithstanding that after such act or omission has occurred, such opinion is amended, rescinded, or determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(813)) 
Sec. 30-31. - Administrative enforcement. 
(a)  Compliance with this article shall be enforced by the commission, except to the extent that enforcement of the requirements imposed under this article is specifically committed to another agency under subsection (b) of this section. For purpose of the exercise by the commission of its functions and powers under the Federal Trade Commission Act, a violation of this article shall be deemed an unfair or deceptive act or practice in violation of that Act. All of the functions and powers of the commission under the Federal Trade Commission Act are available to the commission to enforce compliance by any person with this article, irrespective of whether that person is engaged in commerce or meets any other jurisdictional tests in the Federal Trade Commission Act, including the power to enforce the provisions of this article in the same manner as if the violation had been a violation of a Federal Trade Commission trade regulation rule. 
(b)  Compliance with any requirements imposed under this article shall be enforced under: 
(1)  Section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, in the case of: 
a.  National banks, by the comptroller of the currency; 
b.  Member banks of the Federal Reserve System (other than national banks), by the Federal Reserve Board; and 
c.  Banks the deposits or accounts of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than members of the Federal Reserve System), by the board of directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; 
(2)  Section 5(d) of the Home Owners Loan Act of 1933, section 407 of the National Housing Act, and sections 6(i) and 17 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (acting directing or through the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation), in the case of any institution subject to any of those provisions; 
(3)  The Federal Credit Union Act, by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration with respect to any Federal credit union; 
(4)  Subtitle IV of Title 49, by the Interstate Commerce Commission with respect to any common carrier subject to such subtitle; 
(5)  The Federal Aviation Act of 1958, by the Secretary of Transportation with respect to any air carrier or any foreign air carrier subject to that Act; and 
(6)  The Packers and Stockyards Act of 1921 (except as provided in section 406 of that Act), by the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to any activities subject to that Act. 
(c)  For the purpose of the exercise by any agency referred to in subsection (b) of this section of its powers under any Act referred to in that subsection, a violation of any requirement imposed under this article shall be deemed to be a violation of a requirement imposed under that Act. In addition to its powers under any provision of law specifically referred to in subsection (b) of this section, each of the agencies referred to in that subsection may exercise, for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any requirement imposed under this article, any other authority conferred on it by law, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Neither the commission nor any other agency referred to in subsection (b) of this section may promulgate trade regulation rules or other regulations with respect to the collection of debts by debt collectors as defined in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(814)) 
Sec. 30-32. - Reports to congress by the commission. 
(a)  Not later than one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and at one-year intervals thereafter, the commission shall make reports to the congress concerning the administration of its functions under this article, including such recommendations as the commission deems necessary or appropriate. In addition, each report of the commission shall include its assessment of the extent to which compliance with this article is being achieved and a summary of the enforcement actions taken by the commission under section 30-31. 
(b)  In the exercise of its functions under this article, the commission may obtain upon request the views of any other Federal agency which exercises enforcement functions under section 30-31. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(815)) 
Sec. 30-33. - Relation to state laws. 
This article does not annul, alter, or affect, or exempt any person subject to the provisions of this article from complying with the laws of any state with respect to debt collection practices, except to the extent that those laws are inconsistent with any provision of this article, and then only to the extent of the inconsistency. For purposes of this section, a state law is not inconsistent with this article if the protection such law affords any consumer is greater than the protection provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(816)) 
Sec. 30-34. - Exemption for state regulation. 
The commission shall by regulation exempt from the requirements of this article any class of debt collection practices within any state if the commission determines that under the law of that state that class of debt collection practices is subject to requirements substantially similar to those imposed by this article, and that there is adequate provision for enforcement. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, exh. A(817)) 
Chapter 32 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Law enforcement generally, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-1 et seq.; compensation of law enforcement officers on commission basis prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-26-19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 32-19. - Composition and rank. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the city council shall prescribe. Following the police chief in rank shall be the captain, the lieutenants, and the police officers, in order of seniority in each group. 
Sec. 32-20. - Oath. 
Prior to entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of the police department shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the city council. 
Sec. 32-21. - Appointment of police chief; department rules. 
(a)  The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of city council, and shall be subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and the city council. 
(b)  In the exercise of his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with this Code, all other resolutions and ordinances of the city, and the laws of the state. 
(c)  In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. If there are two or more officers who are next in rank, the patrol supervisor, regardless of seniority, shall act as chief until a successor has been duly appointed. 
Sec. 32-22. - Duties of police chief. 
The police chief shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To attend upon request meetings of the city council and trials before the municipal court; 
(2)  To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments, and rules of the city council and of the municipal court; 
(3)  To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court; 
(4)  To see that the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced; 
(5)  To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof; 
(6)  To protect the rights of persons and property; 
(7)  To hire officers qualified pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and to discipline police officers, up to and including termination of employment; 
(8)  To oversee the conduct of the officers and other employees of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department; 
(9)  To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department including a log of any internal investigations; 
(10)  To submit a monthly report to the city council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officer; 
(11)  To submit monthly to the state department of public safety the uniform crime report prescribed by state law, O.C.G.A. § 35-3-36; 
(12)  To designate when necessary certain vehicles as "emergency vehicles," provided that such vehicles are registered with the police and in the records of the city; and 
(13)  To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the mayor and the city council. 
Sec. 32-23. - Qualifications of police officers. 
Any person employed by the city as a police officer shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the city; 
(3)  Have a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent; 
(4)  Not have been convicted, by any state or by the federal government, of any crime, the punishment for which could have been imprisonment in a federal or state prison or institution; nor shall he have been convicted of sufficient misdemeanors to establish a pattern of disregard for the law; 
(5)  Be fingerprinted and a search made of local, state, and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal records; 
(6)  Possess good moral character as determined by investigation procedure established by the state peace officers standards and training council; 
(7)  Have an oral interview with the mayor and city council, or with the chief and the city's chief administrative officer, to determine such things as applicant's appearance, background, and ability to communicate; 
(8)  Be found, after examination by a licensed physician or surgeon, to be free from any physical, emotional, or mental conditions that might adversely affect his exercising the powers or duties of a police officer; 
(9)  Complete satisfactorily at least a basic course of 400 hours of mandated instruction; and 
(10)  Hold no other job without the permission of the police chief. 
Sec. 32-24. - Recognition and certification. 
The city shall do all things necessary in order for their law enforcement officers to be recognized by the state and certified within the standards of the state Peace Officer Standards and Training Act (POST Act), as provided in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2005, § I) 
Sec. 32-25. - Power of arrest. 
A city police officer shall have the power of arrest in the enforcement of all ordinances of the city, state codes, and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2005, § II) 
Sec. 32-26. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The primary duties and responsibilities of a city police officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  To enforce all ordinances enacted by the mayor and city council, state codes, and the laws of the state; 
(2)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance violation, and citations for court appearances for the violation of ordinances and the laws of the state; 
(3)  To investigate and collect evidence of violations of these ordinances and the laws of the state; 
(4)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance and state law violations; 
(5)  To appear and testify in court; 
(6)  To do any followup work that may be necessary; and 
(7)  Other police duties as deemed necessary by the mayor, city council and police chief. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2005, § III) 
Sec. 32-27. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned, or impounded property. 
All personal property seized or abandoned and in the custody of the police department shall be disposed of only in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 17-5-54. 
Chapter 36 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1, 36-32-5, 36-35-6; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in section 1-18 unless a greater penalty is permitted by state law, in which event, penalties may be imposed up to and including the greatest penalty permitted by state law. 
Secs. 36-2—36-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSE AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-21. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person who shall use any vulgar, indecent or profane language on any road, lane or alley or at any public place within the city; or who shall use any abusive, insulting, offensive, obscene, opprobrious or threatening language to anyone or otherwise act in any disorderly manner within the corporate limits of the city or who shall do any act or use any language or words within the corporate limits of the city which tend to disturb the peace or endanger morals, safety or health of the citizens of the city shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(b)  Any person who shall within the corporate limits of the city commit an act against the public safety, the public morality or the public decency shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(c)  Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public street, lane or alley, or highway, or within the curtilage of any private residence not in the exclusive possession of the person so intoxicated, or upon any bus or other public conveyance, or on any fairgrounds, ball grounds, show grounds or any other place of public gathering or assembly which said drunkenness is caused by the excessive use of intoxicating wines, beers, homebrew, liquors, or any other intoxicating beverage or drugs, shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(d)  Any person who shall be in a drunken or intoxicating condition within the curtilage of his own home and who shall act in such a disorderly, loud or violent manner as to disturb other citizens of the city, or in such manner as to disturb the good order, peace and welfare of the city shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(e)  Any person who shall throw or place beer cans, liquor bottles, glass bottles or containers, cans, or trash or debris in any public street or highway, or in the city park, in the city shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(f)  Any person who shall throw or place beer cans, liquor bottles, glass bottles or containers, cans, trash or debris on any premises in the city not in the possession of such person or without the consent of the owner and person in possession of same shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(g)  Any person who rolls dice, plays with playing cards, or engages in any other conduct usually associated with gambling on any public street, public road, public highway, public alley or public sidewalk in the city shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(h)  Any person who individually or along with others obstructs any public street, public road, public highway, public alley or public sidewalk in the city by hindering or impeding the free and uninterrupted movement of vehicles or pedestrians thereon shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(i)  Any person who commits in or upon any public street, public road, public highway, public alley, public sidewalk or any other public place or building in the city any act which results in an obstruction of or interference with the free and uninterrupted use of property or any business lawfully conducted by any other person in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public road, public highway, public alley, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, which obstruction or interference prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon, thereto and therefrom shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(j)  Any person who urinates or defecates in any place open to or in view of the public, including, but not limited to, private parking lots, shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 7) 
State Law reference— Reckless conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-60; riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30; fighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; loitering, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36; profanity, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 36-22. - Boisterousness near places of divine worship. 
No person shall within the incorporate limits of said city talk, whisper, shuffle feet, move any object, or create any noise, whistle, hiss or sneer in a loud and boisterous manner in the presence of or adjacent to any assembly of persons met for divine worship, singing, exhibition, and assembly for any purpose so as to disturb and annoy any one or more persons within said assembly. Any such act is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-106) 
Sec. 36-23. - Quarreling, fighting prohibited. 
No person shall within the corporate limits of said city quarrel, brawl, use obscene or profane language in a loud or boisterous manner on the streets or act in an indecent way, or fight, or incite others to do any act of violence in any boisterous and riotous manner. Any such acts are hereby declared to be disorderly conduct. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-107) 
Sec. 36-24. - Disorderly conduct in parking areas. 
(a)  Motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person, on any public parking area, or on any private shopping center or other business establishment parking area, or upon any public or private drive serving such parking areas to race the motor of any motor vehicle; to cause the wheels of any motor vehicle to spin; to stop any motor vehicle in such manner as to cause its tires to slide of skid on any surface of such parking area or lot, or other part of said premises; or to cause to be made any loud or unseemly noise which disturbs the peace and tranquility of the city. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink beer, wine, intoxicating liquor, or any other alcoholic beverage while on any public parking area, or on any private shopping center or other business establishment parking area, or upon any public or private drive serving such parking areas. 
(c)  Leaving vehicle unoccupied. It shall be unlawful for any persons to park, or cause to be parked, and leave unoccupied any motor vehicle on any public parking area, or on any private shopping center or other business establishment parking area, or upon any public or private drive serving such parking areas; however, it shall not be a violation of this provision if such motor vehicle is parked or left with the knowledge and consent of: 
(1)  The operators of the business or businesses whose patrons are served by the area where such motor vehicle is so parked and left unoccupied; or 
(2)  The person having legal authority to manage and control such area. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner or lessee of the parking area or lot of every shopping center, and of every other business establishment providing a parking area for its patrons of sufficient size to encourage loitering or cruising in motor vehicles in such area, to post on or immediately adjacent to such parking lot or area, and in a conspicuous location, one or more signs bearing the following legend: 
"Customer Parking Only. Parking for other purposes, cruising in motor vehicles, and congregating and lingering in this parking area are prohibited. City of Cleveland Public Safety Ordinance section ____________ ." 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 8) 
State Law reference— Parking, standing or driving vehicle in private parking areas after request not to do so, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252; adoption of ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24. 
Sec. 36-25. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons to assemble at any place within the corporate limits of the city and by loud discourse, boisterous conduct, the sounding of one or more motor vehicle horns, or by the operation of any other noise-making device disturb the public peace. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 36-26. - Disturbance of meeting, gathering, or procession. 
It is prohibited for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 36-27. - Loitering. 
(a)  Loitering shall be defined as remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, walking about aimlessly, or sitting on cars, trucks, or other vehicles, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the city on public property or private property that is open to the general public in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; or otherwise cause a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(3)  Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place; or 
(4)  Be at a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that would warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. 
(b)  Failure to disperse, or relocating from one position to another and regrouping, after having been warned of a violation of this section shall be "prima facie" evidence of intent to continue an unlawful act under this section and shall constitute a new offense. 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36; adoption of ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24. 
Sec. 36-28. - Unlawful assembly; failure to disperse. 
In any instance where two or more persons have assembled within the corporate limits of the city on the private property of any other person, without first having obtained the permission of the owner, tenant in possession, or person in charge of such private property, it shall be unlawful for such two or more persons to fail to disperse and cease such assembly upon being directed to do so by any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 2) 
State Law reference— Unlawful assembly, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-33; inciting to riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-31. 
Sec. 36-29. - Obstruction of public ways. 
No person shall obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-103) 
Sec. 36-30. - False alarms. 
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of a fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 
Secs. 36-31—36-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC HEALTH 

Sec. 36-49. - Washing of vehicles outside service stations regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or entity, including, but not limited to, churches, schools, and charitable organizations, to wash any vehicle on the outside of any service station or garage so as to permit water and mud or residue from said vehicle to flow into the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-116) 
Sec. 36-50. - Hazardous excavations. 
No person shall leave any well, hole or pit in the ground uncovered or insecurely covered on any unenclosed premises in this city, or leave such well, pit or hole in the ground in such condition as to be dangerous to any persons or domestic animals. 
Sec. 36-51. - Abandonment of iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door with snap lock or other similar device thereon without removing said snap lock or other similar device on the doors from said icebox, refrigerator or container. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Secs. 36-52—36-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 36-76. - Gambling not allowed. 
No two or more persons shall come together within the corporate limits of said city for the purpose of playing and betting on any game of cards, dice, or other game of chance. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-112) 
Sec. 36-77. - Unlawful to keep gambling house. 
No person shall have or keep any place in said city where others may come together or assemble for the purpose of carrying on any game of chance by any instrument or device whatever, nor carry on any raffling of anything of value, other than as permitted by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-113) 
Sec. 36-78. - Public indecency. 
No person shall use any obscene, vulgar or profane language in the hearing of others, nor commit any act of public indecency. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 36-79. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private property not his own other than by virtue of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, intoxicated condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 36-80. - Disorderly house. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit parties of disorderly character to assemble in his house, to the disturbance of the citizens in his neighborhood. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 36-81. - Maintaining house of prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city: 
(1)  To keep, set up, maintain or operate any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(2)  To offer, or to offer or agree to secure, another for the purpose of prostitution, or for any other lewd or indecent act. 
(3)  To receive, or to offer or agree to receive, any person into any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation, or to permit any person to remain there for such purpose. 
(4)  To direct, take or transport, or to offer or agree to take or transport, any person to any place, structure or building, or to any other person, with knowledge or reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10. 
Sec. 36-82. - Prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful in the city for any person: 
(1)  To offer to commit, or to commit, or to engage in, prostitution or assignation. 
(2)  To solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit prostitution, lewdness or assignation with himself. 
(3)  To reside in, enter or remain in any place, structure or building, or to enter or remain in any conveyance, for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(4)  To aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts or things prohibited herein. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9. 
Sec. 36-83. - Marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess marijuana in the city where prohibited by state law. The city shall prosecute persons found to be in unlawful possession of one ounce or less of marijuana. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30(j). 
Secs. 36-84—36-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 36-110. - Discharge of weapons and fireworks prohibited. 
No person shall fire a gun, pistol, or other firearms; fire any anvil, dynamite, twine or fireballs; nor burn rockets, crackers, or any kind of fireworks within the limits of the city except when allowed for military or law enforcement funerals. Anyone violating this section shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-104) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-103, 16-11-104; regulations of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 36-111. - Hunting prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to hunt or to shoot squirrels or other wild game within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 5) 
Secs. 36-112—36-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NOISE 

Sec. 36-136. - Unlawful use of loudspeakers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or speak with, any amplifier, mechanical loudspeaker, public address system, or any other device for the amplification of the human voice, or musical recording, upon any of the streets, alleys, or upon any vacant property within the corporate limits of the city without first giving satisfactory proof to city authorities that the use of such amplifier, mechanical loudspeaker, public address system, or other device will not constitute a public nuisance, and will not disturb the good order and quiet of the city, and without first obtaining a written special events permit as provided in section 48-116. The fee for a special events permit shall be as set forth in chapter 24. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or speak with, any amplifier, mechanical loudspeaker, public address system, or any other device for the amplification of the human voice, or musical recording, upon public or private property within the corporate limits of the city in such manner as to disturb the peace and tranquility of, or invade the privacy of the home or place of business of any other person, or place of public gathering, or to interfere with the use and enjoyment of public property, or property owned or occupied by others in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 6) 
Sec. 36-137. - Restrictions. 
(a)  The making, creating or permitting of any unreasonably loud or unnecessary noise in the city is prohibited. 
(b)  The making, creating or permitting of any such noise, sound or vibration of such intensity, duration, frequency or character that would be harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city is prohibited. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area, which would include business areas, as well as public streets and sidewalks. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise by or within a motor vehicle which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in the area, which would include business areas, as well as public streets and sidewalks. Included within this restriction are loud or no mufflers on motor vehicles and sound reproduction or amplification equipment in or on motor vehicles, such as radios, tape or cassette players and megaphones, as well as any other device that transmits sound. 
Sec. 36-138. - Decibel limitations; measurement. 
(a)  For purposes of this division, excessive noise shall include sound from any source that registers 85 decibels or more on a sound level meter or other instrument designed to measure sound level. 
(b)  For noises or sound created inside a building or dwelling, same shall be measured at the property line of that building or dwelling. For purposes of motor vehicles, sound or noise shall be measured ten feet from such motor vehicle. 
Sec. 36-139. - Standards for evaluation noise. 
The standards which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this division exists may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The level of the noise; 
(2)  The nature of the noise and whether it is usual or unusual; 
(3)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(4)  The level and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(5)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities, hospitals, churches, facilities for the care of the elderly, ill or mentally ill, as well as any other area which historically is treated by the community as a quiet area; 
(6)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(7)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(8)  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
(9)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
Sec. 36-140. - Vehicle stereo noise. 
(a)  In addition to the other restrictions and standards contained in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a public street or other public property or other property used by the public to operate or amplify with sound produced by a radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from said motor vehicle. 
(b)  The term "plainly audible" is defined as any loud unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area which includes the business area as well as public streets and sidewalks in the city. This prohibition is in addition to and not exclusive of the other provisions of this division. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement or emergency vehicle in the performance of lawful duties or to the noise made by a horn or other warning device as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70 or to any motor vehicle used for business or political purposes which in the normal course of such business use sound-making devices. 
Secs. 36-141—36-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 36-164. - Trespass. 
No person shall enter any untenanted or vacant building of any kind, nor enter any yard, garden, orchard, field, or woodland of any person in this city without the consent of the owner thereof, or his tenant. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 36-165. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle on, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: 
(1)  The parking area is identified by at least one sign as specified in this subsection (or if the parking area contains more than 150 parking spaces, then by at least one such sign for every 150 parking spaces), each such sign containing the following information in easy to read printing: 
a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; 
b.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customers' use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center of other similar facility providing the parking area; and 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted; and 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
c.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or 
d.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 8) 
Sec. 36-166. - Applicability to private nonbusiness area. 
It is the intention of the mayor and city council that the owners, tenants, custodians and managers of private nonbusiness parking areas shall be able to avail themselves of the protections and remedies afforded by this article to the private and public parties expressly identified in this article. Such private nonbusiness parking areas shall include, but are not limited to those of religious institutions and bodies and those of private educational and charitable institutions and bodies. 
(Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 9) 
Sec. 36-167. - Posting bills; defacing property. 
No person shall post any bills, advertisements or other notices of any kind on any public or private building, property or grounds in the city, nor write, paint, draw, carve, or cut any letters, word or device on any such property in this city without the owner's consent, and in cases made under this section the person committing such acts must show said consent, or he will be presumed not to have had it. 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 36-168. - Defacing memorials or monuments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, mar, deface, injure, damage, or destroy any memorials or monuments in said city, or to enter the enclosure around the same, or to open the gate of said enclosure, or to in any manner injure, deface, or destroy any fence enclosing said monument or its appurtenances. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-109) 
Sec. 36-169. - Theft or destruction of road and traffic signs. 
It shall be illegal for any person to steal, vandalize, destroy or otherwise damage any public road or traffic sign in the city. 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 36-170. - Damage or destruction of city property. 
No individual or entity shall cause damage to or destroy any personal or real city property, including, but not limited to, vandalism or intentional destruction of city property or actions found to be done with knowledge of the potential for damage or in such a manner as to be negligent in the disregard of the potential for such damages. This section shall not prohibit the work of city employees or their agents in the performance of their duties to use, repair, replace or dispose of city property. In addition to all other applicable penalties, any person convicted of damaging city property shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost of repair or replacement of the property or for the diminished value of the damaged property. 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 36-171. - Theft by shoplifting. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(b)  Any person who commits the offense of theft by shoplifting shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
Secs. 36-172—36-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-196. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated, placarded, and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the state Controlled Substances Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-1 et seq., 16-13-20 et seq. 
Dwelling, building, or structure. 
(1)  The term "dwelling, building, or structure" means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
(2)  The term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, or harvesting of crops, livestock, or poultry. 
Inspector means the building and health inspector or the code enforcement officer of the city. 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience, or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. Nuisances include, but are not limited to, any act or omission to act to perform a duty, or the suffering or permitting of a condition or thing to exist, which act, omission, condition or thing: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)  Offends decency; 
(3)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch, or drainage; 
(4)  Is offensive to the senses; 
(5)  In any way renders others persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(6)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings, or such nuisance as declared to be a nuisance per se herein. 
Occupant means any person over eight years of age living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the city for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
Public officer means the officer, or any agent of such officer, who is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
Public records means deeds, deeds of trust, security deeds and other instruments of record in the office of clerk, county superior court, or any and all other pertinent records used to determined what persons could have any interest in the real property in question. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Standard codes means the laws, regulations and minimum standards adopted by the city which promote the safety and welfare to the public with respect to the construction and maintenance of buildings and dwellings within the city as presently published or as hereafter may be from time to time amended, modified or otherwise changed. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § I) 
Sec. 36-197. - Enforcement. 
The public officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article, and said officer shall be the special projects coordinator of the city. In the event that the office of the special projects coordinator shall be vacant, then and in that event the code enforcement officer or the building inspector of the city shall serve as said public officer. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § VI; Ord. of 2-10-1997) 
Sec. 36-198. - Declaration of nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business, owner or lessee, tenant, or other having possession, ownership or control of private property to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation of a nuisance. 
Secs. 36-199—36-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

Sec. 36-220. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable code. The term "applicable code" means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided by state law as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code applicable under state law or adopted by ordinance or resolution of the city; and 
(3)  Any building code adopted by the city, provided that such building or minimum standard code for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Sec. 36-221. - Duties of owners. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
Sec. 36-222. - Enforcement. 
The public officer, inspector, city manager or other designee, after determining that any building, structure, dwelling or other conditions may constitute a nuisance, may nonetheless deviate from the strict provisions of abatement provided in this article, based upon the inspector's finding that one of the following criteria exists which creates a hardship which warrants a decision not to abate a nuisance: 
(1)  That the type of structure, topography of the land, or other unusual circumstances means that the normal time period for abatement of any such nuisance should be extended; or 
(2)  That due to health, mental, physical infirmity or similar serious medical problems of the owner, or serious and dire financial circumstances of the owner and/or the requirements of abatement, the inspector determines to grant a moratorium, or additional period of time, or otherwise modify the requirements of abatement to suit the particular circumstances of the occurrences. 
Sec. 36-223. - Determinations by public officer. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
Secs. 36-224—36-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OTHER NUISANCES 

Sec. 36-255. - Abandoned appliances, furniture, vehicles, and other items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in that person's possession or under that person's control upon any premises owned or occupied by that person, which premises are frequented by or accessible to children for playing or other purposes, the items set forth below: 
(1)  Any icebox, refrigerator or similar device, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the door on such icebox, refrigerator or similar device, when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the windows or doors on the vehicle when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof. 
(3)  Any household or kitchen appliances that have been abandoned or are not being put to the use for which they were intended, including, but not limited to, clothes washers and dryers, dishwashers, bathtubs, water heaters, toilets, air conditioning or heating units, stoves, ovens, microwave ovens, and other similar such appliances, if said items are physically located or placed outside any structure on the property. 
(4)  Any household furniture customarily intended for indoor use that has been abandoned or is not being put to the use for which it is intended, including, but not limited to, chairs, sofas, couches, loveseats, entertainment centers, desks, tables, or other similar such furniture items, if said items are physically located or placed outside any structure on the property. This subsection shall not include porch or patio furniture, or other furniture customarily placed on the exterior of a residence or other structure. 
(b)  The items set forth in subsections (a)(1)—(4) of this section shall be considered nuisances as a matter of law. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § III) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 36-256. - Obstruction of natural flow of water. 
Any person who shall, by the erection of a dam or other obstruction, prevent the natural flow of water, causing it to collect in pools upon any lot or in any street or alley, or who shall allow any such dam or obstruction to continue on any property owned or controlled by him, after knowledge of its existence, or who shall do or cause to be done any work the effect of which will be to cause the damming up or collection of water in pools, shall be guilty of the offense of maintaining a nuisance, and such action shall be unlawful. This section shall not prevent persons owning or controlling property from filling up such lots as they may desire, if sufficient draining is provided across such lots for such natural flow. This section shall not prevent such change of the grade of any street as may be for the public interest. 
Sec. 36-257. - Storage of malodorous commodities. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance to keep uncured hides or other malodorous commodities to the annoyance of any citizen or to keep such within 300 yards of the dwelling or place of business of any citizen of the city. 
Sec. 36-258. - Obnoxious gases or odors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn in any furnace, grate, boiler, fireplace or upon any open land within the limits of the city any substance containing rubber, zinc, lead, sulfuric acid or any other substance which emits poisonous or obnoxious gases, fumes or smoke. Such conduct shall be considered a nuisance as a matter of law. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the burning of those substances within an enclosed structure and provided those gases, fumes or smoke are not allowed to escape from the enclosure in which those substances are burned in a state which would pollute the air or is harmful or injurious to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
Sec. 36-259. - Wells, cisterns, pits, holes to be covered, enclosed or filled. 
(a)  The maintaining upon the premises by the owner or any person occupying such premises of wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth where such are not securely covered or enclosed shall constitute a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of all persons owning or occupying those premises within the city to keep those wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth on such premises securely covered or enclosed, so as to prevent injury therefrom to the person or property of others. 
(b)  Old and unused wells shall be filled by the owners or agents in charge of the property upon which the wells are located. It shall be the duty of the inspector to give notice as provided in this article to any person having such a well to abate it. 
State Law reference— Abatement of hazard from abandoned well or hole, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 36-260. - Junk motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or tenant of any lot, tract or premises in the city to suffer, permit or allow any junk motor vehicle or vehicle parts to be parked, abandoned or maintained upon the property. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a junk motor vehicle or vehicle parts to remain upon the real property or upon the property of another. 
(b)  No junk motor vehicle shall be in such a condition as to constitute a health hazard or an unsightly nuisance, notwithstanding the fact that such junk vehicle may be located upon private property. Any such vehicle shall constitute a public nuisance per se, except that it shall not be a nuisance to maintain, in an otherwise lawful manner: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building; 
(2)  Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; 
(3)  Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinances of the city; 
(4)  Any motor vehicle that is properly maintained as an antique vehicle pursuant to any laws or regulations of the state governing such vehicle. 
(c)  Except in circumstances where the public health and safety require summary abatement before the municipal court, the inspector shall give written notice to the owner of the vehicle or the person in possession, charge or control of the real property that, in the opinion of the inspector, the vehicle meets the definitional requirements of a junk motor vehicle and that a nuisance has been created by such responsible party. Upon such lawful notice being given, the procedures contained in this article, and as generally provided in division 4 of this article, shall control the potential abatement of the alleged nuisance. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
Sec. 36-261. - Accumulations in yards, garages or carports prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot, tract, parcel of land or other premises in the city to maintain a yard, lawn, garage, carport, or other area on the exterior of any structure on the property in such a manner as to allow the accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, or other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things, thereby creating an unsightly or unsafe condition or visual blight. 
Sec. 36-262. - Accumulation of stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot, tract, parcel of land or other premises in the city to allow water to accumulate and become stagnant. 
Sec. 36-263. - Disposal of animal and vegetable matter. 
It shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful to place or throw or cause another to place or throw, in or upon any street, or public or private property of another, any dead bird or animal, tainted meat, decayed fruits or vegetables, human or other excrement. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the discharge of human excrement into the sewer system of the city, or the placing of the above-named objects in suitable containers at curbside for garbage pickup. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § III) 
Sec. 36-264. - Excessive weeds and grass, trees, and shrubs. 
(a)  All exterior property areas shall be kept free of excessive weeds and grass. 
(b)  Small tracts of land, whether improved or unimproved, within the city, shall be kept cut, clipped or controlled through necessary means as frequently as needed to insure that weeds, rank grass and noxious growths do not exceed a height of 12 inches. 
"Small tracts" are defined as building, lawns, sidewalk neutral strips, walkways, gardens, decorative landscaped areas, and unimproved lots of two acres or less. 
(c)  Grass areas abutting and within 50 feet of city streets shall be kept mowed to a height not exceeding ten inches. 
(d)  Large tracts, larger than two acres, shall be cut, clipped, or controlled through necessary means to a height not exceeding 18 inches. 
(e)  Large tracts adjacent to improved residential property shall be kept clipped to the same standards as small tracts within 100 feet of such improved residential property. 
(f)  Any tract maintained in a natural state or as a wilderness area may be exempt from cutting except for the requirements of the provisions thereof. 
(g)  All trees and shrubs shall be maintained to not imperil public health or safety, or cause damage to any structure, premises, or utility services. 
(Ord. No. 2012-011, 8-13-2012) 
Secs. 36-265—36-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ABATEMENT 

Sec. 36-290. - Abatement cumulative to other remedies. 
It is the intent of the city council that nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
Sec. 36-291. - Authority for issuance of citations. 
The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
Sec. 36-292. - Summary abatement. 
(a)  The public officer shall have the power to order the removal and abatement, without hearing, of those things which are declared either by common law or by the statute law to be nuisances, or which are nuisances per se and from their nature indisputably are so. 
(b)  Any requirement for service of notice to abate a nuisance, which may be summarily abated, may be complied with by the mailing of such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last-known address of the person so to be notified. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-293. - Notice to abate. 
Except in urgent circumstances, involving nuisances per se, where the public health and safety require an immediate hearing, or in a summary abatement proceeding in the municipal court of the city, the public officer, upon his own motion, or upon a request by a public authority or upon a request by at least five residents of the municipality, if his preliminary investigation discloses a probable basis for a finding that an alleged nuisance exists, said public officer shall give written notice of any alleged nuisance in the form of a complaint and notice to abate a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-294. - Form of complaint and notice. 
The complaint and notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this division shall contain: 
(1)  An order to appear at a hearing to be held before the public officer or his designated agent at a place within the municipality, fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; 
(2)  A statement that the owners and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; 
(3)  A statement that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer; 
(4)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary; 
(5)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(6)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; 
(7)  A statement that if the owners and any parties in interest do not appear at the hearing fixed in accordance with this provision, and if the nuisance is not abated within the prescribed time set out in said complaint, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-295. - Findings and determination; service. 
(a)  If, after such notice and hearing, or the waiver in writing of such hearing by the owner and all interested parties, the public officer determines that the alleged nuisance does constitute a nuisance under the provisions of this division, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and caused to be served upon the owner thereof the following: 
(1)  In all cases of nuisance except those involving any dwelling, building or structure declared unfit for human habitation, or for commercial, industrial or business, an order ordering the abatement of the nuisance, the actions necessary to abate said nuisance and the prescribed time in which said abatement is to be accomplished. 
(2)  In all cases of nuisance involving any dwelling, building or structure declared unfit for human habitation, or for commercial, industrial or business use or involving any dwelling, building or structure which is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the following: 
a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, an order requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, an order requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(b)  In no event shall the city require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-296. - Failure of owner to abate; abatement by city. 
(a)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to abate a nuisance, then said public officer may cause such nuisance to be abated and in all cases involving any dwelling, building, or structure the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(b)  If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the public officer, set forth in this division and this section, shall not be exercised until the city shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this division with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-297. - Costs of abatement. 
The amount of the cost of said abatement, or in all cases involving dwellings, buildings or structures such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs by the municipality and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the public officer in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained by said clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-298. - Collection of liens for abatement costs. 
The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on any lien created under this division in the following manner: 
(1)  As to all nuisances, except those involving dwellings, buildings or structures, said lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(2)  As to all nuisances involving dwellings, buildings or structures, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner: 
a.  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the municipal corporation, within 30 days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to said municipal corporation the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed; 
b.  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county or municipal corporation; and 
c.  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of said three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2)b of this section, the municipal corporation may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-299. - Manner of giving notice in abatement proceedings. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this division shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest. 
(b)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the municipality, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in the newspaper designated as the legal organ of the county. A copy of such complaint or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the municipality or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section or this subsection in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the municipality or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person; in the case of other persons who live outside of the municipality or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 36-300. - Enforcement powers of public officer. 
In the enforcement of this division, the public officer shall be authorized: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this division; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this division to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990, § IV) 
Secs. 36-301—36-318. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 36-319—36-339. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 36-340. - Purposes. 
The city council has determined that: 
(1)  Persons under the age of 18 are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. 
(2)  There has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for minors resulting in an increase in the crimes, substance abuse, and school dropout rates, juvenile pregnancy, and other illicit behavior. 
(3)  The city has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities which are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. 
(4)  A curfew for those under the age of 16 will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help attain the foregoing objectives and diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the city and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. 
(5)  Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. 
(6)  A curfew will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control and decrease minor delinquency. 
Sec. 36-341. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency errand means a mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that call for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Minor means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years. 
Public place means any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way, to include sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, malls, or other places or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, bodies of water or watercourses; any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation, including parking lots; and any vacant lot or land. 
Sec. 36-342. - Curfew hours; defenses to prosecution. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in any public place unsupervised by his parent, legal guardian, or other an adult over the age of 21 years having lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the evening curfew shall begin at 12:00 midnight rather than 11:00 p.m.; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply and it shall be a defense to prosecution under this division: 
(1)  If the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  If the minor is returning directly home from a school activity; 
(3)  If the minor is traveling to, or returning directly home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(4)  If the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(5)  If the minor is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through the city with parental consent; 
(6)  If the minor is on the sidewalk adjoining the property where the minor resides or on the property where the minor resides or on either side of or across the street from the property where the minor resides and the adult or the owner or resident of that property has given permission for the minor to be there; and 
(7)  If the minor is married or has been married pursuant to state law. 
Sec. 36-343. - Responsibility of owners of public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors during curfew hours. It is a defense to prosecution of an owner, operator, or employee of a business establishment under this article if the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
Sec. 36-344. - Responsibility of parent or guardian. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such person to be on the streets or sidewalks or on or in any public property or public place within the city during curfew hours. 
Sec. 36-345. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Warning; notice to parent or guardian. Any law enforcement officer upon finding a minor in violation of this article shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn the minor that he is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to his home or usual place of abode or shall take the minor home. The law enforcement officer shall report such action to the chief of police who in turn shall notify the parents, guardian or person having custody or control of such minor. 
(b)  Detention. If the minor refuses to heed the warning or direction by any law enforcement officer or refuses to give such law enforcement officer his correct name and address, or if the minor has been warned on a previous occasion upon violation of curfew, he shall be taken to the police department and parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent, guardian or other adult person above cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the appropriate juvenile authorities. 
Secs. 36-346—36-409. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VACANT AND FORECLOSED PROPERTY 

Sec. 36-410. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Cleveland Vacant and Foreclosed Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-411. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
(1)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a foreclosure and vacant real property registry as a mechanism to protect property values in neighborhoods for all property owners. 
(2)  Due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are foreclosed or where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure, the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties are negatively impacted. 
(3)  Improperly maintained and secured foreclosed properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near such properties and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of foreclosed real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(4)  This foreclosure and vacant real property registry will require owners and agents to provide the city with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing foreclosed and vacant real property into compliance with applicable provisions of Municipal Code of Cleveland, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-412. - Definitions. 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state in which such agent, corporation or limited liability corporation, is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. The definition of "agent" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a county tax map and parcel number and/or a 911 address has been issued by a county or municipal corporation (for many foreclosed properties in Cleveland, there will be no record of a land disturbing permit) and is held pursuant to a judicial or non-judicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owned to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ. 
Street address means the E911 address, where available, street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. The definition of "street address" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for occupying or habitation, has not been lawfully occupied or inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a unexpired valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. The definition of "vacant real property" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-413. - Registration of vacant or foreclosed property. 
(a)  Owner or agents of foreclosed real property or vacant real property, including, but not limited to, foreclosed real property and vacant real property which is also residential rental property, are required to register such property with the person designated by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland within 30 days of such property becoming foreclosed or vacant real property by following the provisions of this section unless otherwise exempted by this article or state law. 
(b)  Any such owner or agent of foreclosed real property or vacant real property located within the jurisdiction of the city is required to file with the person designated by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland, a registration form in paper format. The Georgia Department of Community Affairs has developed a standard vacant or foreclosed real property registry form which the owner or agent shall use such form and the city shall only require use of such form. Such form shall only require submission of the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and current tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner and copy of said fully executed instrument; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including, but not limited to, deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(c)  Registration is required for all vacant or foreclosed real property unless otherwise exempted, pursuant to this Article, but is not required for vacant or foreclosed real property within 90 days of such real property's transfer by means of: 
(1)  Deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(d)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or pursuant to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-414. - Foreclosed and vacant real property exemptions. 
(a)  Registration or payment of any administrative fees of foreclosed real property pursuant to this article and Georgia law is not required of transferees as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any transferee who acquires any real property by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160 or acquires any real property pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure and: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure, to such transferee, contains the information specified in subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  The deed, to such transferee, is filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court of White County, Georgia within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office or the officer in charge of the city foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees for said filing instrument to said clerk's office; and 
b.  A true and correct copy of the deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(c)  City exemptions. Any owner or authorized agent, which has vacant or foreclosed property within the city's water and sewer service area, that holds an active utility account with the City of Cleveland Utility Department for water and/or sewer services will not be required to register the property under this ordinance as long as all information is current with the account. An active utility account is an utility account that is billed monthly for water and/or sewer charges, payable to the City of Cleveland. 
(d)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-415. - Removal from registry. 
(a)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property may apply to the city to remove a vacant or foreclosed real property from the city registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes a vacant or foreclosed real property. 
(b)  Any application for removal allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall be granted or denied, in writing, person designated by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland, within 30 days, and if no such determination is made within 30 days then the application for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted. Removal of a property from the registry shall not bar such property from being again placed on the registry if such property fails to conform with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-416. - Administrative fees. 
Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered with the city under this article shall be required to make a payment for administrative fees that reasonably approximate the cost to the city of the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration, including but not limited to code enforcement, of the registry. A fee of $50.00 is required for each registration for the cost of the establishment, maintenance, operation and administration, including but not limited to code enforcement. Such fee amount shall be set via resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-417. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of the person designated by the city pursuant to section 36-413 hereof, or the city, in the administration of this article may appeal to the municipal court of the city. All appeals hereunder must be taken within 30 days of the decision in question by filing with the such person designated pursuant to section 36-413 hereof a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(b)  The person designated pursuant to section 36-413 hereof shall forthwith transmit to the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the municipal court clerk who shall schedule an appeal hearing within 60 days following the date the appealing party submits its completed written appeal with subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The municipal court judge may call for further information to be provided within the next 35 days following the hearing, and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the municipal court judge deems appropriate. 
(d)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the person designated pursuant to section 36-413 hereof certifies to the municipal court, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the municipal court judge on notice to the person designated pursuant to section 36-413 hereof, and on due cause shown. 
(e)  The municipal court judge may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the person designated pursuant to section 36-413 hereof appealed from by the owner or agent and may make such decision, requirement, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-418. - Administration. 
(a)  The foreclosure and vacant real property registry is subject to the Open Records Act of the State of Georgia and the city may make such registry information available online. 
(b)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-419. - Nuisances. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of the city to enforce any applicable provisions of the ordinances and Municipal Code of the City of Cleveland, or any provisions of state or federal law enforceable by said city, or to impair, limit or preempt in any way the power of the city to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 36-420. - Penalties. 
Any owner or agent required to register a vacant or foreclosed real property under this article who fails to register or fails to update the information specified in section 36-413(a) of this article, registration of vacant or foreclosed property, may be fined up to the maximum allowed under state law, $1,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City and county recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; gifts of public parks or pleasure grounds to municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; park and recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; establishment of city and county supervised recreation, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3; political subdivisions to have environmental testing on property acquired for park or recreational area, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD 

Sec. 38-19. - Created. 
There is hereby created the city parks and recreation board which shall be an advisory body. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § I) 
Sec. 38-20. - Composition. 
The parks and recreation board shall consist of nine members. The members shall be as follows: 
(1)  One member who shall be an officer or elected official of the city. The city shall be authorized to name an alternate board member to serve during the absence or disability of said board member; 
(2)  One member who shall be a representative of the city parks and a resident of the county; 
(3)  One member who shall be deemed by the city to be an appropriate representative of the handicapped citizens of the city and the county; 
(4)  One member who shall be a resident of Ward 1 of the city; 
(5)  One member who shall be a resident of Ward 2 of the city; 
(6)  One member who shall be a resident of Ward 3 of the city; 
(7)  One member who shall be a resident of Ward 4 of the city; and 
(8)  Two members who shall be a resident of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § II) 
Sec. 38-21. - Appointment and tenure. 
The first three members of the board as listed in section 38-20 shall be appointed for a term of one year; the second four members of the board shall be appointed for a term of two years; and the final two members of the board shall be appointed for a term of three years. There shall be no prohibition against a member serving more than one consecutive term. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § III) 
Sec. 38-22. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled by the mayor and council, who also shall remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § V) 
Sec. 38-23. - Compensation. 
The members of the parks and recreation board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed at the discretion of the mayor and council for actual expenses incurred in connection with the discharge of their official duties. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § VI) 
Sec. 38-24. - Officers and rules of procedure. 
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the recreation board shall meet and elect one of their members as chairperson and shall elect a secretary, a treasurer and such other officers as said board deems appropriate. The board shall adopt rules and regulations to govern its proceedings and keep a correct record thereof, which shall be a public record. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § VII) 
Sec. 38-25. - Powers and duties. 
The parks and recreation board shall advise and make recommendations to the mayor and council regarding establishment, maintaining and conducting a recreation system for the city in such a way as to employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner. In particular, it shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  To provide for, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city as may be specifically authorized by the mayor and council; 
(2)  To recommend the setting aside, leasing or acquisition of lands or buildings within or without the city limits for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, or for other recreational purposes, and to provide for the maintenance and improvement of such areas; 
(3)  To cooperate with the local school board in the development of recommendations for the establishment, conduct and maintenance of a recreation system; 
(4)  To submit a budget request annually to the city council for approval; 
(5)  To submit an annual report to the council, which shall include a financial statement of money received and expended and a description of all activities sponsored by the board during the year; 
(6)  To keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record; 
(7)  To hold meetings, all of which shall be open to the public; 
(8)  To exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § VIII) 
Sec. 38-26. - Staffing, contracts and expenditures. 
The parks and recreation board may recommend that the city appoint such employees and staff as the board deems necessary for its work. The parks and recreation board may contract with suppliers of such goods and services as it may require, provided that all such contracts and expenditures shall be approved in advance by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1990, § IX) 
Secs. 38-27—38-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-56. - Powers and duties of mayor and council. 
The mayor and council shall conduct and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city. They may conduct or sponsor any form of recreational or cultural activity that will employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. They may conduct such activities on properties under their control on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-401) 
Sec. 38-57. - Park property. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever either real or personal. 
(2)  Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(4)  Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-402) 
Sec. 38-58. - Operating hours. 
The park shall be opened daily to the public. Any section or part of the park may be declared closed to the public by the city council at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-403) 
Sec. 38-59. - Permit for park use. 
(a)  Whenever any association or organization desires to use said park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of said association or organization shall first obtain permission from the city for such purposes. 
(b)  The city shall grant the request if it appears that the association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by the individual members of the public and if the said association or organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. The city council may require an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage, and shall contain such a provision if the swimming pool is to be utilized by said association or organization. 
(c)  If a planned event will require additional city services, the city council may require a permit and, in that event, a permit fee in the amount determined adequate to defray the costs of the services provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-403) 
Sec. 38-60. - Use and maintenance of picnic areas. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(2)  Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(3)  Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-403) 
Sec. 38-61. - Public nudity prohibited. 
No person in a park shall dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-404) 
Sec. 38-62. - Speed of vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any area in said park in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-405) 
Sec. 38-63. - Merchandising; advertising and signs. 
(a)  No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. 
(2)  Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(3)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(b)  Exception to this section is here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-406) 
Sec. 38-64. - Smoking prohibited. 
Smoking shall be prohibited within the boundaries of any city park, city sports complex, and city recreation area, whether owned or leased, including any open area within any city park, city sports complex, and city recreation area, whether owned or leased. 
Violations to this section may be subject to penalties under section 1-16 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, Exh. A, 8-2-2010) 
Chapter 40 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; municipal and county ordinances for issuance of permits to charitable organizations for solicitation of contributions on streets and highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND SOLICITATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization or nonprofit organization means an organization registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 or an organization exempt from such registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9 or any organization recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Department of Treasury. 
Peddler means an individual carrying his own merchandise, article or other good and who offers to sell such merchandise, article or other good or service to consumers at retail, and who upon such a sale delivers the merchandise then and there on the spot at any fixed location within the incorporated areas of the city. 
Solicitor means any person, group, firm, or organization who shall solicit orders, sales, funds, contributions or donations on behalf of a business, occupation, organization, vocation, or individual for commercial, charitable, nonprofit, or other noncommercial purpose, door to door or house to house in the residential areas or in any fixed location on any streets in residential areas, or on sidewalks, streets, highways, or the rights-of-way thereof within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 1) 
Secs. 40-20—40-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS 

Sec. 40-42. - Special event permits and identification card permits required. 
(a)  Permit for soliciting for commercial purposes in residential areas. Any solicitor desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, survey making or any other activity in any residential areas for a commercial purpose, shall first register with the city clerk, pay the prescribed registration fee as set forth in chapter 24, and obtain a personal identification card from the police department. The identification card shall serve as the permit. 
(b)  Permit for soliciting for commercial purposes on public ways. Any solicitor desiring to solicit orders, sales, funds, contributions or donations on behalf of a business, occupation, organization, vocation, or individual for charitable, nonprofit, or other noncommercial purpose only on any sidewalks, streets, highways, or in the rights-of-way thereof within the incorporated areas of the city shall first register with the city clerk, pay the prescribed registration fee as set forth in chapter 24, and obtain an identification card permit, which shall specify the location and duration of the intended solicitations on the city's streets, highways, or the rights-of-way. The identification card shall serve as the permit. 
(c)  Permit for peddling. Any peddler desiring to sell any merchandise, article or other good or service or transact any other business shall first register with the city clerk, pay the prescribed registration fee as set forth in chapter 24, and obtain a personal identification card. The identification card shall serve as the permit. The application for permit under this section must specify the location and duration of the peddling activity to ensure that the preferred location is not in violation of this Code, including zoning restriction, or deemed to be unsafe by the city police department. No peddler shall attempt to sell any merchandise, article or other good or service or transact any other legal business on any street, sidewalk, park, parkway or any other public place unless the peddler's permit specifies that peddling in such public places is permitted. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 40-43. - Contents of application questionnaire. 
(a)  The city police department shall provide an application questionnaire to be completed by each applicant for permit under this division upon payment of the applicable fee. Each application questionnaire shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name and Social Security number of individual applicant; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Driver's license number, if applicable. 
(4)  Race; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Residential address and primary telephone number; 
(7)  Business addresses and telephone number; 
(8)  Height and weight; 
(9)  Hair and eye color; 
(10)  Name and address of organization represented and whether that organization is commercial or noncommercial (charitable or not-for-profit); 
(11)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's immediate supervisor in the organization represented; 
(12)  A list of any pleas of guilty, convictions, or sentences of probation entered against the application in regard to any offences other than minor traffic violations. 
(b)  The application questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: 
"Georgia law provides it is a felony to knowingly and willfully make a false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the government of any municipality of this state." 
(c)  The chief of police shall review the application questionnaire to ascertain whether the applicant has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been convicted of, a felony or a misdemeanor involving a violation of moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the application questionnaire has been properly completed and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas or convictions of any felonies or misdemeanors involving violence or moral turpitude, the chief of police shall approve the application subject to the payment of the applicable permit fee. 
(d)  No individual shall be permitted to solicit sales, funds, contributions or donations within the city on behalf of any organization if the organization has had its confirmation letter or permit, as issued by the chief of police, revoked under this division. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 40-44. - Occupation tax or regulatory registration required for commercial solicitations and peddling. 
(a)  Following approval of the application questionnaire made in accordance with this division, and prior to the issuance of any permit granted hereunder, any applicant seeking to solicit within the city for a commercial purpose shall obtain an occupation tax registration and pay an occupation tax registration fee, or produce a valid occupation tax registration or certificate from another county or municipality of the state. 
(b)  Following approval of the application questionnaire made in accordance with this division, and prior to the issuance of any permit granted hereunder, the applicant seeking to peddle merchandise, articles or goods or other services shall obtain a regulatory registration and pay a regulatory registration fee. 
(c)  Registration required by this section shall be accomplished in the same manner as applies to other businesses in the city as set forth in chapter 12. Fees required for registration shall be as provided in chapter 24. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 40-45. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Upon qualification and payment by the applicant of a nonrefundable occupation tax or regulatory registration fee for commercial solicitation or peddling, the city police department shall photograph the applicant and provide the applicant with a identification card permit bearing the applicant's photograph, name and the name of the organization represented, and identifying the applicant as a commercial solicitor or peddler. 
(b)  All solicitors and peddlers permitted by the city shall carry the identification card permit on their person at all times and said license shall be presented for inspection to any appropriate officer or official of the city upon demand. The permit is valid only for location and duration as approved. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 40-46. - Qualifications; suspension and revocation. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony, except that a permit may be issued to a convicted felon if it appears that he has been pardoned, or that he has been free from any legal restrictions for a period of five years prior to the date of his application. For the purpose of this division, the terms "conviction" and "found guilty" shall be deemed to include verdicts or pleas of guilty, or pleas of nolo contendere, entered by a court of this state, a court of a sister state, or any federal district court. Any permit issued as the result of a willful false statement or omission in the solicitor's application for permit shall be deemed null and void from the time of its issue. 
(b)  The permit of any person charged with a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude, shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal, accusation, or indictment whichever shall first occur; such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charged is dismissed, "dead-docketed" or "no-billed." 
(c)  The permit of any person arrested or served with a summons in regard to a violation of any provision of this division, which is alleged to have occurred the date the permit was issued, shall be deemed suspended from the time he was arrested or served with summons; such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is acquitted or the case is dismissed. 
(d)  The permit of any person who is convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude, shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. The permit of any person convicted of having violated any provision of this division after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of conviction. 
(e)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 14) 
Sec. 40-47. - Validity; renewal of permits. 
Each permit issued under this division shall be valid only for the person or organization indicated thereon, and until the expiration of the current occupation tax certificate of such organization. Such permit may be renewed upon payment of a fee established by the city council and verification by the city that the organization represented has renewed its occupation tax certificate for the current year. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 7) 
Sec. 40-48. - Display of permit. 
The police department shall furnish to each permit holder a device suitable for attaching the permit card to the outer clothing of the identification card permit holder. No person shall engage in any of the conduct coming under this division without wearing and displaying the identification card permit in a conspicuous manner. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 8) 
Sec. 40-49. - Solicitors required to disclose of purpose of call. 
At each dwelling, whether it be an apartment unit or detached single-family residence, the solicitor shall inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the call and shall not represent that the solicitor is participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that he is offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 9) 
Sec. 40-50. - Solicitors not permitted to enter posted property. 
No solicitor shall enter a dwelling except at the express invitation of the occupant. No solicitation shall be made at any single-family or multifamily dwelling where a conspicuous "No Soliciting," "No Peddlers" or other similar sign is displayed at or near the main entrance or driveway to the premises. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 10) 
Sec. 40-51. - Decorum required. 
(a)  No person shall use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation or attempt to peddle. 
(b)  No solicitor shall remain upon the premises after the occupant of the premises has verbally indicated that he does not wish to make a purchase or donation or to otherwise listen or participate in the purpose of the call. For the purpose of this division, a call shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left the premises. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 11) 
Sec. 40-52. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be a violation of this division: 
(1)  For any person to engage in any of the activities described in this division without first obtaining a permit as required hereunder. 
(2)  For any person to violate any of the provisions of this division or to violate any other city ordinance or any state or federal law while engaging in any of the activities coming under this division. 
(3)  For any person to lend, rent, or sell his permit card to another. 
(4)  For any person to engage in any activity coming under this division during a period in which his permit is in suspension or after his permit has been revoked. 
(5)  For any person to engage in the act or business of a peddler of any merchandise, article or other good or service within the corporate limits without having first secured an occupation tax registration as set forth in section 40-44. 
(6)  For any person to engage in fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, be it through himself or through an employee. 
(7)  For more than two individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this provision shall be deemed to have violated such provision. 
(8)  For any person to make more than one solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any two-week period, without receiving prior invitation therefor from the occupant of any such premises. This provision shall be construed to include solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents or representatives of any person more than once during the aforesaid period without prior invitation as herein provided. 
(9)  For any person with a criminal record as described in section 40-46, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 40-85, to engage in any of the activities described in this division. 
(10)  For any person, at the time of initial contact with the occupant or prospective customer, to fail to verbally identify himself for the purpose of the call or solicitation and the company and product line he represents or charitable, nonprofit, or noncommercial group he represents. 
(11)  For any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of the call or solicitation or use any falsehood, deception or misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plans, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the status of the purpose of the person engaging in the call or solicitation. 
(12)  For any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a building or residence at any entrance or part of the building or residence other than the main entrance to the residence. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 12) 
Sec. 40-53. - Surrender of permit. 
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division for the use by any person is, and shall remain, the property of the city. Each permit holder shall surrender his permit card to the police department no later than three of the department's business days following the expiration, suspension, or revocation of the permit, or upon the demand of any officer of the department or upon the demand of the chief of police, whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 15) 
Secs. 40-54—40-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 40-80. - Registration; confirmation. 
(a)  Any solicitor desiring to solicit orders, sales, funds, contributions or donations for only a charitable, nonprofit, or other noncommercial purpose in any residential areas or on any streets, highways, or in the rights-of-way, shall first register and supply proof of such recognized status with the city clerk. 
(b)  The chief of police shall then issue written confirmation of the organization's exempt charitable, nonprofit or noncommercial status and the date and location of the solicitation to be conducted. 
(c)  The organization shall then furnish a copy of such confirmation to each of its agents or representatives who shall keep a copy of such confirmation on their person at all times while engaged in their charitable, nonprofit, noncommercial solicitation. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 40-81. - Term of permit; total number of permits restricted. 
Each permit issued for solicitation described in this division will be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of its issuance. No organization soliciting under this division may hold more than two permits in a single 12-month period. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 40-82. - Age of solicitors restricted. 
All individuals soliciting on behalf of a charitable, nonprofit, or noncommercial organization must not be less than 16 years of age. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 40-83. - Reflective safety vests required. 
All individuals authorized to solicit on behalf of a charitable, nonprofit, or noncommercial organization must wear reflective safety vests at all times. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 40-84. - Additional restrictions for safety purposes. 
Any solicitation for a charitable, nonprofit, or noncommercial purpose may be restricted as necessary for safety reasons as determined by the city police department. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 2(c)(4)) 
Sec. 40-85. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the requirements set forth in section 40-42(a): 
(1)  Persons, businesses, and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law, or by the Constitution of the United States or the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article. This exemption is deemed to include, but may not be limited to, persons or organizations canvassing door to door or house to house in the residential areas or on any streets, highways, or the rights-of-way thereof within the incorporated areas of the city for a religious or political purpose. 
(2)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit or other noncommercial organizations as defined in section 40-19. 
(3)  Any exemption granted herein shall remain in effect only until December 31 following the date of the confirmation. Only one such letter shall be issued to each organization during any calendar year. 
(4)  Any sales representative who calls upon prospective customers at the private invitation of the homeowner or occupant shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Any exemption granted does not exclude the need for a special event permit. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2006, § 2(d)) 
Chapter 42 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1; pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 42-19. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate pawnshops in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136, as amended, and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of pawnshops within the city. It is neither the intent nor the effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to materials pledged, consigned, pawned or exchanged. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 1.0) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 
Sec. 42-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means: 
(1)  Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a parttime or fulltime basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufactures or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this article. The term "pawnbroker" also means any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby he has charge of the business or daily operations of the pawnshop, and whose business or occupation it is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment, or exchange, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop transaction means to take or receive any article of property or, from any customer, by pawning, pledging, trading, exchanging, purchasing, or other means. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 2.0) 
Sec. 42-21. - Annual permit required; fees; renewal. 
(a)  All persons before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn shall first file an application with the city clerk for an annual permit to conduct such business. 
(b)  The issuance of such permit will be based on a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. The cost of the permit/criminal history background investigation shall be as set forth in the city's fee schedule. This fee is imposed to defray investigative expenses and administrative costs associated with issuing an initial permit for all owners. 
(c)  In the event an owner has more than one pawnshop, then each location will be assessed the fee in subsection (b) of this section. This fee is nonrefundable in the event an applicant, for any reason, is not issued a permit and/or an occupational tax certificate. 
(d)  Owners/managers are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee in the amount provided in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 3.0) 
Sec. 42-22. - Permit term; prerequisite to issuance of occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  No occupation tax certificate required by city ordinance shall be granted to any person until a pawnshop permit has been issued or approved by the city. 
(b)  The permit and occupation tax certificate will expire annually, on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 4.0) 
Sec. 42-23. - Application for permit. 
The application for the annual permit shall state the street number and address at which the business is proposed to operate. The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph, and social security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers and employee, having any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 5.0) 
Sec. 42-24. - Regulation as to employees and managers. 
(a)  No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person is found in compliance with the qualifications as described in this section. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The following qualifications shall apply to all employees and managers: 
(1)  No permit shall be issued until a signed application has been filed with the city, and a search of the criminal record of the person completed. Such application shall include the applicant's name, fingerprints, social security number, date of birth, and prior arrest record; although an applicant's arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall not give rise to a presumption or inference of guilt. Applicant must also provide positive identification (only government issued pictured identification accepted, e.g., driver's license, passport, military card, or state identification card). 
(2)  The chief of police or his designee shall conduct a search relative to any police record of the applicant. 
(3)  In the event the applicant is qualified for employment in a pawnshop under this section and there is no record of a violation of this article, the chief of police or his designee shall issue a permit to the applicant, by mail. If it is found that, the person is not qualified for a permit and therefore ineligible for employment in a pawnshop, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the person in writing that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal to the city council. 
(4)  No person who has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices shall be issued a permit for the five years preceding the date of application. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere entered under the state First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored; provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(5)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the police department for a pawnshop permit under this section. 
(6)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the chief of police, his designee, or the city clerk. 
(7)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the city. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a pawnshop occupation tax certificate to file with the chief of police or his designee, the name of the establishment, the occupation tax certificate number and a list of all employees, including their date of birth, social security number, home address and home telephone numbers twice annually; during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(9)  If it is determined that any person issued a pawnshop permit has falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme in the application for the pawnshop permit such permit shall be revoked or canceled. 
(10)  City employees who are directly involved in the issuance of pawnshop permits or in the regulation of pawnshops shall not be eligible for a permit. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 6.0) 
Sec. 42-25. - Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation. 
A permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the chief of police or his designee where the pawnbroker or employee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a permit or fails to meet all qualifications set forth under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 7.0) 
Sec. 42-26. - Occupation tax certificate. 
All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession, shall make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed in chapter 12. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 8.0) 
Sec. 42-27. - Records maintenance. 
(a)  As set forth herein, all pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions. 
(1)  In addition to any other information required by the chief of police, all pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The pawnbroker shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. 
(2)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This subsection does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however, the pawnbroker shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this subsection. 
(3)  The pawnbroker shall also require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(4)  The pawnbroker shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker shall photograph with a digital camera the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, with the photograph clearly showing the pawnbroker's ticket and/or transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(6)  The pawnbroker shall possess federal firearms licenses when persons pledge, trade, pawn, exchange, sale, or purchase firearms. 
(7)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property, In the event that more than one pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(b)  The pawnbroker shall store the records required in subsection (a) of this section, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 9.0) 
Sec. 42-28. - Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or other wise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract. 
(b)  The city police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on police hold. In such event, the police department shall notify the pawnbroker of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to maintain the subject property until the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(c)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or purchased shall be held and maintained by the pawnbroker on the premises of the pawnshop or, if impracticable, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police shall not approve any off-premises storage facilities located outside the county. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 10.0) 
Sec. 42-29. - Reports to police. 
Every pawnbroker shall make a monthly report in writing to the police department, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police. The report shall contain all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker during the month as dated on the report. Such report shall be typewritten. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 11.0) 
Sec. 42-30. - Dealing with minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees to receive through any pawnshop transaction any property from minors. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 12.0) 
Sec. 42-31. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The city police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. Sworn officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the city, county, state, or federal statue. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2008, § 13.0) 
Chapter 44 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-01, adopted Feb. 22, 2016, amended Ch. 44 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 44, §§ 44-1—44-35, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; placement of posters, signs and advertisements on public or private property; permission and limitations, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; limitations on signs identifying or advertising sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; restrictions on certain signs providing information in the interest of the traveling public and multiple message signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 

Sec. 44-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Sign Ordinance of the City of Cleveland, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-2. - Purpose and findings. 
The mayor and city council of Cleveland, Georgia find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detriment to property values and to Cleveland's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. By enacting this chapter, the mayor and city council intend to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  Further the objectives of the Cleveland Comprehensive Plan; 
(3)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(4)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(5)  Maintain and enhance the visual environment, and preserve the right of citizens to enjoy Cleveland's scenic beauty; 
(6)  Protect property values by minimizing possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)  Avoid harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(8)  Promote economic development; and 
(9)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-3. - Applicability and severance. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply and govern in all zoning districts. Within the City of Cleveland, no sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with this chapter. In the event that a court should adjudge any part of this chapter a violation of the Georgia or United States Constitution or any other provision of law, it is the specific intent of the mayor and city council that the offending provision or provisions be stricken from this chapter and the remainder of the chapter stay in effect to regulate signs on property within the City of Cleveland. This severance section is in addition to the legislative intent expressed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
A-frame sign means any portable sign or structure no greater in size than two feet wide by three feet high and composed of up to two sign faces mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to form a triangular vertical cross section through the faces. 
Abandoned sign means a permanent sign on property containing a building or activity that has ceased operations. Permanent signs on property shall be considered abandoned when there is clear evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds; provided however, that this definition shall not apply in any case where a business or activity is temporarily suspended and there is substantial evidence that the business or activity will resume within a six-month period. An abandoned sign may also be any sign that that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt and may or may not have a person, who accepts maintenance responsibility. 
Alterations mean change or rearrangement in the structural parts or its size, whether by extending on a side, by increasing the area or height, or in moving from one location or position to another. 
Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors which accomplishes such action, motion, sound, or changing colors with or without electrical energy. Including, but not limited to, signs with lights or other illuminating devices that blink, flash, fluctuate, or have a changing light density, brightness, or contrast. This definition does not include a "swinging sign" or "multiple message sign" as defined by this chapter. For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area, or only one face shall be measured in computing sign area if the display faces are the same size. The display of street address on a ground sign, wall sign, or window sign, shall not be included in the computation determining the maximum allowable area of a ground, wall, or window sign. 
Awning means an architectural projection or shelter projecting from, supported by the exterior wall of a building, and composed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be permanent or retractable. 
Awning sign shall be considered a "wall" sign. 
Banner means a sign made of cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For the purposes of this chapter, a "banner" is considered a "sign." Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. 
Billboard means a freestanding sign larger than 200 square feet in area. 
Billboard digital or digital billboard means a freestanding sign larger than 200 square feet in area and programmable by a computer capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or picture images that can be altered or rearranged on site or by remote means without altering the face or surface of the sign. 
Building means any enclosed or open structure that is a combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy and/or use for human or animal habitation and is permanently affixed to the land, including, but not limited to, manufactured homes. 
Building face or wall means all window and wall area of building in one plane or elevation. 
Building marker means any sign cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material and which relates to its construction and/or dedication. 
Building official means the person or persons designated by the mayor and city council to administer this chapter, or to act on behalf of the city in said administration. 
Canopy means a structure constructed of fabric or other material other than an awning placed so as to extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors, windows, and other openings, supported by the building or supports extended to the ground directly under the canopy or cantilevered from the building. Signs placed on canopies are considered "wall signs." 
Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion thereof with letters, numerals, or graphics that can be changed either manually or electronically. The electronic change of letters, numerals, graphics must be a static change and cannot dissolve, fade, travel, or scroll and must not change more than once every 30 seconds. A sign on which the letters, numerals, or graphics change more often than once every 30 seconds shall be considered an animated sign (prohibited) and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
City means the City of Cleveland. 
Cleveland Code of Ordinances means those ordinances codified in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, together with those ordinances duly ordained and adopted by the mayor and council, but not yet codified. 
Directory sign means a sign, which is situated on a premise with more than one tenant or occupant of a building. It may be freestanding or attached. 
Sign districts, as as referenced in this chapter, are defined as follows: 
(1)  Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District is coterminous with the B-1—Central Business District as established in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cleveland, as amended, and the boundaries of which are are established on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Cleveland, as may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District is bounded by the following street segments and landmarks: (i) Henderson Street to Quillian Street; (ii) Cemetery Street to Dixon Street; (iii) Bell Street to Wilford Ash Parkway; and (iv) Jackson Street to Old Nacoochee Road. 
(3)  Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District is bounded by the following street segments and landmarks: (i) Helen Highway; Wilford Ash Parkway; Donald E. Thurmond Parkway; (ii) Quillian Street to City limits—South; Dixon Street to City limits—East; (iii) Wilford Ash Parkway to City limits—West; and (iv) Old Nacoochee Road to City limits—North. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. Only one face shall be used in computing allowable sign area. 
Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, or in any other way bring into being or establish, but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to message change, maintenance or repair of a sign structure. 
Flag means any unframed fabric or bunting. 
Frontage of a building means the width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building in which an establishment is located. 
Frontage along a right-of-way or road or street means the distance in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public or private street. 
Grandfathered sign has the same meaning as "nonconforming sign" as hereinafter defined. 
Ground sign means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support (i.e., freestanding). A ground sign may consist of more than one sign panel, provided all such sign panels are attached to or integrated into one sign structure. 
Hanging sign means a sign that is suspended parallel, or perpendicular from a building, wall, roof, facade, canopy, marquee, or porch by means of brackets, hooks, or chains and the like. 
Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from the normal grade of the ground at the base of the sign, and shall include the air space between the ground and the sign. The height of any monument sign base or other structure erected to support or adorn the sign is measured as part of the sign height. 
Historic district means the city's B-I—Central Business District as established in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cleveland, as amended, and the boundaries of which are established on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Cleveland, as may be amended from time to time. 
Internally illuminated sign means a sign illuminated by an internal light source which is viewed through a translucent panel. 
Indoor sign means a sign only visible from inside business or other establishment. All indoor signs must be located three feet or further within the interior of such establishment. 
Inflatable sign means any sign, symbol, figure, or character that is or can be filled with three cubic feet or more of air or gas. Inflatable signs include, but are not limited to, balloons of such size. 
Informational sign means a sign with an area not greater than six square feet for residential zoning districts and 16 square feet for nonresidential zoning districts with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or projections which, when erect, stands at a height no greater than three feet from the normal grade in residential zoning districts and five feet from the normal grade in nonresidential zoning districts at the base of the sign to the highest point on the sign. 
Mansard sign means a sign attached to a sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to, or functioning as, a building wall. 
Marquee means a roof-like structure attached to and supported by a building wall (with no vertical supports) and that projects in a cantilever fashion from the wall of the building. Such signs are similar to a movie theater sign. 
Marquee sign means a sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a marquee. For purposes of this chapter, marquee signs shall be considered "wall signs." 
Master sign plan means a plan establishing parameters for the size, location, and structure of signs located on, or to be located on, a property which contains multiple uses, buildings, or tenants but which is constructed or managed as a single development. 
Mayor and council means the mayor and city council of the City of Cleveland. 
Monument sign means a sign supported entirely by a base structure. The base structure shall be a minimum of two feet by four feet in size and permanently affixed to the ground and which is composed of brick, stone, rock, or stucco. A monument sign shall not be mounted on a pole or poles. Changeable copy on such a sign shall not exceed 30 percent of the area of the sign face. 
Multiple message sign means a sign, display, or device which changes the message or copy on the sign electronically or by movement or rotation of panels or slats. 
Neon sign means a luminous-tube sign that contain neon or other inert gases at a low pressure. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which lawfully existed on the effective date of this chapter but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or which does not comply with this chapter due to amendments since the date of erection of the sign. 
Off-premises sign means a permanent sign not related to the site on which it is located or that directs persons to a different location than where the sign is located. 
Out-of-store marketing device means any facility or equipment which is located outside a primary building on a site zoned for noncommercial or commercial uses, which is used for the primary purpose of providing a product or service without the owner's or agent's immediate presence, and which device is manufactured to include color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing thereon designed to communicate information regarding the product or service provided by such device to the public. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include, but are not limited to, the following; fuel pumps, ATM units, vending machines, newspaper racks, drink machines, iceboxes, and phone booths. An out-of-store marketing device shall be deemed to be a sign for the purposes of this chapter, but shall not be included in the calculation of the area of allowed signs. 
Pennant means a small, triangular, or rectangular flag or multiples thereof made of lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, individually supported or attached to each other by means of a string, rope, or other material and meant to be stretched across or fastened to buildings, or between poles and/or structures, and which is designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this chapter a pennant is a "sign." 
Person means any person, legal or natural, including, but not limited to, any business entity, firm, institution, or other entity. 
Portable sign means any sign whether on its own trailer, wheels or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising or other messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols (i.e., changeable copy sign). Even if the wheels or supports of such signs are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, such sign shall remain a portable sign. 
Portico means a porch or walkway, open to the outside air that is covered by a roof supported by columns or pillars, typically leading to the entrance of a building. Signs attached to porticos are considered "wall signs" for purposes of this chapter. 
Principal use sign means any sign which is permitted in conjunction with a principal use or principal building or use located on the property, and which may display a noncommercial, commercial, or other message, the content of which message is not regulated by this chapter. 
Projecting sign means a sign projecting more than 14 inches from the outside wall or walls of any building, or canopy, portico, or awning, upon which it is located or attached. 
Public property means property owned by a government entity. 
Right-of-way means the right-of-way of any public road or street, as well as the Cleveland public square, and the right-of-way of any private subdivision road or street. 
Roof sign means a sign projecting higher than the front building wall or any sign supported by or attached to said roof. 
Rope lighting means lighting made up of tiny lights, usually incandescent bulbs or light emitting diodes (LEDs), which are spaced along a wire or other medium for power. 
Sidewalk sign means a movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
Sign means a lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bring to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way, a driveway or parking lot with access to a public or private right-of-way, or from an adjacent property, except as specifically noted otherwise in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" includes, but is not limited to, "banners," "balloons," "flags," "pennants," "streamers," "windblown devices," and "advertising devices." Furthermore, the term "sign" also includes, but is not limited to, all structural components, supports, lighting systems, attachments, ornaments, and other features used to support the sign or draw the attention of the observers to the sign. 
Sign area means the area of the smallest rectangle within which all elements of a flat sign are contained (a flat sign being a sign with either two display surfaces facing exactly opposite directions or one display surface facing in one direction if against the wall of a building), or the maximum projected surface area (projected in one direction) of any other sign. Provided however: 
(1)  Supporting structures for signs shall not be counted in the sign area, provided such supporting structures consist of posts, hangers, or brackets of the minimum number and size necessary to support the sign. A wall or fence on which a sign is mounted shall not be counted in the sign area, provided such wall or fence serves primarily to enclose, divide, or protect an area; and 
(2)  Supporting structures of natural finish masonry, rock, stone, stucco, or wood, or any combination thereof, shall not be counted in the sign area, provided that: 
a.  Such structures do not extend more than one foot above the sign or two feet beyond the ends of the sign; 
b.  The height of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed the maximum height allowed in this chapter; and 
c.  The area of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed twice the area of the sign itself. 
Streamer shall have the same definition as "pennant," as defined in this chapter. 
Structure means the supports, uprights, bracing, guy rods, cables, and framework of a sign or outdoor display. 
Subdivision or multiuse sign means a freestanding monument sign pertaining to a subdivision designed for residences, offices, businesses, institutions, or industries, or any combination thereof. 
Swinging sign means a sign, other than an animated sign as defined by this chapter, where the sign copy area or sign area is attached to a sign structure in a way that can be set in motion with pressure, and the sign structure is attached to a building at a height above normal eye level. This term does not include freestanding signs. A swinging sign may be considered in lieu of a permitted wall sign. 
Temporary sign means a display, sign, or banner with or without a structural frame, not permanently mounted, and intended to be displayed for only a limited time. 
Visible means capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Wall sign means a single-sided sign with one visible face applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which, if attached to a wall or portico, and does not project more than 14 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure, or is on an awning or canopy. 
Windblown device means any device not otherwise specifically defined in this chapter, that is designed to inform or attract whether or not such device carries a message, and which all or part of the device is set in motion by wind. For purposes of this chapter, windblown devices are signs. 
Window sign means any sign which is painted on, applied to, attached to, or projected upon or within the exterior or interior of a building glass area, including, but not limited to, doors, or located within three feet of the interior of a building glass area, including, but not limited to, doors. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-5. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any sign which is specifically exempted from the permitting requirements of this chapter shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a sign permit. Exemption from the requirement of a sign permit shall not be construed to exempt such sign from compliance with other applicable provisions of this chapter nor from the the applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland. The following types of signs are specifically exempted from compliance with the requirement to obtain a sign permit under this chapter: 
(1)  Flags, as many as three per lot, when displayed in a way that allows for routine, daily raising and lowering of the flags, each of which shall not exceed 40 square feet in area. Poles for such flags shall not exceed 25 feet in height and shall not be more than 25 feet from the main building entrance. 
(2)  Street address identifiers and building identification numbers on multi-tenant buildings which are essential to identifying the location of such buildings. 
(3)  Signs not oriented or intended to be legible from a public right-of-way, private road or driveway, or other private property. Signs or stickers which are designed to be read only from close range (i.e., five feet or less) attached to a device or structure more than 25 feet from the right-of-way, not to exceed one square foot for each sign or sticker. 
(4)  Signs erected more than three feet inside a building. 
(5)  Building markers and integral decorative or architectural features, so long as such features do not contain moving parts or lights. 
(6)  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs installed within the right-of-way of a public street under the authority of the government with jurisdiction over such right-of-way. 
(7)  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs along private streets and driveways, and in off-street parking areas that are installed in accordance with the requirements of the City of Cleveland and each of which do not exceed four square feet area. 
(8)  Signs posted by authorized government officials in the performance of an official duty on public land or on public right-of-way. 
(9)  Holiday lights and decorations, provided that they are removed within 45 days following the holiday season to which they pertain. Businesses, whose primary business is holiday sales, are exempt from removing holiday lights and decorations. 
(10)  Handicapped parking signs, when required per local, state, or federal law. 
(11)  Any sign no larger than four square feet in area that is posted by a City resident at the location of their residence. 
(b)  Provided however, in each and every case, where a sign of a certain size is exempted from the permitting requirements of this section and an applicant desires to erect a larger size sign than the area of the sign exempted, but said sign is not allowed, said sign shall only be permitted upon the approval of a variance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-6. - Interpretation and enforcement and construction standards. 
(a)  Interpretation and enforcement. The Cleveland Building Official, designated by the mayor and council, shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Construction standards. All signs permitted under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable city building codes and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-7. - Sign permit required—Sign application—Sign permit fees. 
(a)  Except where specifically excluded by other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or other entity, to post, display, substantially change, alter, or erect, reconstruct, replace, or reset a sign or out-of-store marketing device in the City of Cleveland without first having obtained an authorization for such sign and thereafter a permit in the manner prescribed herein. 
(b)  Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his or her agent in the office of the Cleveland Building Official upon forms furnished by said office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  Reference master sign plan; 
(2)  The type of sign as defined in this chapter; 
(3)  A drawing of the sign structure or other information which shows the height of the sign, the area of the face of the sign, and the structural supports of the sign, all drawn to engineering or architectural scale; 
(4)  The street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the subject property, and the suite number, where applicable; 
(5)  A boundary survey or tax plat of the property on which the sign will be located, and, in the case of ground signs, the distance from the property lines and the street right-of-way and street pavement; 
(6)  The square foot area of each sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. The application must also show the location and number of existing signs and their locations on the subject property; 
(7)  Written description of all other signs on lot indicating sign type and placement; 
(8)  The name(s) and address(s) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located, and signed consent of the owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the subject sign, which may include, but is not limited to, a copy of the lease or other document from the owner of the sign which authorized the erection thereof; 
(9)  Name, address, phone number, and business license number of the sign contractor; and 
(10)  In addition to the foregoing, the Cleveland Building Official may require additional information as a part of any application in order to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  No sign permit shall be issued until a sign permit fee, if required, has been paid to the city, the fee for which shall be fixed, from time to time, by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-8. - Sign types requiring a permit. 
(a)  The following signs require a permit: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Height limit: 
1.  Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District: Signs shall not exceed a height of six feet at the highest anywhere on the sign. 
2.  Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District: Henderson Street to Quillian Street; Cemetery Street to Dixon Drive; Bell Street to Wilford Ash Parkway; and Jackson Street to Old Nacoochee Road: Signs shall not exceed a height of ten feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
3.  Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District: Helen Highway; Wilford Ash Parkway; Donald E. Thurmond Parkway; Quillian Street to City limit—South; Dixon Drive to City limits—East; Wilford Ash Parkway to City limits—West; and Old Nacoochee Road to City limits—North: Signs shall not exceed a height of 16 feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
4.  Residential subdivision entrances—All residential subdivisions and apartment complex: Signs shall not exceed a height of ten feet at the highest point of the sign. 
b.  Structure (except as otherwise provided in section 44-8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards): 
1.  Freestanding signs are required to be monument signs in all zoning districts. A monument sign is a sign supported entirely by a base structure. The base structure shall be a minimum of two feet by four feet in size, entirely enclosed or solid with no visible open space and permanently affixed to the ground. A monument shall not be mounted on an exposed pole or exposed poles; 
2.  There shall be no graphics located on the vertical support structures of a freestanding sign; 
3.  Materials for support structure shall be natural finish masonry, stone, rock, stucco, or wood, or any combination thereof; 
4.  Changeable copy, if used, shall not exceed 30 percent of the area of the sign face; and 
5.  Where two sign faces are located in a "V" formation, the angle between the two signs shall be no greater than 60 degrees. 
c.  Size (except as otherwise provided in section 44-8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards): 
1.  Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District: Sign size shall be limited to a maximum of 36 square feet. 
2.  Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District: Henderson Street to Quillian Street; Cemetery Street to Dixon Drive; Bell Street to Wilford Ash Parkway; and Jackson Street to Old Nacoochee Road: Sign size shall be limited to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
3.  Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District: Helen Highway; Wilford Ash Parkway; Donald E. Thurmond Parkway; Quillian Street to City limits—South; Dixon Drive to City limits—East; Wilford Ash Parkway to City limits—West; Old Nacoochee Road to City limits—North: Sign size shall be limited to a maximum of 480 square feet. This size sign is limited to plaza signs and entrances to commercial developments only. 
4.  Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District: Helen Highway; Wilford Ash Parkway; Donald E. Thurmond Parkway; Quillian Street to City limits—South; Dixon Drive to City limits—East; Wilford Ash Parkway to City limits—West; and Old Nacoochee Road to City limits—North: Sign size (except the aforesaid plaza and entrance signs in said district), shall be limited to a maximum of 160 square feet. Property for the use of this sign must be recorded as its own lot of record. 
5.  Residential subdivision entrances—All residential subdivisions and a apartment complexes: Signs shall be limited to a maximum of 70 square feet. 
d.  Number of signs (except as otherwise provided in section 44-8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards): 
1.  Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District: 
i.  A building on a tract with 50 or more feet of continuous frontage on a road right-of-way and with one or more entrances onto a road right-of-way may install a sign at each entrance, provided the combined square footage of all signs does not exceed 36 square feet. Where there is frontage on more than one such right-of-way, each frontage is treated independently provided that no two signs may be closer than 50 linear feet from one another. Signage may not be transferred from one frontage to another. Signs must be located outside the right-of-way. 
2.  Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District: 
i.  A building on a tract with 50 or more feet of continuous frontage on a road right-of-way and with one or more entrances onto a road right-of-way may install a sign at each entrance, provided the combined square footage of all signs does not exceed 100 square feet. Where there is frontage on more than one such right-of-way, each frontage is treated independently provided that no two signs may be closer than 50 linear feet from one another. This includes properties in the City that abut properties in the county. Signage may not be transferred from one frontage to another. Signs must be located outside the right-of-way. 
3.  Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District: 
i.  A building on a tract with 50 or more feet of continuous frontage on a road right-of-way and with one or more entrances onto a road right-of-way may install a sign at each entrance, provided the combined square footage of all signs does not exceed 480 square feet. Where there is frontage on more than one such right-of-way, each frontage is treated independently provided that no two signs may be closer than 50 linear feet from one another. Signage may not be transferred from one frontage to another. This includes properties in the city that abut properties in the county. Signs must be located outside the right-of-way. Signs which exceed 160 square feet are limited to plaza signs and to signs at entrances to commercial developments only. 
ii.  All other signs in this sign district shall be limited to a combined square footage of 160 square feet per each lot of record. No two such signs may be closer than 50 linear feet from one another, and such signage may not be transferred from one frontage to another. This includes properties in the city that abut properties in the county. 
4.  Residential subdivisions may install a freestanding sign at each entrance, provided that the combined area of all freestanding signs does not exceed 70 square feet. 
e.  Location and orientation. 
1.  Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District: Signs shall be located outside the right-of-way. No sign or sign structure shall be placed onto or obscure or damage any significant architectural feature of a building, including, but not limited to, a window, door frame, cornice, moulding, ornamental feature, or unusual or fragile material. Rights-of-way vary in width in this sign district. The Cleveland public square shall be deemed to be part of such rights-of-way. 
2.  All other locations. 
i.  All signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way; and 
ii.  No freestanding sign may be within 50 feet of another freestanding sign (including signs outside the limits), however, within the Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B -I Central Business District, freestanding signs may be located within 20 feet of one another. 
(2)  Wall and mansard signs . Wall and mansard signs shall be permitted on the wall or mansard of a building facing a public street. If a building has public street frontage on more than one side, a wall or mansard sign may be allowed on either the main entrance or on any side facing a public street. These signs are subject to the following: 
a.  Wall and mansard signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts; 
b.  If a building is located on a lot that has no street frontage, wall or mansard signs shall be permitted on a single facade; 
c.  Wall or mansard signs attached flat against the exterior surface of a building may extend not more than six inches from the wall; 
d.  The total area for wall or mansard signage shall not exceed the lesser of 20 percent of the area of the building wall or 360 square feet; 
e.  A directory sign is a wall sign for the purposes of this chapter; 
f.  For buildings with multiple tenants having storefronts only, the facade rented by the tenant shall be considered as the wall area for a sign area calculation; 
g.  No part of a wall or mansard sign shall be located more than 25 feet above the existing level of the ground beneath such sign; 
h.  Wall or mansard signs shall not extend more than three feet above the bottom edge of the eave line of the mansard to which said sign is attached, or more than three feet above the top of the parapet of the wall to which such sign is attached; 
i.  Changeable copy shall not exceed 30 percent of the area of the sign face; 
j.  When a wall or mansard sign is formed by placing individual letters, numbers, figures, symbols, trademarks, or other graphics, or any combination thereof, without a distinguishing discrete or framed background, the area of the sign shall be the area enclosed by a contiguous perimeter line drawn around all the letters, numbers, figures, symbols, trademarks, or other graphics, in any combination, which make up the sign. Any letter, number, figure, symbol, trademark, or other graphic in such a sign which is separated by more than 36 inches from any other letter, number, figure, symbol, trademark, or other graphic in such a sign, shall be considered a separate sign; 
k.  No tenant wall signs are allowed above the second floor of a multi-tenant building. Second floor tenants must have primary direct access from their space to the outside from the second floor area. The access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designated for public use; and 
l.  A master sign plan is required. 
(3)  Projecting and hanging signs . One projecting or hanging non-illuminated sign for each business or tenant shall be allowed subject to the following: 
a.  The sign is located in a nonresidential zoning district; 
b.  The sign is located over a public entrance door to an occupied building; 
c.  The sign is no more than nine square feet in area; 
d.  The sign may not project more than 36 inches from the wall; 
e.  The sign is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building or extends from the wall; 
f.  The sign maintains a minimum of eight feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below; and 
g.  The sign shall not extend vertically beyond the window sill of the second story. 
(4)  Banners . One banner is allowed on each developed lot in nonresidential zoning districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  One banner for per each business or organization may be erected for no more than 120 days during a calendar year for the same business or organization. The duration of a temporary event for such banner shall not last longer than 15 consecutive days and shall not take place more frequently than four times in any calendar year for the same business or organization. The 15 days do not have to be consecutive; 
b.  The maximum size of the banner shall not exceed 35 square feet and the height shall not exceed five feet; 
c.  All banners shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side property lines. For front setback, the banner must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will a banner be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection. For traffic safety, sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection; 
d.  Hanging banners must maintain a minimum eight-foot clearance between the bottom of the banner and the walkway below; and 
e.  Banners shall not be placed above the second floor or higher than 25 feet above ground level beneath it, whichever is less. 
(5)  A-frame signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any portable sign or structure composed of two sign faces mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to form a triangular vertical cross section through the faces, provided that the A-frame sign is no greater than two feet wide and three feet high and that the location of the A-frame sign is located on a public or private sidewalk and shall be located so as to leave an unobstructed width of 60 inches for passage along the sidewalk. Said sign must be located in front of the business served and no greater than 12 feet from the main entrance to the business served. Should a permit for an A-frame sign be denied by the because of lack of sufficient unobstructed pedestrian access, then the denied business may add a wall or window sign not to exceed a size limit of two feet wide by three feet high or a window sign, which window sign may not exceed two feet by three feet. Neither such wall nor the window sign, however, shall exceed other applicable signage restrictions in this chapter. 
(6)  Window signs are permitted in all nonresidential zoning districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The maximum area of the window sign shall be 30 percent of the available glass area based on the definition of window sign set forth in this chapter. Signage that is located inside the building within three feet of the window that is intended to be viewed from the outside, is considered included in the window area limitation. Available glass shall be measured by considering an entire window unit exclusive of any mullions. In commercial zoning districts, other than the B-I Central Business District (Sign District 1), one lighted window sign shall be allowed and may include neon or similar type signage. Said lighted window sign cannot be a sign which changes copy electronically using switches and electric lamps, or any other electric means, or which flashes, blinks, or scrolls. However, the sign may be a fiber optic, neon, or light-emitting diodes (LED) sign, which shall not be greater than 324 square inches in area. 
b.  No window signs are allowed above the first floor unless the building is a multi-tenant office or commercial structure wherein second floor tenants have primary direct access from their space to the outside from the second floor level. The access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designated for public use. 
c.  In no case shall any window sign be installed, applied, affixed, hung, or painted above the level of the second floor windows. 
(7)  Signage during construction. Two additional signs shall be allowed during construction of a residential or nonresidential subdivision subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Illumination . Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
b.  Duration . Such signs shall be allowed during the period beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the earlier of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the installation of a permanent sign at the residential or nonresidential subdivision entrance. 
c.  Size . The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and five feet in height in the B-I Central Business District and shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and seven feet in height in all other areas in the city. 
d.  Location . All signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side from side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will such a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersections. For traffic safety, sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(8)  Residential subdivision entrance. No more than two freestanding monument signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a residential subdivision, including but not limited to, multi-family complexes, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such signs must be placed on common property under the ownership of the developer, Home Owners Association (HOA), or apartment complex owner; 
b.  The sign face shall not exceed 70 square feet in area and six feet in height; 
c.  If the sign or sign structure is attached to a decorative wall or fence, the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed ten feet in height. The post and/or columns of the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed ten feet in height; 
d.  Such signs shall not be internally illuminated; 
e.  The permit for such sign shall not be issued until the final subdivision plat is approved by the city; and 
f.  All such signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection. For traffic safety, sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(9)  Standards for billboards. Billboards are allowed in Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District subject to the standards and conditions hereafter set out and as may be stated elsewhere in this chapter. Due to the historic nature of Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District, and the high density of residential development common in Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District, billboards are prohibited in Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District and in the Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District. Billboards should not be used as the primary sign for a business. 
a.  General standards . This section 44.8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards, shall apply to prohibit the erection of new billboards in the City of Cleveland, or the reconstruction of existing billboards, to the fullest extent that is not inconsistent with state and federal law or with the provisions of this chapter allowing for the reduction of the overall number of billboards within city. 
1.  Permit required . No billboard shall be permitted to be erected or reconstructed without a permit from the city building official. 
2.  No new billboards. After the effective date of this chapter, the city building official shall not issue permits for new billboard structures except as required by Georgia or federal law and/or permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Billboards are primary structures. After the effective date of this chapter, all billboards shall be classified as primary structures, and a billboard which is in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, and the applicable provisions of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances, and applicable state and federal regulations, may be located on a lot or parcel that contains another primary structure, if such location on such lot or parcel is allowed by the applicable provisions of this chapter, and the applicable provisions of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances, and applicable state and federal regulations. 
b.  Location, area, and height . All billboard structures required to be permitted under state or federal law, and erected so as to be visible from any public, state or federal road shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  General . All billboard structures erected abutting or so as to be visible from the right-of-way of any state highway that is a limited or controlled access highway shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75 et seq., as amended, and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under said code and associated regulations. In instances where the sign controls of this chapter are stricter, this chapter shall apply. Billboards shall only be located on tracts or parcels located in Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District. which are also situated within the B-2—Highway Commercial zoning district of the city or within the I—Industrial zoning district of the city. 
2.  Structure type. Only one billboard shall be allowed to face the same direction per each location. This allows back-to-back or V-formation signs, provided they are joined by a mutual or attached frame, but prohibits two signs stacked or side-by-side facing the same direction. 
3.  Setback . All billboard signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side property lines. For front setback, all such signs must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and no more than 65 feet outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersections. For traffic safety, no such sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
4.  Spacing . On all roads, except divided lane four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways, no billboard structure shall be permitted within 1,500 feet of another billboard along the same side of the road or within 1,000 feet of any residential or agricultural zoning district, public park, public building, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, cemetery, or religious building, regardless of whether the measurements extend outside of city limits. 
5.  Spacing . On divided four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways no billboard structure shall be permitted within 1,500 feet of another billboard, measuring from the two closest points, regardless of whether the measurements extend outside of city limits. 
6.  Maximum sign area . On all roads, except divided lane four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways, the maximum sign area permitted for each face of the structure shall not exceed 378 square feet with or without trim. 
7.  Maximum sign area. On divided four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways the maximum sign area permitted for each face of the structure shall not exceed 378 square feet with or without trim. 
8.  Sign height. All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above the adjacent road crown measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. No sign shall exceed the height of 22.5 feet above the level either the road crown or the ground surface, whichever is higher. Two signs in the same location back-to-back or in a V-formation shall be the same height above the crown of the road pavement surface. Height includes the supporting structure and the sign. 
9.  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions or extensions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
10.  Lighting . No illumination of off-premises signs shall be permitted. 
c.  Digital billboard conversion and location. Any legally erected billboard may be converted to a digital billboard so long as it meets the following standards and conditions: 
1.  Replacement of a static billboard with a digital billboard shall be subject to the following: 
i.  Two square feet of existing static billboard display shall be removed within the city limits for each one square foot of digital billboard display area, either newly constructed or installed as a modification and/or conversion of an existing static billboard. The two square feet removed must be from physically completed static billboards with complete sign faces. No partially erected or partially completed signs may be used to qualify for the requirement. 
ii.  The applicant shall provide an inventory of their outdoor advertising sign locations within the city. A person or entity that converts an existing static billboard to a digital billboard must provide, with each permit application, a complete current inventory of its billboards located within the incorporated limits of the city. The inventory shall include for each structure the location (longitude and latitude), size, number of sign faces, and type of illumination. 
iii.  No person shall convert an existing static billboard structure to a digital billboard structure without first obtaining a sign permit as required by this chapter. 
iv.  Digital billboards shall be the same size or smaller than the static billboard being replaced. 
v.  A digital billboard replacing a nonconforming static billboard may be permitted if approved by the city building official. 
2.  Construction of digital billboards in new locations. 
i.  After removing two square feet of existing static billboard display in accordance with this chapter, a new structure may be erected containing a digital billboard if the location is approved by the city building official. 
ii.  The city building official shall be authorized to permit the installation of any new digital billboard structure in any location within the city so long as the location complies with all applicable state and federal regulations pertaining to outdoor advertising, this chapter, and the applicable provisions of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances. 
3.  Digital billboard operational standards. 
i.  Digital billboards shall display static images for a period of at least 20 seconds before instantaneously transitioning to another static image. 
ii.  Animation, frame effects, flashing, and the appearance of movement, by any method whatsoever shall be explicitly prohibited. 
iii.  All digital billboards shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the sign's brightness based on ambient light conditions. 
iv.  No digital billboard shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light as measured using a foot-candle meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. Measuring distance shall be determined by the following equation: the square root of the product of the sign area and 100. For example, using a 200 square foot digital billboard: (200x100) = 141.4 feet measuring distance. 
v.  The city will from time to time check the brightness of each digital billboard to verify the levels specified in this chapter are met. If the owner of a sign fails to control brightness within these limits, the sign permit will be revoked. Should a permit be revoked, the sign must be turned off immediately and remain off unless and until the sign is re-permitted. Re-permitting shall require the owner to reapply in accordance with the procedures in place at the time of the new permit application, and shall require the payment of the fees required for a new permit. 
vi.  All digital billboards shall have a switch or circuit breaker located on the property where located that allows electrical power to be turned off. The owner of each digital billboard shall provide the city contact information for a 24-hour, seven-day per week contact person who has the authority and is able to turn off the sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. If at any time more than 30 percent of the digital display area malfunctions or are is longer working property, the owner of the digital billboard shall turn off the electronic display until repairs are made. 
4.  Emergency compliance . The permit holder of a digital billboard shall coordinate with city and other governmental authorities to display, when appropriate, emergency information important to the traveling public, such as Amber Alerts or alerts concerning terrorist attacks, or natural disasters. Emergency information messages shall remain in the advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency that issues the information, or protocols established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
d.  Nonconforming billboards . Any legally erected sign that would become nonconforming as a result of this chapter will be allowed to remain in accordance with this chapter, or until purchased by the Georgia Department of Transportation or the city, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws, rules, and regulations governing such signs. No nonconforming billboard shall be allowed to be increased in size or height or relocated on the property, but may be decreased in size or height and/or may be converted to a digital billboard subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
1.  Billboards may not be used as the primary sign for a business. 
2.  Billboards will not be permitted on top of buildings or on top of roofs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-9. - Sign permits—Process. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for reviewing the applications for sign permits to ensure signs within the city comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Authority . The city building official is authorized to review and approve or disapprove an application for a sign permit pursuant to the procedures and requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Applicability . No sign, except those specifically exempted in this chapter, shall be erected, placed, reconstructed, or structurally altered without the sign owner having first obtained a sign permit from the city building official pursuant to the procedures and the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Signs for which a general permit has been granted . Pursuant to section 44-10 of this chapter a general permit has been granted for those signs identified in said section 44-10, and no application for a sign permit is required for such signs so long as the requirements of this chapter are met. 
(e)  Procedure . 
(1)  Initial submission and review of application. Application for a sign permit must be made on the form provided by the city building official and shall be accompanied by the information and documents listed on the form and the fee as required by the mayor and council. An application will only be deemed as sufficient when all required information and accompanying documents are received by the city building official. 
(2)  Action by the city building official. Within 15 working days after the application is determined sufficient, the city building official shall review the application in accordance with this section and determine whether the application complies with the standards in this chapter. 
(3)  Approval . If the city building official finds that the application complies with the requirements of this chapter, the city building official shall approve a sign permit. Any sufficient sign application for which no action has been taken after 60 working days shall be deemed approved, unless the applicant has consented to a longer period. 
(4)  Fails to comply. If the city building official determines the application fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall be provided a notification with written comments, explaining why the application fails to comply with the standards. The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to submit a revised application. If a revised application is not resubmitted within 30 days of the date of notification, the application shall be considered withdrawn and subject to a new application and remittance of accompanying fees. The time for resubmitting may be extended an additional 30 days, if requested prior to the original deadline for submittal. 
(5)  Re-submittal. A revised application shall be re-submitted to the building official and reviewed by the city building official within five working days after its re-submittal. The city building official shall approve or disapprove the application, based upon the criteria of this chapter. 
(f)  Criteria . A sign permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant has demonstrated the application complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Expiration . If the work described in any sign permit has not been completed within six months from the date of issuance, the sign permit shall expire and be void; however, one six month extension of the permit shall be granted if an additional permit extension fee has been paid prior to the expiration of the initial permit. The permit extension fee shall be the amount of the initial permit fee. 
(h)  Amendments . A sign permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures established for its original approval. 
(i)  Appeals . Any person aggrieved or affected or any officer department, board, or bureau of the city affected by the determination of the city building official on an application for approval of a sign permit may appeal the determination in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 44-28 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-10. - Signs subject to a general permit. 
(a)  Purpose of general permit. A general permit is hereby granted for the following types of signs in any zoning district, other than on lots or tracts requiring a master sign plan, provided that such signs are erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Traffic control signs. 
(1)  Issued by the city, county, state, or federal agency, department, or official as required by law. 
(c)  Official notices. 
(1)  Issued by any court with competent jurisdiction or authorized public agency, department, or official. 
(d)  Flags . Any flag provided that: 
(1)  No more than three flagpoles permitted per developed lot; 
(2)  Flags may be set in the ground or attached to a structure; 
(3)  No more than three flags are permitted per flagpole; 
(4)  All flagpoles shall be setback from each property boundary a distance equal to the height of the flagpole or 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or at least two feet outside of the right-of-way, whichever is greater, and 15 feet from side and rear lot lines. For traffic safety, flagpoles shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection; 
(5)  All flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, so as not to constitute a threat to public safety; 
(6)  On officially designated county, state, and federal holidays, there shall be no restriction as to maximum flag size or number of flags on display in residential districts; and 
(7)  In nonresidential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed height provided for a structure or building in the applicable zoning district, or 50 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in residential areas shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(e)  Window signs. 
(1)  Window signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Window area coverage . The maximum area of the total of all window signs shall be 30 percent of the available glass area. Signage that is located inside the building and within three feet of the window that is intended to be viewed from outside the building is considered included in the window sign area limitation. Available glass shall be measured by considering an entire window unit exclusive of any mullions. No window signs are allowed above the first floor unless the building is a multi-tenant office or commercial structure wherein second floor tenants have primary direct access from their space to the outside from the second floor level. The access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designated for public use. 
(3)  In no case shall any window signs be installed, applied, affixed, hanging, or painted above the level of the second floor windows. 
(4)  Indoor signs must be three feet or more from the window and should not be intended to be seen from the public right-of-way or street and are intended for the indoor retail/service area. 
(f)  Informational signs . In addition to any other sign permitted by this chapter, two informational signs are allowed on a single lot, subject to the following: 
(1)  Size limitation. 
a.  For residential lots, a maximum size of six square feet of sign area, with a cumulative square footage of 12 square feet. Maximum height of any sign is three feet to the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
b.  For all nonresidential lots, signs shall be a maximum size of 16 square feet of sign area, with a cumulative square footage of 32 square feet. The maximum height of any sign is five feet to the the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  All signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be at least five feet outside of the right-of-way and must not interfere with underground utilities. If the sign would interfere with underground utilities, the informational sign must be placed further from the right-of-way. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection. For traffic and pedestrian safety, sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(3)  Mounting devices. 
a.  Informational signs shall be mounted on metal frames that do not exceed ¼-inch in diameter or when mounted on frames of other material such frame members cannot exceed ¾-inch by 1½-inch in size. No message may be written on the mounting hardware so that the entire message area is contained on the sign itself. 
(4)  Lighting prohibited. 
a.  Informational signs may not be illuminated in any manner. 
(5)  Numerals . 
a.  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location (911 address) affixed to a structure such as a mailbox, building facade entrance or house, or placed on the ground, not less than four inches in height and not to exceed eight inches in height. Such numerals are required for all zoning districts. 
(6)  Door signs. 
a.  Door signs not to exceed one square foot and not more than one sign per door. 
(7)  Holiday lighting. 
a.  Holiday lights and decorations, provided that they are removed within 45 days following the holiday season to which they pertain. Businesses, whose primary business is holiday sales, are exempt from removing holiday lights and decorations. 
(8)  Out-of-store marketing devices. 
a.  Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include, but are not limited to: fuel pumps, ATM units, vending machines, newspaper racks, drink machines, iceboxes, and phone booths. 
b.  Out-of-store marketing devices may be allowed in nonresidential zoning districts, if otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the applicable provisions of this Code. Such devices do not require a sign permit and any not included in the calculation of overall sign areas for the lot on which such device or devices are located. 
c.  All out-of-store marketing devices shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side property lines. For front setback, the device must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will an out-of-store marketing device be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersections. For traffic safety, an out-of-store marketing device shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-11. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in the city, except as specifically provided by this chapter: 
(1)  Abandoned signs. A sign shall be considered abandoned when there is clear evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds, on which such sign is located or with which said sign is associated, provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to any case where a business or activity is temporarily suspended and there is significant evidence that the business or activity will resume operations within a six-month period. An abandoned sign may also be any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt and may or may not have a person, who accepts maintenance responsibility. 
(2)  Animated signs. A rotating or revolving sign, or signs where all or a portion of the signs move in some manner, except those dynamic display and electronic message signs which are allowed under this chapter. 
(3)  Inflatable signs. Except as specifically permitted under a special event sign permit, inflatable signs are prohibited within any right-of-way. 
(4)  Pennants . Except as specifically permitted under a special event sign permit, pennants are prohibited within any right-of-way. 
(5)  Roof signs. Roof signs that extend more than three feet above the roof line. 
(6)  Streamers and windblown devices. Any propeller, whirling, or similar device that is designed to flutter, rotate, or display other movement under the influence of the wind, including, but not limited to, flags, except as specifically allowed in this chapter. 
(7)  Signs resembling traffic signals or signs. Signs that imitate an official traffic sign or signal. This includes, but is not limited to, signs with lights and shapes similar to those traffic safety signs, used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices or traffic safety signs. No sign shall be constructed, erected, or maintained which purports to be or resembles an official traffic sign or signal except those signs officially authorized by the city or other governmental entities. 
(8)  Signs creating pedestrian hazards or traffic hazards, or both. Signs within rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, those attached to traffic signs, utility poles, or guy wires. No sign shall be erected at or near any public street or the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to create a hazard or a traffic hazard by obstructing vision, or at any location where it would interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign or signal. No sign shall be erected that obstructs the vision of pedestrians in a public right-of-way or the entrance of a private street or driveway to a public right-of-way. 
(9)  Flashing signs, strobe, laser, and searchlights . Any sign that contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation or an intermittent light source. 
(10)  Hazardous signs . No sign shall be erected or maintained which, due to structural weakness, design defect, or other reason, constitutes a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of any person or property. 
(11)  Any sign illuminated at such an intensity or brightness which reasonably interferes with the peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent, or nearby, properties, or which reasonably creates a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(12)  Signs attached to, drawn, or painted upon trees, rocks, or other natural features. 
(13)  Signs displayed on outdoor furniture, benches, trash cans, telephone booths, and similar devices, except as specifically authorized by the city as memorial devices of not more than four inches by eight inches in size. 
(14)  Signs attached to, drawn, or painted on utility poles, telecommunication towers and water towers or tanks unless otherwise required by local, state, or federal law. 
(15)  Signs with dynamic display and electronic message signs are prohibited in B-I Central Business District, but may be allowed in other sign districts if in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(16)  Signs drawn or painted upon roof, building, or structure, except as otherwise expressly allowed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-12. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained by the sign owner in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. Upon discovery of a sign in need of maintenance, the city building official or Cleveland Code Enforcement Officer shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is located if the owner of the sign itself cannot be determined. Said notice shall state the item or items requiring repair or maintenance. The owner shall have 30 days in which to repair or maintain the sign before a citation is issued. If the owner has failed to make repairs or the necessary maintenance within that time, the city building official or Cleveland Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a citation to be issued. For the purposes of this section, the owner of the real property on which the sign is located shall be deemed the owner of the sign. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, after being notified pursuant to this section and after the 30-day notice has expired, for any person to display a sign in any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any element of the sign have become detached or have fallen off the sign or has become misaligned. 
(2)  Painted surfaces on the sign or sign structure have begun to peel or flake over a significant portion of the sign, or have faded or oxidized to an extent that the sign no longer in good repair. 
(3)  A significant number of bricks, stones, or other materials on the structural base of a sign have become detached or have fallen off, or have become misaligned. 
(4)  Other similar conditions of disrepair or lack of maintenance as determined by the city building official or Cleveland Code Enforcement Officer. 
(5)  For lighted signs, one or more illumination devices are not working and have not been repaired. 
(6)  The area on private property around the sign on which such sign is erected shall be properly maintained clear of brush, trees, and other obstacles so as to make the sign readily visible. 
(c)  If no action is taken by the property owner or the tenant in possession under a an enforceable lease to correct such matters within said 30-day period, said sign shall be deemed a nuisance and pursuant to section 36-196 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, the City of Cleveland shall have full authority to abate said nuisance in accordance with the provisions thereof and to claim and secure all remedies allowed thereby. The costs of such abatement shall be borne by the property owner and such tenant, jointly and severally, and shall constitute a lien on the property of such property owner and such tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-13. - Abandoned signs. 
(a)  If the business, use, or activity on a property has ceased operations, leaving a sign which may have been permitted in connection with said business, and such if such sign has been found by the city building official to have been abandoned, as defined in this chapter, or as declared by the property owner or tenant, such sign, including its supports, shall be removed or modified as hereinafter allowed by the property owner within 30 days after written notice from the city building official of such building official's determination that said sign is an abandoned sign under the provisions of this chapter. No new sign will be permitted to be erected until said abandoned sign, and its supports, have been removed or converted into a sign lawfully conforming with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  If such abandoned sign contains a sign face that is in the form of a removable panel, the panel containing advertising shall be removed and replaced with a panel without advertising until another use is established for the location of the former business, use or activity, and a new sign permit issued for such new business, use, or activity. If such abandoned sign contains a sign copy area that is not removable without disassembling the sign, then the said sign copy area shall be painted over if possible, or, where it cannot be painted over, covered with durable cloth or canvas so that the sign copy and/or underlying structure which was permitted in connection with said former business, use, or activity is no longer visible, until another use is established for the location of the former business, use or activity, and a new sign permit issued for such new business, use, or activity. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the owner of the real property on which the sign is located shall be deemed the owner of the sign. 
(d)  If no action is taken by the property owner or the tenant in possession under a an enforceable lease to correct such matters within said 30-day period, said sign shall be deemed a nuisance and pursuant to section 36-196 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, the City of Cleveland shall have full authority to abate said nuisance in accordance with the provisions thereof and to claim and secure all remedies allowed thereby. The costs of such abatement shall be borne by the property owner and such tenant, jointly and severally, and shall constitute a lien on the property of such property owner and such tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-14. - Replacement of nonconforming sign. 
(a)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs may be permitted after a proper sign permit has been obtained from the city. 
(b)  A change of property owner will require the new owner to prepare and submit and have approved by the city a master sign plan and the new owner will be required to have all non-conforming signs conform to the provisions of this chapter then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-15. - Repairs and maintenance to nonconforming signs. 
No structural repairs to, or change in shape or size of, a nonconforming sign shall be allowed except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter after a proper sign permit has been obtained from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-16. - Duration and continuance of nonconforming signs. 
Signs which do not meet all requirements of this chapter when enacted, or which do not meet provisions of this chapter at the time of its adoption, may stay in place, if not in violation of any of the requirements set out in sections 44-12 and 44-13 of this chapter, until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard. 
(2)  No conforming principal use or accessory use, ground or wall sign, shall be permitted to be erected on the same property with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or made to conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Upon a change of ownership, the subsequent owner will be granted six months to bring all nonconforming signs into conformance with the City of Cleveland sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-17. - Display of property address required. 
It is of the upmost importance that public safety personnel, mail carriers, and the general public be able to conveniently locate buildings, institutions, businesses, and establishments by their property address. Therefore, to ensure this essential public purpose is served, establishments other than single-family dwellings shall display the street address of the property either on a principal use ground sign or on the building facade. Within a commercial center where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest street numbers shall be identified. Street address numbers shall be of a material that is in clear contrast with the background. Numbers shall not less than four inches in height and not exceed eight inches in height on or adjacent to rights-of-way within the city, including, but not limited to local roads, state, and federal highways. Numbers shall be visible from both directions of travel along such rights-of-way. Single-family homes are required to post a street address on a mailbox, or a small ground sign in front of the dwelling which is not obscured by vegetation. Numbers shall be not less than four inches in height and not exceed eight inches in height on rights-of-way within the city, including, but not limited to, local roads, state, and federal highways. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-18. - Height of ground signs. 
Height of a ground sign (except as otherwise provided in this chapter in section 44-8(a)(9)—standards for billboards), is measured from the normal grade ground at the base of the sign, and is limited as follows: 
(1)  Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District: Ground signs may not exceed a height of six feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
(2)  Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District—Henderson Street to Quillian Street; Cemetery Street to Dixon Drive; Bell Street to Wilford Ash Parkway; and Jackson Street to Old Nacoochee Road: Ground signs may not exceed a height of ten feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
(3)  Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District—Helen Highway; Wilford Ash Parkway; Donald E. Thurmond Parkway; Quillian Street to City limits—South; Dixon Drive to City limits—East; Wilford Ash Parkway to City limits—West; and Old Nacoochee Road to City limits—North: 
a.  Except billboards expressly allowed under the provisions of this chapter in section 44-8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards, ground signs may not exceed a height of 16 feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
b.  Billboards expressly allowed under the provisions of this chapter shall not exceed 22.5 feet in height, as more particularly set forth elsewhere in this chapter in section 44-8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-19. - Increase in height of ground signs. 
The maximum heights for ground signs established by this chapter shall apply to any ground sign, except for ground signs situated below the level of the adjacent road grade. If the maximum height permitted in section 44-18, and elsewhere in this chapter, would prevent adequate visibility, if all other provisions of this chapter are properly complied with, the ground sign height for a sign at such location may be allowed by the city, upon proper application made to the city, to be increased as follows: 
(1)  Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District: Ground signs may not exceed a height of six feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign when measured from the level of the adjacent road grade. 
(2)  Sign District 2—Commercial and Residential District—Henderson Street to Quillian Street; Cemetery Street to Dixon Drive; Bell Street to Wilford Ash Parkway; and Jackson Street to Old Nacoochee Road: Ground signs may not exceed a height of ten feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign when measured from the level of the adjacent road grade. 
(3)  Sign District 3—High Density Commercial District—Helen Highway; Wilford Ash Parkway; Donald E. Thurmond Parkway; Quillian Street to City limits—South; Dixon Drive to City limits—East; Wilford Ash Parkway to City limits—West; and Old Nacoochee Road to City limits—North: A sign may be sixteen feet higher above road grade. 
a.  Except billboards expressly allowed under the provisions of this chapter in section 44-8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards, ground signs may not exceed a height of 16 feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign, when measured from the level of the adjacent road grade. 
b.  Billboards expressly allowed under the provisions of this chapter shall not exceed 22.5 feet in height (as more particularly set forth elsewhere in this chapter in section 44-8(a)(9)—Standards for Billboards) at the highest point anywhere on the sign, when measured from the level of the adjacent road grade. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-20. - Sign setback. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from the rear and side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersections. For traffic safety, a sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-21. - Illumination. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all signs which are allowed to be illuminated under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  In all sign districts externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by a white, steady, stationary light of reasonable intensity, shielded, and directed solely at the sign, so as not to cause glare or spill light on the road right-of-way, so as not to cause a traffic hazard and so as not to light up the sky or adjoining buildings. Provided however, that signs located on properties lying within a residential or agricultural zoning district shall not be externally illuminated. 
(2)  In all sign districts, except in the Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District, neon lights or rope lights outlining the perimeter of a structure may be allowed, however such neon lights or rope lights shall not be used to outline windows or doors, and any such neon light or rope light string shall not exceed three foot-candles in intensity. All such neon lights and rope lights shall be located so as not to spill light on the road right-of-way, and so as not to cause a traffic hazard. 
(3)  Neon lights lights and/or rope lights used to outline any structure and/or architectural feature of any structure which is located in the Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Security lights shall be directed so as not to cause glare or spill light on the road right-of-way which would create a traffic hazard. Such security lights shall also be directed to minimize the lighting of the sky above the level of the light. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-22. - Temporary signs. 
Temporary signs may be permitted on commercial properties subject to the issuance of a temporary sign permit from the Cleveland Building Official. Such temporary signs shall conform to the following: 
(1)  No temporary sign permit shall be valid for more than 45 days in a 12-month period. 
(2)  One banner shall be permitted per lot. Banners shall not exceed 32 square feet, nor may it be more than 15 feet in height. Such banner may be temporarily placed or attached to a building, wall, window, railing, or ground sign, or it may be freestanding between two poles or stakes. 
(3)  One gas or air-filled advertising device may be permitted per lot, not to exceed a height of 15 feet above the ground. However, all gas or air-filled advertising devices are prohibited in the Sign District 1—Historic Downtown District—B-I—Central Business District. 
(4)  Any new business or an existing business which has changed ownership may obtain a sign permit for a temporary sign. 
(5)  All temporary signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from rear and side property lines. For front setback, the temporary sign must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will a temporary sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection. For traffic and pedestrian safety, a temporary sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-23. - Master sign plan. 
A master sign plan is required for all nonresidential projects including more than one freestanding building and for all nonresidential projects including a building suitable for multiple tenants. The approved master sign plan must be provided to tenants to ensure compliance with this chapter and the terms of the applicable master sign plan. 
(1)  Approval required. Any new construction and any re-development of a nonresidential project which includes one or more freestanding buildings shall obtain approval of a master sign plan from the city building official as part of the development review process prior to any signs being erected, other than signs permitted during construction under this chapter. All signs erected or maintained shall conform, at all times, to the approved master sign plan. The signs approved through the master sign plan are the only signs allowed, and any deviations from an approved master sign plan shall be unlawful unless and until a revised master sign plan is approved. The approved master sign plan must be provided to tenants to ensure compliance with this chapter and the terms of the applicable master sign plan. 
(2)  Master sign plan application. An application for a master sign plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Accurate site plan, including location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas; 
b.  One set of drawings showing details of construction and foundation of proposed signs; 
c.  An accurate indication of the location of each of the present and proposed future signs of any type, whether requiring a permit or not; 
d.  An elevation drawing or photo depicting the proposed location of signs on any building, wall, or other structure; 
e.  A scaled drawing showing the size, shape, structural design, materials, and lighting of proposed signs; 
f.  Master sign plans must be signed by all owners or their authorized agents; 
g.  Any other maps, drawings, or materials as required by the Cleveland Building Official to adequately describe the sign proposal. 
(3)  Master sign plan review. 
a.  An application for a master sign plan shall be reviewed as part of the development review process and shall follow all procedures thereof, unless otherwise provided in this section. 
(4)  Individual sign permits. 
a.  Individual sign permits are required for all signs contained within an approved master sign plan. 
(5)  Amendments . 
a.  A master sign plan may be amended by filing a new master sign plan application that conforms to all requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Location of entrance signs. 
a.  All signs shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from rear and side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be at least 15 feet from the pavement and outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at street or driveway intersections. For traffic and pedestrian safety, sign shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-24. - Variances. 
(a)  Administration by the Cleveland Building Permit Review Committee. The Cleveland Building Permit Review Committee has the responsibility for administration of this section 44-28. 
(b)  Purpose . The purpose of a variance is to provide limited and conditional relief when the strict application of this chapter, and the applicable provisions of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances, impose unusual practical difficulties or undue hardships on the applicant. Possible grounds for a variance might include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Dimensional variances only (i.e., variances as to the required setback, sign size, or sign height), which variances shall not exceed ten percent of the required standard or limitation, and shall not subvert the purpose and intent of this chapter; and 
(2)  Extreme topographic conditions preventing the sign from being seen from the adjacent road right-of-way. 
(c)  Criteria for granting a variance. 
(1)  Based on the application, evidence submitted by the applicant, investigations by the city building official and such other persons as may be directed by the mayor and council; all of the following findings shall exist in order to grant a variance (documentation, including but not limited to, maps, recorded surveys, and other related documents is required): 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, topography; and 
b.  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship. 
(2)  Variances shall not be granted: 
a.  If special circumstances on which the applicant relies are a result of actions of the applicant, owner, or previous property owners; or 
b.  To allow the use of the property in a manner or for a purpose not authorized by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland and applicable law. 
(d)  Application requirements. The owner or duly authorized agent shall file an application for variance with the city building official on the prescribed form. A complete application shall consist of: 
(1)  Variance request form; 
(2)  Copy of ordinance section from which the variance is being requested; 
(3)  Correspondence clearly stating the basis for the variance request; 
(4)  Supporting documentation necessary to give the city building official a clear understanding of the request; and 
(5)  Maps, recorded survey, and proposed sign plans and construction details. 
(e)  Submission to Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board. 
(1)  The request for variance is reviewable by the Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board if the city building official determines that the request for variance meets the criteria. 
(2)  The Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board shall review the request for variance upon receipt of the following items within 15 days of the determination of the city building official: 
a.  Correspondence clearly stating the basis for the request for Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board review; 
b.  City building official's recommendation; 
c.  Supporting documentation necessary to give the Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board a clear understanding of the request for review; and 
d.  A review fee of $390.00. 
(3)  The Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board shall review the application and staff investigation report and determine whether the evidence supports finding that the required criteria has been met and approved with or without conditions or deny the application. However, the determination of the Cleveland Building Official shall remain in full force and effect pending such review and decision. 
(f)  Appeal to the Cleveland Mayor and City Council. Decisions or actions of the Cleveland Planning and Zoning Board are subject to appeal to the Cleveland City Council. However, the Cleveland Planning and Zoning Board's decision shall remain in full force and effect pending such appeal. 
(g)  If an applicant desires to appeal a decision or action of the Cleveland Planning and Zoning Board, the applicant shall notify the Cleveland Mayor and City Council, in writing, within ten days of the action or decision of the Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board. Upon receipt of this notice, the Cleveland Mayor and City Council shall establish a date and time to hear the appeal. The applicant's request shall include: 
(1)  Correspondence stating the basis for the appeal of the Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board action or decision; 
(2)  Applicable Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board minutes; 
(3)  Supporting documentation necessary to give the Cleveland Mayor and City Council a clear understanding of the appeal request; and 
(4)  Appeal fee $390.00. 
(h)  Conditions . 
(1)  Reasonable conditions may be imposed in connection with the granting of a variance as deemed necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property of the neighborhood and otherwise secure the purpose and requirements of this chapter; and 
(2)  Guarantees and evidence shall be required that such conditions are and will continue to be in compliance with the terms of the variance and this chapter. 
(i)  Compliance with conditions approval. Adherence to the approved plans and compliance with conditions imposed in the variance are required. Any departure from conditions of approval of this variance constitutes a violation to this chapter. 
(j)  Vested interest in approved variances. A valid variance supersedes conflicting provisions or amendments unless specifically provided by the provisions of this chapter or the conditions of such variance. 
(k)  Investigations and reports. The city building official shall make an investigation to provide necessary information to ensure that the action on each application is consistent with the variance criteria. Any report of such investigation shall be included in the application file. 
(l)  Revocation . Variances shall become invalid if not exercised within one year of the date of approval or if there is a change in ownership not otherwise noted and approved at the time of the granting of the variance. 
(m)  Limitations on reapplication. The Cleveland Zoning and Planning Board shall not hear denied applications for the same or substantially similar variance application until a period of six months has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-25. - Inspections. 
(a)  The city building official, his or her department's staff, representatives, and agents, and Cleveland Code Enforcement Officer, and the staff of the city fire, and public works departments, shall have the power to conduct such investigations as they may reasonably deem necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in this chapter. After providing proper credentials, these officials, employees, representatives, and agents may enter any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the premises. 
(b)  No person or entity shall refuse entry or access to the city building official, his or her department's staff, representatives, and agents, and Cleveland Code Enforcement Officer, and the staff of the city fire, and public works departments, who request entry for purposes of inspection. Similarly, no person or entity shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with the city building official, his or her department's staff, representatives, agents, Cleveland Code Enforcement Officer, and the staff of the city fire and public works departments, while in the process of carrying out the official duties of same related to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-26. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  Any person or entity failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a stop work order. Such order or notice shall be presented by the city building official or the Cleveland Code Enforcement or an authorized designee, in writing and shall state the conditions under which work may continue. Where an emergency exists, no written order or notice shall be required. 
(2)  The city building official or the Cleveland Code Enforcement Officer, or an agent assigned by the Cleveland Police Chief, shall present the stop work order to the owner of the property, an authorized agent of such owner, or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property. Upon receipt of notice of the stop work order, activities in violation of this chapter shall cease immediately. 
(b)  Revocation of occupation license or other authorization. Any person failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject to revocation of the occupation license, work permit, building permit or other authorization for the conduct of business and associated work activities within the incorporated areas of this city of such person. 
(c)  Enforcement in municipal court. Any person who shall do anything prohibited in this chapter or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the municipal court of the City of Cleveland. Upon conviction, the court shall assess the person(s) or entity with a penalty, which may include fine, confinement, or both, in an amount permitted for the violation of city ordinances. The court may deem each day the violation exists as a separate offense. 
(d)  Civil penalties. Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $100.00 per day, not to exceed $500.00 per day. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Enforcement by injunction or mandamus. The Cleveland Mayor and City Council, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceedings to stop the violation. 
(f)  Failure to comply. If a person or entity fails to comply within the time specified, a violation shall have occurred and in addition to other penalties, any applicable performance or surety bond shall be subject to forfeiture. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-27. - City directional sign program. 
(a)  The city may, but shall not be required to erect, replace, repair, and maintain one or more structures upon which the city may affix, for a fee, signs identifying private commercial businesses within the city, and directing traffic in the direction of such businesses. 
(b)  There shall be multiple signs affixed to the same structure, on a first come, first served basis. 
(c)  All such signs shall be uniform in size. 
(d)  No business owner or operator may affix, remove, or modify any sign upon any such structure, and the entirety of the structures, and any signs affixed thereto, shall be the sole property of the city. 
(e)  The city shall establish and revise from time to time as necessary: 
(1)  An initial fee to cover the cost of manufacture, installation, affixation, and related expenses, of signs and sign structures; and 
(2)  An annual renewal fee to cover the cost of repair, maintenance, and replacement, of such signs and sign structures. 
(f)  No business owner or operator shall have a sign affixed to such sign structure, unless and until, such owner or operator shall have paid the initial fee, any renewal fee, is current on payment of all business license fees, occupation tax, and any other tax or fees owed to the city, and completed an application for affixation of such sign upon forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 44-28. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Liability . The approval of a master sign plan and/or a sign permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any applicant or other person or entity from the responsibility for damage to any person or property nor does such approval impose any liability upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents, for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  Repeal . The adoption of this chapter repeals ordinances and provisions of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances conflicting with the terms of this chapter. It is hereby provided that any provision of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances, and any applicable provision of governing state and federal laws, rules, and regulations, which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out or making effective the intent, purpose and provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to be in favor of the city. 
(c)  Effective date. The effective date of this chapter shall be February 22, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-22-2016) 
Chapter 46 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings and disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization for local government units to enforce collection of taxes, fees, or assessments for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3; authority of local governments to adopt and enforce local regulations for the handling and disposal of solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection means, where a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial premises means all premises not residential as residential is hereinafter defined in this section. Where the classification of a commercial premises cannot be determined conclusively from the foregoing definitions, such determination shall be at the discretion of the mayor or his designated representative. It is the intention of the mayor and council that any such unclassified commercial premises shall be placed in a class commensurate with the volume of solid waste produced by said premises. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing, or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location of land area where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in Rules of the Department of Human Resources, chapter 270-5-20, entitled Radioactive Materials. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn, or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Residential premises means all residential dwellings except motels and other dwellings offering lodging for hire. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Sanitary land filling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except water-carried body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § II; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Sec. 44-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The superintendent of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the exercise of his solid waste management duties, said superintendent shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Inspect and regulate the operation of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to insure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the superintendent of public works shall be subject to the review of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the superintendent of public works shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council, which body may, upon hearing, confirm, modify, or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § IX; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Secs. 46-3—46-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 46-23. - Responsibility for solid waste. 
The city, by and through its proper departments, shall be responsible for sanitation services within the city, including the collection and disposal of all garbage, trash and other refuse within the city except as hereinafter set out in this article; provided, however, that residential or commercial owners and occupants may dispose of refuse from their premises but each such owner or occupant will be required to pay the minimum monthly charge in order to defray part of the cost of providing sanitation and health services by the city. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § I; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Sec. 46-24. - Precollection. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth herein or under the express prior approval of the superintendent of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The superintendent of public works by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(b)  Containers. 
(1)  Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodentproof, and easily cleanable. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 55 gallons, except that bulk containers of a type accepted by the superintendent of public works as suitable for mechanical collection services or by publicly owned equipment used for such collection may be used. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection or causing them to hamper or injure the persons collecting waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(2)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed, and loaded in such manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(3)  No person shall place any solid waste in any container not owned by that person or in any container whose owner has not given said person permission to deposit solid waste in such container. No person shall place any solid waste in any container owned by the city without express permission of the city. 
(c)  Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored for collection in paper-board boxes or other throwaway containers strong enough to retain the waste; loose paper or cuttings shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Rubbish containers or bundles shall be placed for collection beside the solid waste containers. 
(d)  Placement. On days designated as collection days for the respective routes by the superintendent of public works, garbage and/or rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning same, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the property, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes, or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § III; Ord. of 7-8-1991; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Sec. 46-25. - Collection. 
Garbage, trash and refuse shall be collected from the various premises in the city by the proper departments of the city or as may be contracted by the city as follows: 
(1)  Frequency. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected as follows: 
a.  Residential premises: Once per week. 
b.  Commercial premises: 
1.  Premises where solid waste is collected in containers of 55 gallons or less: Twice per week, unless otherwise requested. 
2.  Premises where solid waste is collected in dumpsters or other containers of more than 55 gallons: Twice per week, unless otherwise requested. 
3.  Where necessity requires, collections may be made more frequently. Any premises obtaining additional collections shall be billed for said additional services in accordance with the frequency and magnitude of said additional services. 
(2)  Limitations. Industrial waste, large animals over 30 pounds, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations will not be collected, transported, or disposed of by public facilities; but such waste collection, transportation, and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste or animals. For the purposes of this article, landscaping wastes shall include leaves, limbs and yard clippings, and demolition wastes shall include household appliances and furniture. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § IV; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Sec. 46-26. - Hazardous wastes prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this article to place or to cause to be placed in any container, box, or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except under specific prior arrangement with the superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § IV; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Sec. 46-27. - Private collection contractors required to be licensed. 
No person other than employees of the city shall collect, transport, or dispose of solid waste for pay in the city without having first applied for and received a license to engage in such business as provided in chapter 12. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § IV; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Sec. 46-28. - Disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § V; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Sec. 46-29. - Fees and classification. 
(a)  Fees. Monthly charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Classification of establishments. For the purpose of determining the initial classification of establishments as to volumes of waste generated, the superintendent of public works shall make a volume survey of all establishments in the city to be served by public collection facilities. The superintendent shall observe each establishment for a period not less than one week, and the result of such survey and the classification established thereby shall be given in writing to each establishment. Similar surveys shall be made semiannually to determine whether changes should be made in classification and upon request of the owner of any establishment who feels his establishment is in an improper category, provided not more than two such surveys per year may be so requested. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § VI; Ord. of 1-9-1995; Ord. of 12-19-1998; Ord. of 6-13-2005, § I) 
Sec. 46-30. - Billing. 
(a)  Against whom levied. Service charges in accordance with the city fee schedule are levied against both the owner and the occupant of premises served, jointly and severally, but collecting from one shall relieve the other. 
(b)  Charges for solid waste collection and disposal. Charges for solid waste collection and disposal service shall be billed and collected monthly in advance by the 15th day of each month and shall be payable by the owner or occupant at the office of the city clerk. When such payment has not been made by the 15th day of any month, a ten percent penalty shall be added and collected. When such payment has not been made by the 15th day of the following month, service shall be discontinued until all arrears, including penalty, have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1989, § VII; Ord. of 12-19-1998) 
Secs. 46-31—46-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTERING 

Sec. 46-49. - Definitions. 
The following words terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn or dispose of a substance. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6971, or other federal regulations. 
Litter means all discarded substances and materials, including without limitation all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste materials, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, building or construction materials, demolition debris, mechanical equipment or parts, scrap tires, or any or all other material or substance of any kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial or mining operations. 
Litter receptacle means those containers acceptable to the city and which may be standardized as to size, shape, capacity and color, as well as any other receptacles suitable for the depositing of litter. 
Private property means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, whether inhabited to be used permanently or temporarily, or continuously uninhabited or vacant, which is 100 percent privately owned, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, parking area, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or pertinent to the dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any area that is used or held out for use by the public, whether owned or operated by public or private interests, including but not limited to, streets, parking lots, parking garages, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parks campgrounds, highways, alleys and other public ways. 
Sec. 46-50. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any conviction for a violation of this article shall be punishable by penalties as provided in section 1-16. 
(b)  In addition to the other penalties authorized by this article, in the sound discretion of the judge of the court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter by whomsoever deposited prior to the execution of sentence from any public park or public right-of-way, or from any private property if it can be established by competent evidence that such person has deposited litter thereon (provided that prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession is obtained), and the court may publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city the names of such persons convicted of violating section 46-52. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1990, § II(b), (c)) 
Sec. 46-51. - Compliance. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of the state or any political subdivision thereof, including the law enforcement officers of the city, or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of the city or any political subdivision thereof, is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1990, § IV) 
Sec. 46-52. - General prohibition; exceptions. 
It shall be a unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or any waters within the corporate limits of the city unless: 
(1)  The property has been designated by appropriate authority for the deposit of the litter and the person is authorized to use the property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on the property; 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1990, § II(a)) 
Sec. 46-53. - Dumping; unauthorized use of refuse container. 
(a)  No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of litter, any waste containing hazardous substances, or other refuse or unsightly matter on any public or private property unless the property is specifically approved by the city or state for dumping. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article to dump any domestic, industrial, commercial or mining waste or litter, or refuse into any private dumpster, container or private collection system without permission from the owner. 
(c)  The dumping of any litter or waste materials into any container specifically designated as a recycling container is prohibited unless the materials discarded are properly separated and sorted into categories which are deposited into the containers specifically approved for the same type of recyclable waste and not mixed with any other debris or refuse. 
Sec. 46-54. - Litter from motor vehicle, etc. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property and it is discovered to contain any item which may include, but not be limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, said article shall create a rebuttable presumption that the person identified thereon has violated the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1990, § III) 
Sec. 46-55. - Allowing escape of load material. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other public road within the city unless the vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; provided, however, that sand or any substance for increasing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway and the cleaning or maintaining of the roadway may be undertaken by the governmental agency having that responsibility. 
(b)  Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass, litter or other object has fallen or escaped which constitutes an obstruction or could damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel on the street, highway or other public road shall immediately cause the street, highway or public road to be cleaned of all glass objects and shall pay any costs for the removal. 
(c)  No provision of this section shall apply to any motor vehicle which is used exclusively for agricultural purposes and which is not operated on or over any public highway for any other purpose than the purpose of operating it across the highway or along the highway from one point of the owner's land to another part thereof, irrespective of whether or not the tracts adjoin or the purpose of taking the vehicle to a repair shop. 
Sec. 46-56. - Construction and demolition sites. 
(a)  All construction and demolition contractors, building permit holders, or property owners shall adhere to all provisions of this section. 
(b)  On-site refuse receptacles to effectively and securely handle the accumulation of all debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash and litter produced by those working on the site will be installed and maintained. 
(c)  All construction and demolition sites shall be kept in a litter-free condition. Under no circumstances shall the accumulation of littler become a threat to the public safety or to the public health, welfare, property, morality or good order of the city or portion thereof. 
(d)  All dirt, mud, silt, or any other earth deposited upon any public or private property, including streets and roads, as a result of construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the permit holder as to prevent any detectable amount of accumulation which may tend to cause a threat to the public safety, property values, both real and personal, or good order of the city or environment. 
(e)  Any construction supplies or materials, landscaping supplies or materials, or any other material deposited on a public road or right-of-way shall be removed on a daily basis, or immediately if the presence of the materials constitutes a threat to the public health or safety. In addition to all of the remedies and relief provided herein, the police chief of the city, or the building inspector of the city, or those agents as either may designate, employ, or assign, may immediately cause to cease all work being performed at the site by the issuance of a stop work order. No further work will resume at the site until the violation is corrected and inspected by the authority that issued the stop work order and all reinspection fees that are assessed are paid in full. 
(f)  Under no circumstances shall any litter, waste or debris, including, but not limited to, brush, limbs, stumps, roots and other byproducts of the construction or demolition process be buried on any property not expressly and properly permitted for the activity. 
Sec. 46-57. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the city, shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing refuse pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any the container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
Chapter 48 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Adoption of development specifications. 
The city has adopted, as stated in section 64-1, Standard Development Specifications, April 2002, that include street and sidewalk construction specifications. The adopted specifications shall be applicable to street and sidewalk construction within the city. A copy of the adopted specifications is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 48-2—48-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAINTENANCE 

Secs. 48-21—48-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 48-44. - Cutting or digging prohibited. 
No person shall dig into, cut into, or otherwise cause any impairment of any public road, street, alley, or sidewalk in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1002) 
Sec. 48-45. - Application to city to cut or dig. 
Any person desiring that public roads, streets, alleys, or sidewalks in the city be dug into, cut into, or otherwise altered or repaired, shall make application to the city through the secretary of the city council that the city perform such desired services. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1003) 
Sec. 48-46. - Removal of gravel, earth, or rock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or scrap up or carry away gravel, dirt, earth, rocks, or sand from any street, lane, sidewalk, or square of the city, or make any changes in the sidewalks or streets, without the permission of the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1004) 
Sec. 48-47. - Intrusions prohibited; removal. 
No person shall so construct or have constructed, or keep, have, or maintain any fence, gate, doors, house, steps, or other structure so as to intrude on any street or sidewalk of the city. The mayor shall immediately cause such intrusion to be removed at the expense of the owner of the property from which the same extends, and the cost of the same collected from the owner. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1005) 
Sec. 48-48. - Assemblages obstructing passage. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble in a crowd so as to in any manner obstruct the free passage of the streets or sidewalks in the city. Each person forming a part of such assembly, after notice by any officer or police officer of the city to disperse, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-16. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1007) 
Sec. 48-49. - Shade trees. 
It shall be unlawful to injure or destroy any shade trees on the streets, sidewalks, public squares, or cemeteries of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1008) 
Sec. 48-50. - Display or sale of merchandise. 
No person shall use any portion of the streets or sidewalks of the city for the purpose of displaying or selling goods, merchandise, or wares of any description except upon compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  For the purpose of encouraging and promoting trade and industry within the corporate limits of the city, the city council may issue a permit to a licensed business in said city to use for promotional purpose the sidewalk and street parking spaces immediately adjacent to the building occupied by the licensed business. Applications for permit shall be filed in accordance with chapter 40 and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(2)  Ordinances concerning building codes, permits, zoning, etc., are hereby waived and shall not be applicable to activities authorized pursuant to such permit. 
(3)  An applicant shall provide a liability insurance policy or an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city for injury to third persons or property of others resulting from street or sidewalk construction, obstruction or use by said applicant in connection with said promotion pursuant to such permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1009) 
Sec. 48-51. - Blocking, flooding or otherwise impairing use of streets. 
No person shall block, flood, or otherwise interfere with or impair the use of any public street, road, or thoroughfare in the city without first having secured permission from the city council. Any person giving or transmitting any order or instruction to block, flood, or otherwise impair the use of any public street, road or thoroughfare in the city without first having secured permission of the city council shall be guilty of the violation of this section. Each day that any such street, road, or thoroughfare is blocked, flooded, or the use thereof impaired shall be a separate and distinct offense and shall be punished as such. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-1001) 
Sec. 48-52. - Obstruction of public ways prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations to place on the sidewalks or the public square, or any alley, lane or avenue, any kind of hardware, building supplies, roofing, wire, implement or any other kind of merchandise, or any kind of obstruction or thing on said sidewalks, alleys, lanes, streets or public square. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-121) 
Sec. 48-53. - Seizure of material obstructing public ways. 
Any person, persons, firms, companies or corporations shall instantly remove all such obstructions as enumerated in section 48-52 when notified by the chief of police or other authorities of the city and upon failure to do so said authorities shall seize all such merchandise, wire, roofing, building supplies and other things and advertise and sell the same in the same manner as tax sales in said city and apply the funds derived from such sales to the payment of the cost of removing, selling of the same and to such fines and costs imposed upon the violators of a violation of section 48-52. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-123) 
Sec. 48-54. - Obstruction warning signals. 
Any person who shall cause any obstruction to be placed in any street, alley or sidewalk of said city shall display at such obstructions, during all of each night such obstructions may so remain, a sufficient danger signal or light to warn the traveling public of such obstructions and enable them to avoid injury from same; and any person failing to place and keep such signals as herein provided shall be fined and punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 8-102) 
Secs. 48-55—48-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-82. - Unlawful to drive through procession unless directed by a police officer. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, unless directed by a police officer to do so, to drive between vehicles comprising part of a funeral or other legally authorized procession while such procession is in motion; provided, that said vehicles are conspicuously designated as parts thereof. Permits for all processions other than funeral processions shall be obtained from the office of the mayor and council or, at their direction, from the office of the chief of police. No permit is required for funeral processions. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-880) 
Sec. 48-83. - Clearing streets for military parades. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and other police officers and patrol officers, upon application to the chief of police for such purpose, to clear the streets, or as much there as may be necessary, in advance of a parade of the military forces of the United States, or of the state, or of any portion of such forces of the federal or state governments, as the officers of such forces shall desire to use for the purpose of such parade; preference being given, however, to the United States mail, to the vehicles of the police and fire departments and to other authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-881) 
Sec. 48-84. - Clearing streets for civic parades. 
It shall likewise be the duty of the chief of police and other police officers and patrol officers, upon application, to clear the roadway of any streets necessary in the judgment of the chief of police, to be used for any authorized civic parade or procession. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-882) 
Sec. 48-85. - Arrest for violation of state laws as to parades. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other police officers to arrest any person whose obstruction of any military parade shall amount to a violation of the penal laws of the state, and to prosecute such offenders in the state courts in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-883) 
Secs. 48-86—48-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 48-114. - Purpose and findings. 
The mayor and city council find that special events, as herein defined, are a medium through which individuals may conduct certain lawful economic and noneconomic activities on the public properties, streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way lying within the city, and that the regulation of the location, size and duration of such special events is necessary to protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the city. By enacting this division the mayor and city council intend to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals, groups, organizations, clubs, associations or other entities to conduct such special events; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(3)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(4)  Reduce the possible adverse effects of such special events on the inhabitants and economic interests located in the city; 
(5)  Protect property values within the city by minimizing the possible adverse effects of such special events; 
(6)  Promote economic development; and 
(7)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of special events regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 1) 
Sec. 48-115. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Designee, when used to identify the designee of the city administrator, means the city clerk. 
Local civic group means local —primarily serving the needs of a particular limited district; civic group —of or relating to a citizen, a city, citizenship, or community affairs. 
Local non-profit group means local —primarily serving the needs of a particular limited district; non-profit —not conducted or maintained for the purpose of making a profit. 
Producer means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing, and conducting a special event. The producer must show the special event is a direct service or a direct beneficial benefit to the City of Cleveland and White County, Georgia. 
Special event means any organized activity having as its primary purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or which occurs on private property and impacts government services on a public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way. The special event must be a direct service or a direct financial benefit to the City of Cleveland and White County, Georgia. 
Vendor means any person who engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public property, street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. The term "vendor," as used in this division, shall not be construed to include or prohibit a permanent business, operating under the provisions of the occupational tax license ordinance and other applicable laws, from displaying goods or merchandise on a public sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the permanent business structure so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and so long as other laws and ordinances pertaining to such business or displays are complied with. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 2; Ord. No. 2012-13, Exh. A, 11-13-2012) 
Sec. 48-116. - Permits; applications; fees. 
(a)  Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the city without first obtaining from the city a valid permit for such special event. 
(b)  Geographic limitations. Each special event shall be conducted, located and limited to the specific geographic area authorized and permitted under the terms, conditions and restrictions of the city permit issued for each such special event and in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Time limitations. Each special event shall be limited in time to the dates and time periods authorized and permitted under the terms, conditions and restrictions of the city permit issued for each such special event and in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(d)  Activity limitations. Each special event shall be limited to those activities authorized and permitted under the terms, conditions and restrictions of the city permit issued for each such special event and in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(e)  Application. A producer of a special event shall make application for such permit at city hall in a form prescribed by the city, and file such completed application with the city clerk. Such applications may be obtained form the office of the city clerk. 
(f)  Application fee. A nonrefundable application fee as provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid upon the filing of each special event application with the city clerk. 
(g)  Time requirements for filing. Applications for special events which request the use of any public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way within the city, or for events which are to occur on private property and impact government services on a public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way, and which propose more than six persons as attendees, shall be filed with the city clerk at least 60 days prior to the date the special event is scheduled to occur. Applications for such special events the use or for events which are to occur on private property and impact government services on a public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way, and which propose six or fewer persons as attendees, shall be filed with the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the date the special event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the proposed special event. 
(h)  Permit fee. In addition to the application fee, the producer shall pay a permit fee in order to conduct a special event within the city. The amount of said fee shall be based on the services which the city may elect to provide to the producer of such special event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the city to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services. If, at the conclusion of the special event, the cost of the services provided by the city is greater than the initial permit fee, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this division. The initial permit fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the special event permit for such special event. The application fee and the permit fee specified in this division shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations of the city which might be applicable to such special event. No producer of any special event, except as otherwise provided for, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees required under this division, except as authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 3) 
Sec. 48-117. - Identification of producer. 
The producer of a special event, whether an individual, group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who shall also be the designated agent of any producer who is not an individual, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this division and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 4) 
Sec. 48-118. - Administrative review. 
The city administrator or designee will review each application in order to determine the nature and activities of the proposed event, and to evaluate the effect of such proposed special event on the city, and to determine the amount of the permit fee described in section 48-116. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 5) 
Sec. 48-119. - Special restrictions and conditions on permit. 
After such determination and evaluation by the city administrator or designee, the city administrator or designee may impose such special conditions or restrictions on said permit as may promote the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the city, and such special conditions and restrictions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this division. A violation of any of such special conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 6) 
Sec. 48-119.1. - Collections or fundraisers. 
Applicants who intend to solicit funds or sell goods must be a local civic group or a local non-profit group. Groups who are not located within the limits of White County and wish to solicit funds or sales must have a local civic group or a local non-profit group sponsor the event. The solicitation of funds and sale of goods must be a direct service or a direct financial benefit to the citizens of the City of Cleveland and White County, Georgia. A signed affidavit from the sponsoring group must accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-13, Exh. A, 11-13-2012) 
Sec. 48-120. - Prior permit from department of transportation. 
Any special event which is to use a portion of any state highway right-of-way lying within the city must also have obtained all required permits from the state department of transportation. It shall be the applicant's sole duty and responsibility to obtain all such permits prior to making application to the city for a special event permit. No city special event permit shall be issued without the proper state department of transportation permit first having been obtained, and a copy of same filed with the city clerk with the application for the city special event permit. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 7) 
Sec. 48-121. - Liability. 
The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any and all liability for damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver and indemnification shall be filed with, and made part of, the application for a special event permit. The producer shall be solely responsible for providing any and all insurance that may be necessary for any special event. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 8) 
Sec. 48-122. - Vendors. 
The sale of food, any merchandise and/or services of any type, by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event permit, if such vendor has been identified as a permitted vendor in the special event permit issued by the city. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business at any location or in any manner not authorized by the city permit. Any vendor so authorized by such permit shall be required to prominently display on his person a badge identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the permitted special event. Such identification shall not be less than three inches by three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in such special event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. The permitted vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, acting as a part of a permitted special event, shall be subject to applicable rules and regulations governing food service within the city, including, but not limited to, the rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the producer of a special event to assure such compliance by such vendors. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 9) 
Sec. 48-123. - Traffic and crowd control. 
Such traffic and crowd control on the public property, streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way lying within the city as may be deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council shall be provided by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 10) 
Sec. 48-124. - Toilet facilities. 
The producer of a special event shall be required to provide toilet facilities at any special event lasting more than three hours at which 200 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 11) 
Sec. 48-125. - Musical entertainment. 
Musical entertainment shall be provided in a manner consistent with the peace and good order of the city. The producer of the special event shall be responsible for full compliance with any and all ordinances governing such musical entertainment. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 12) 
Sec. 48-126. - Tents, stages and structures. 
Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands and other temporary structures and facilities constructed or erected as a part of a permitted special event shall be approved by the city prior to and after construction and erection. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 13) 
Sec. 48-127. - Public property closing. 
No public property, street, sidewalk or right-of-way shall be partially or completely closed as part of a special event unless such closure shall have been authorized in the special event permit issued by the city; provided however, the partial or complete closure of the public square of the city or any public street or right-of-way shall require the prior approval of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 14) 
Sec. 48-128. - Duration of permit. 
No special event permit issued under this division shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 15) 
Sec. 48-129. - Picketing and demonstrations, etc. 
Any person, group, or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession, or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place within the city, and may be required under the provisions of this division to conduct such protected activities in certain designated areas identified by the city. Any person, group or organization engaged in such protected activities is required to make application as set forth in section 48-116. However, any such person, group or organization shall be exempt from payment of the application and permit fees set out in section 48-116, and applications for such protected activities shall be filed with the city clerk not less than three days prior to said event. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 16) 
Sec. 48-130. - Funeral processions. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to any motorcade conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 17) 
Sec. 48-131. - Revocation of permit. 
If any permitted producer or vendor, and/or any employee, agent or contractor of such producer or vendor, during the course of the permitted special event, shall violate any law of the United States, the state, or any ordinance of the city, and an arrest is made or citation is issued arising out of such violation, the special event permit may be immediately revoked by the city administrator or designee, and all activities conducted under said special event duty shall be deemed an authorized designee of the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 18) 
Sec. 48-132. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to conduct a special event without having first obtained the necessary special event permit in the manner provided in this division shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-16. 
(b)  Action pursuant to any provision of this division shall not be a bar to the enforcement of this division by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the city, acting by and through the city administrator or designee, shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the city any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005(2), § 19) 
Secs. 48-133—48-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CAMPING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 48-151. - Urban camping and improper use of property. 
(a)  Definitions . For purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term camp and the term camping shall mean occupying or using a public park, public street, or private property for a living accommodation using a mobile, movable, or temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a tent, travel trailer, recreational vehicle, park trailer, sleeping bag, or blanket; and in the course of such occupation or such use: (a) lying or sleeping in a single place or limited area for any substantial prolonged period of time; (b) cooking or preparing meals; (c) depositing or discharging human waste in areas not authorized by the City of Cleveland for such deposit or discharge; or performing any other activity commonly associated with occupation of a residence; or any combination thereof. 
(2)  The term public park includes all municipal parks, public play grounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
(3)  The term public street includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
(4)  The term storing personal property shall mean leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Prohibited use of public park or public street. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any public park or public street, as defined in this section. 
(c)  Interference with ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit on, or to lie down on any public park, public street, or other public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from such public park, or public street, or other public property, or any combination thereof, or so as to interfere with ingress and egress to any private property accessed by means of such public park, or public street, or other public property, or any combination thereof. 
(d)  Prohibited use of private property. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner of a private property, a leaseholder of such private property, or other rightful occupant of such private property to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie upon, any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. Any such use of private property authorized by and consented to by the owner or leaseholder of such private property must be in conformity with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, including, but not limited to, the zoning and land use provisions of said Code of Ordinances which are applicable to such private property, and if such use is a violation of said Code of Ordinances, an authorization of such use by the landowner or leaseholder shall not nullify a violation of any provision of this section. 
(e)  Warning . No person may be arrested for violating this section until such person has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he or she is subject to arrest for urban camping, which shall be an ordinance violation. 
(f)  Exceptions . This section shall not be construed to prohibit any of the following behaviors: 
(1)  Uses of public parks or public streets authorized by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland; 
(2)  Camping on private property where such camping is a permitted use of such property under the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, and such camping is in conformity with the requirements of this section; 
(3)  A person or persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; and 
(4)  A person or persons in lying down, sitting on, or napping on a public park, public street, or private property where such activity does not constitute camping as herein defined, and such activity does not interfere with ingress and egress as defined herein. 
(g)  Hardship variance. A hardship variance for a use of private property which would otherwise be a violation of this section may be allowed for private property lying within a residential district under the city's zoning classification provisions of the City of Cleveland Code of Ordinances. All such hardship request must be made by the property owner and shall be governed by the zoning hardship procedures set forth in said Code of Ordinances. For the purposes of this section, a hardship which might be the basis for such a variance would be a landowner hardship which is an extremely unfavorable experience or event, dire financial condition, and/or lack of necessary means of subsistence. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, 11-4-2013) 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 
DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 48-201. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Cleveland (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public works infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A § 32-1-20, and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-202. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-203. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Cleveland, Georgia. 
Codified Ordinances and Code of Ordinances means those ordinances codified in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, together with those ordinances duly ordained and adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland, but not yet codified. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. "Construct" shall also include, but not be limited to, the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the rights-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or Facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. "Construction" shall also include, but not be limited to, the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the rights-of-way. 
Cleveland Building Official and City Building Official means the building inspector of the City of Cleveland, Georgia, or his or her designee, as may be designated by the mayor and council of the City of Cleveland. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public rights-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of the codified ordinances of the city. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was given or dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, there over or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the Utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor, or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-204—48-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 48-211. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, or otherwise, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-212. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the rights-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable, telephone, and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-213. - Incomplete registration. 
(a)  If a registration is incomplete, the Cleveland Building Official shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the Cleveland Building Official shall so notify the utility in writing, and if a registration is incomplete the Cleveland Building Official shall also so notify the utility in writing. 
(b)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in or to the rights-of-way or any part thereof. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances and the City Code of Ordinances, nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including, but not limited to, the city. 
(c)  Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-214. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this article adopting this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in the rights-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained, unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance, taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the rights-of-way, prosecuting the violator, and/or any other remedy provided by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, and/or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-215—48-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 48-221. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over, or under the public roads and/or the public road rights-of-way of the city without a utility permit from the city of in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-222. - Permit procedure. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the Cleveland Building Official upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as rights-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the Utility to use or occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-223. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the mayor and council of the City of Cleveland by appropriate resolution(s). A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the Cleveland Building Official and the city clerk of the City of Cleveland and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-224. - Issuance of permit. 
If the Cleveland Building Official determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the Cleveland Building Official may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the rights-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-225. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the Cleveland Building Official of each and every event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including, but not limited to, to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-226. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The Cleveland Building Official may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any provision of the City Code of Ordinances, or any law of the state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-227. - Cancellation for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the Cleveland Building Official determines there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach; and 
(2)  If the utility tails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-228. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-229—48-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 48-241. - Utility Accommodation Manual adopted. 
The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms, and appendix items [except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents)], promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the right, power, and authority of the mayor and council of the City of Cleveland, by ordinance duly ordained and adopted, to amend and modify this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the Cleveland Building Official and be open for public inspection. 
Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and said manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References in said manual to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Cleveland, acting by and through its mayor and council, and its officers, employees, and agents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-242. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, city utilities, traffic control devices, and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the rights-of-way or the rights-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-243. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city rights-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. in the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-244. - Installation of poles and other wire holding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wire holding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the rights-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of the city and the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-245. - Blasting. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state laws currently in place or as amended hereafter, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' prior notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-246—48-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 48-251. - Utility responsible for cost of repairs. 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-252. - Liability of utility to replace, restore or repair any street. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street. Facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, there over or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-253—48-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 48-261. - Availability of construction site for inspection. 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the Cleveland Building Official and to all others authorized by the Code of Ordinances of the city and by other law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-262. - Cessation of work due to violation. 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the Cleveland Building Official may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article, or the Cleveland Building Official may issue an order to the utility to correct the work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable codified ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-263. - Notification to city upon completion of construction. 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-264—48-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS, AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 48-271. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals required by the City Code of Ordinances, and by state and federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of said Code of Ordinances and such laws, and shall complete work in a way so as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways, or railways, and the Utility is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 48-315 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-272—48-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 48-276. - Fine for conviction of violation. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies as the city may deem appropriate, including, but not limited to the abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, revocation of licenses or permits, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 48-277—48-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 48-281. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-282. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city by issuing a written approval of registration or by issuing a permit under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which the city has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued an approved registration, or a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time and at all times. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-283. - Compliance. 
No utility and/or no person, legal or natural, including, but not limited to, any corporation, firm, institution, or other entity, shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the city to enforce compliance with this article or any provision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-284. - Appeal of administrative decisions. 
All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the Cleveland Building Official at 85 South Main Street, Cleveland, Georgia 30528. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-285. - Chapter headings. 
Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-286. - Repealer. 
Except as provided otherwise herein, the adoption of this article repeals ordinances and provisions of the Cleveland Code of Ordinances conflicting with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 48-287. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this article shall be February 22, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, 2-22-2016) 
Chapter 50 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

Sec. 50-1. - Adoption of development specifications. 
The city has adopted, as stated in section 64-1, Standard Development Specifications, April 2002, that include subdivision specifications. The adopted specifications shall be applicable to subdivision developments within the city. A copy of the adopted specifications are available in the office of the city clerk. 
Chapter 52 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county tax officials and administration, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-100 et seq.; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; miscellaneous local administration provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380; county sales and use taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; taxes on tobacco products, O.C.G.A. § 48-11-1 et seq.; levy of occupation taxes by counties and municipalities on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Scope of chapter. 
This chapter contains provisions regarding taxes levied by the city other than taxes and fees associated with business establishments, which are addressed in chapter 12. 
Sec. 52-2. - Enforcement by tax commissioner. 
The city may contract with the county tax commissioner to provide for enforcement of this chapter. 
Secs. 52-3—52-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 52-23. - Rate of levy. 
(a)  To meet the ordinary current expenses of the city, the city has levied an annual ad valorem tax in the amount provided by the city council upon all real and personal property within the city. 
(b)  To provide for a sinking fund for the payment of principal and interest on general obligation bonds, greater ad valorem tax may be levied upon all real and personal property within the city. Such levies shall be shown separately on all tax bills. 
Sec. 52-24. - Assessment and fair market value. 
All property subject to city ad valorem taxation shall be assessed at 40 percent of its fair market value. The basis for fair market value shall be 100 percent of the fair market value determined for the property by the city for city ad valorem tax purposes. Assessments for the city are handled by the county tax assessor. 
Sec. 52-25. - Appeal of assessments. 
Any taxpayer may appeal from an assessment by the county board of tax assessors in the manner provided by state law. 
Sec. 52-26. - Due date; interest on delinquent taxes; exception. 
The time fixed for the payment of any past, present or future ad valorem taxes shall be the date fixed by the county tax commissioner as specified on the tax bill issued by or on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1997, § 4) 
Sec. 52-27. - Failure to pay tax. 
The city shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
Sec. 52-28. - Taxes charged against owners and life tenants. 
Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property, if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of the property are chargeable with the tax thereon. 
Sec. 52-29. - Exempt property. 
All public property, all places of religious worship and places of burial, and all buildings used as a college, university, or other seminary of learning are exempt from ad valorem taxation. 
Sec. 52-30. - Tax execution docket. 
The county tax office creates and maintain a tax execution docket for the recording of all tax executions issued by the city. A copy of the tax execution docket shall be maintained for public inspection in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1997, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 52-31. - Cancellation of executions. 
Cancellation of tax executions shall be made when all unpaid taxes, penalty and interest sums have been paid. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1997, § 2) 
Secs. 52-32—52-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 52-51. - Rate of levy; compliance with state law. 
The city may impose sales and use taxes consistent with state law. 
Chapter 54 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Telephone and telegraph service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANTENNAS AND TOWER STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-21, §§ I—XIV, adopted Dec. 12, 2011, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 54-18—54-30, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 3-29-2004, §§ II—XIV. 

Sec. 54-18. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Telecommunications Antennae and Towers Standards Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § I, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-19. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Administrator means the City Administrator of the City of Cleveland, or his or her designee. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this article, the term "antenna" does not include: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multi-channel multi-point distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; or 
(3)  Any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
Camouflage or stealth means techniques to disguise, hide, or conceal cell towers from view. Such techniques must include designs appropriate to the area of installation. 
Governing body means the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland. For the purposes of this article, the words "city" and "governing body" are one and the same. 
Micro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than 20 feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than six antennae per site. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Telecommunications facilities refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
Tower means a structure or facility, including but not limited to a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole constructed as a free-standing structure, or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving of analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers, and associated facilities, structures and antennas. 
Whip antenna means a flexible, vertical rod, or radio antenna that would bend without breaking. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § II, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-20. - Scope and exclusions. 
This article shall apply to any telecommunications tower construction, erection, maintenance and/or renovation, and/or upgrade activity undertaken on any telecommunications tower in the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland by any person or persons, legal or natural, except for the following: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; provided, however, that the construction of any such and antenna is not located within 200 feet of any waterway. 
(2)  Any tower or antenna owned and/or operated by the City of Cleveland. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § III, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-21. - Design requirements. 
The general requirements for telecommunications towers set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications towers within the City of Cleveland, to-wit: 
(1)  Height . No telecommunications tower shall exceed 200 feet in total height. 
(2)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications towers, the owner of a telecommunications tower shall ensure that it is constructed, operated, maintained and/or repaired in compliance with all applicable City of Cleveland codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the city administrator. 
(3)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities and/or towers. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities and/or towers governed by this article shall bring such telecommunications facilities and/or towers into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating such standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility and/or tower is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted to the City of Cleveland every 12 months. 
(4)  Security . All telecommunications facilities and/or towers shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(5)  Lighting . No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities and/or towers unless required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction, or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the city shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(6)  Advertising . No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities and/or towers. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this article and the other codes, ordinances, rule and regulations of the City of Cleveland are met. 
(7)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities and/or towers shall be camouflaged or stealth to an appropriate design for the area of installation, including, but not limited to, such telecommunications facilities and/or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City of Cleveland, regardless of whether or not such city property is located in the City of Cleveland or not. Design must be pre-approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland. Telecommunication facilities and/or towers are subject to all applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration and other federal and state agencies. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting tower so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities and/or towers should be placed directly above, below or incorporated within the vertical design elements of a the associated building or structure in order to help in camouflaging such facilities and towers. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities and/or towers shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that is associated with telecommunications facilities and/or towers must be concealed from public view or made visually compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding visual backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(8)  Landscaping . 
a.  To the extent reasonably possible landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility and/or tower from any public way, public property and/or public or private residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the telecommunications facility and/or tower site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The City of Cleveland may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes; for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses, such as farms, nurseries and tree farms; or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain approved locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural locations or in developed industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the city. 
(9)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility and/or tower shall be automated to the greatest extent possible in order to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the transmission facility and/or tower site abuts or has access to a public street or highway, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of such public street of highway. 
(10)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility and/or tower shall be allowed, but may not be used for offices or vehicle storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility and/or tower shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility and/or tower. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities and/or towers may be located on sites containing another principal use if such site is otherwise in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, rule and regulations of the City of Cleveland. 
(11)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  All property necessary to satisfy setback requirements covering the total height of the tower shall be under the ownership or control of the applicant. The requirements for control may be satisfied by a properly executed and recorded (in the Deed Records of the Office of Clerk, Superior Court, White County, Georgia), instrument creating a perpetual easement. 
b.  Telecommunications towers must be set back from any adjacent property line, as measured radially from the base of the tower to said adjacent property line, a distance equal to the sum of the total height of the tower, plus the building set back distance specified for the tower site in the City of Cleveland Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities and/or towers: 
1.  Telecommunications towers must be set back from any off-site residential structure, as measured radially from the base of the tower to said off-site residential structure, a distance equal to the sum of the total height of the tower, plus the building set back distance specified for the tower site in the City of Cleveland Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  Each and every guy wire and accessory facility must satisfy the minimum building setback requirements of this article and the City of Cleveland Zoning Ordinance as though such guy wire and/or accessory facility were a separate structure. The point at which each guy wire is attached to the ground (i.e., the "ground end") shall be subject to the same setback requirements as though said ground end point were an antenna, and, as measured radially from said ground point to said adjacent property line, a distance equal to the sum of the length of the guy wire, plus the building set back distance specified for the tower site in the City of Cleveland Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  For antennas attached to the roof of a supporting structure, or on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ration (example: ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact, and such alternate placement is approved by the city. 
(12)  Additional requirements for towers. 
a.  Tower site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
b.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
c.  In no case shall a tower be located in the front yard, back yard or side yard of a residential lot, or upon property classified as residential under the City of Cleveland Zoning Ordinance. 
d.  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect any historic or scenic view corridors, as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency, or where such towers will create visual clutter. 
e.  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing devices or other similar protective devices designed to prevent tower access. 
f.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot owned by the applicant shall be permitted, provided that all applicable state, federal and City of Cleveland codes, ordinances, rules and regulations are complied with. No such tower such lot shall be located closer to an adjacent tower on such than the height of the taller tower. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § IV, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-22. - Application procedure. 
(a)  General application requirements for all building and other use permits. Application for a building, erection, maintenance/ renovation, or upgrade activity permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the City of Cleveland by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility and/or tower. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any telecommunications facility and/or tower permit authorized by this article and must be submitted with said application in order for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities and/or tower, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
(2)  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility and/or tower, including, but not limited to, any adjacent residential or commercial structures, roadways, and waterways. 
(3)  A report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
a.  Telecommunications facility and/or tower height and design, including technical and engineering data; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility and/or tower, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the telecommunications facility and/or tower structure; 
d.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunication facility and/or tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are in compliance with this ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cleveland, and are of adequate size to contain all debris should structural failure occur; 
e.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower, and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity; 
f.  Information showing the how the proposed telecommunication facility and/or tower would provide the needed coverage or capacity; 
g.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to the city and neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the proposed telecommunication facility and/or tower, including name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address; and 
h.  Identification of the geographic service areas for proposed telecommunication facility and/or tower, including a map showing the site and the nearest associated telecommunications facility sites within the network, including a description of the distances between the telecommunications facility sites, and a description of how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § V, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-23. - Future development. 
(a)  Two-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a two-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
(1)  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility and/or tower sites within the City of Cleveland. The list must include the following information for each site: 
a.  Land lot and district; 
b.  911 address if available; 
c.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
d.  The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
e.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
f.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
(b)  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations, but does know of area where telecommunications facilities and/or towers will be needed within the ensuing two years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(1)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the city. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The city will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The city shall carefully weigh such claims and the evidence presented in favor of them against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  Applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
c.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The city may approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
d.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(2)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the city to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § VI, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-24. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits . 
(1)  A request for a permit under this article shall be initiated by application to the city and handled in accordance with the permit provision of section 54-22 of this article. City of Cleveland, acting by and through the mayor and council, may issue a permit under this section, provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of this article, and all other applicable codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Cleveland, have been met and, further, provided that the benefits of and need for the proposed telecommunication facility and/or tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)  In granting a permit, the City of Cleveland may impose additional conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed telecommunication facility and/or tower on surrounding properties. 
(b)  Permit fees. A fee in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be charged for each application. Permits will be reviewed and a decision will be rendered within 45 days from the date of application. Permits will be effective for a period of 12 months. Expired permits will be treated as a new application upon re-submittal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § VII, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-25. - Co-locations. 
Applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § VIII, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-26. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the City of Cleveland, acting through its mayor and council, may be taken by any person aggrieved or affected by such decision. Such appeal shall be to the Superior Court of White County, Georgia, within 30 days of the decision of said City of Cleveland. Any decision by the City of Cleveland denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § IX, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-27. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of, local, state, and federal regulations and shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § X, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-28. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities and/or towers shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in all applicable codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Cleveland so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities and towers. If upon inspection by the administrator, or his/her designee, of any telecommunications facility it is determined not to comply with all such city codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility and/or tower into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility and/or tower is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the City of Cleveland may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility and/or tower is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the City of Cleveland may remove such facility and tower and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the City of Cleveland in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The City of Cleveland may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with all applicable city codes, ordinances, rules and regulations or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The City of Cleveland may seek to have the telecommunications facility and/or tower removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § XI, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-29. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility and/or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and/or tower and the owner of the property where the such facility and tower is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility and/or tower. If such abandoned telecommunications facility and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the City of Cleveland notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The City of Cleveland may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities and/or towers are removed. Delay by the City of Cleveland in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The City of Cleveland may seek to have the telecommunications facility and/or tower removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate telecommunications facility and/or tower regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned abandoned telecommunications facility and/or tower wishes to use such abandoned facility or tower, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article and all other applicable city codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, as though such telecommunications facility and/or tower were an unpermitted facility or tower. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § XII, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-30. - Pre-existing towers/non-conforming uses. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities and/or towers operative on the efffective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use and shall be treated as a non-conforming use site. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities and or towers. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility and/or tower that has received complete written approval by the city as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, but which has not yet been constructed or placed in operation, shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility and/or tower so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna on a non-conforming structure shall be considered an expansion of the non-conforming structure, unless given prior written approval by the City of Cleveland. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § XIII, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 54-31. - Penalty for violations of article. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility and/or tower covered by this article without having first obtained the necessary permit or variance in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City of Cleveland and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day during which the violation, or failure or refusal to comply, continues, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  If any telecommunications facility and/or tower is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article or without obtaining all required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the City of Cleveland, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use and/or to correct and/or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § XIV, 12-12-2011) 
Secs. 54-32—54-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PREPAID WIRELESS TRANSACTIONS 

Sec. 54-51. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of 75 cents. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 8-8-2011) 
Sec. 54-52. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. Chapter 8 of Title 48 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 2, 8-8-2011) 
Sec. 54-53. - Administrative provisions. 
The Clerk of the City of Cleveland is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of the ordinance from which this article was derived and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(l), within ten days of enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 3, 8-8-2011) 
Sec. 54-54. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 4, 8-8-2011) 
Chapter 56 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; cities and counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 56-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
Sec. 56-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Crosswalk means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of curb and property lines at intersections, or any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then of the lateral boundary lines, of two or more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one such street or highway crosses the other. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Official traffic signals means all signals, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the mayor and city council, for the purpose of directing, warning or regulating traffic. 
Official traffic signs means all signs, markings and devices, other than signals, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the mayor and city council for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic. 
Operator means any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Pedestrian means any person afoot or in a hand-wheeled vehicle. 
Pneumatic tires means tires of rubber and fabric or similar elastic material inflated with air. 
Police officer means any officer of the police department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway means every road or driveway not open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. 
Residence district means any street length between street intersections where more than 50 percent of the frontage is in use for residence purposes, or where so designated as such by ordinance. 
Right-of-way means the privilege of immediate use of the street or highway. 
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curblines, or that part improved and intended to be used for vehicular travel. 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while so set apart. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property lines. 
Slow or slowly, when used in this chapter or on any official traffic sign, means that the speed of a vehicle shall not exceed ten miles per hour and that the vehicle shall be under perfect control. 
Solid tires means all tires of rubber and fabric or similar elastic material other than pneumatic tires. 
Street or highway means every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purpose of vehicular travel. 
Through street means any street so designated by ordinance whereon traffic has right-of-way over that on intersecting streets, except boulevards. 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any prescribed lane of travel. 
Traffic control signal means any device using colored lights, sounds or words or any combination thereof, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is directed to stop and to proceed. 
Traffic lane means those spaces in a roadway bounded by real or imaginary lines prescribed for pedestrians or vehicular use. 
Trailer means any vehicle without motive power used for carrying property or passengers wholly on its structure and designed for being drawn by a self-propelled vehicle, except those running exclusively upon tracks. 
Truck means every vehicle designed for transporting materials. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-801) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
Secs. 56-3—56-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 56-23. - Duties of the police department. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the traffic rules and regulations of the city and all applicable state laws, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, and to cooperate with the other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-802) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); obedience to persons directing traffic required, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-2. 
Sec. 56-24. - Police department authorized to adopt emergency measures. 
The police department is empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, for the limit or duration of said emergencies or special conditions only. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-803) 
Sec. 56-25. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-807) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); obedience to persons directing traffic required, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-2. 
Sec. 56-26. - Signals and directions of traffic officers. 
Drivers shall be governed by the signals of traffic officers at intersecting streets and at all other times and places within the city. Drivers must at all times comply with any directions of any member of the police department as to stopping, starting, rate of speed, manner of approaching or departing from any place, the manner of taking on or discharging passengers or loading or unloading goods in any place, or directions deemed necessary by any police officer in the interest of the public safety and convenience. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-834) 
Sec. 56-27. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the operators of any vehicles owned by or used in the service of the federal, state, county or city governments; and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this article except as otherwise permitted herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-808) 
Sec. 56-28. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding bicycles or animals to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person propelling a pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions thereof with reference to the equipment of vehicles and except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-809) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate persons on toy vehicles preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(18); bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq. 
Sec. 56-29. - Impoundment and disposition of motor vehicles. 
(a)  Any person, at the direction of the chief of police or a duly certified police officer, is hereby authorized to remove, or have removed at their direction, a vehicle, from any public or private way or place, under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated, the council hereby finding and determining such vehicles under such circumstances to be obstructions to traffic or public nuisances. Such vehicle is authorized to be removed under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, subway or tunnel, or where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a public way is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or parked illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or left unattended on any public street with engine running or with keys in the ignition switch or locked; 
(4)  When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon any area or portion of a public street in violation of or contrary to a parking limitation or prohibition established by the chief of police, provided, such area or portion of such public street has been posted with an official sign giving notice both of such limitation or prohibition and of the fact that such area or portion of such street is a "tow away" area; 
(5)  When a vehicle is parked in violation of any traffic ordinance and is an obstruction or hazard or potential obstruction or hazard to any lawful function or limits the normal access to a use of any public or private property; 
(6)  When the driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by the police department and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street, highway or restricted parking area, or other public way; 
(7)  When the driver of a vehicle is reasonably suspected of using license plates or license permit unlawfully misusing a license plate or license permit issued to the driver, or a vehicle is parked without proper license plates or license permits, or with no license plates or license permit or driven or parked with an invalid or expired license permit; 
(8)  When the driver of a vehicle is driving without an operator's license or chauffeur's license which is current and valid, or who does not have such license in the driver's immediate possession, or who drives a vehicle contrary to restrictions imposed upon the license, or who drives a vehicle while their operator's or chauffeur's license has been denied, suspended, cancelled or revoked by the state; 
(9)  When a vehicle is found parked on or so near to any railroad track as to block the same in any manner; 
(10)  When any truck-tractor is found to be parked in any metered parking space; 
(11)  When any semitrailer is found to be parked in any metered parking space; 
(12)  When the driver of any vehicle, or the vehicle which the driver is driving, is reasonably suspected of having been involved in any hit and run accident; 
(13)  When any vehicle is reasonably suspected of being a stolen vehicle, or parts thereof to be stolen parts; 
(14)  When the driver of any vehicle is taken into custody for suspected felony or misdemeanor, or when the vehicle is suspected of containing stolen goods, or other contraband; 
(15)  When any vehicle is parked or stopped in an emergency access lane in violation of or contrary to a parking limitation or prohibition established by city ordinance, provided that such emergency access lane has been posted with an authorized sign giving notice both of such limitation or prohibition and of the fact that such area or portion of such public roadway or private property is a "tow-away" area. 
(b)  The owner of any vehicle so removed and impounded shall be required to pay storage and other costs incurred by virtue of such removal and impounding, regardless of the cause of the conduct necessitating such action by the police department. 
State Law reference— Disposition of personal property in the custody of law enforcement agencies, O.C.G.A. § 17-5-4; authority to remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-3. 
Secs. 56-30—56-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ACCIDENT REPORTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Accidents and accident reports, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-270 et seq. 

Sec. 56-47. - Records of traffic accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total number of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. All such records shall be public records. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-804) 
State Law reference— Traffic accidents, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-270 et seq.; reporting accidents, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-30 et seq. 
Sec. 56-48. - Investigation of accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents, to make arrests, and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-805) 
Sec. 56-49. - Traffic accident reports. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to maintain a suitable system of filing for traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed numerically by location. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-806) 
State Law reference— Duty of law enforcement officer to provide information to parties, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-273.1; reporting accidents, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-30 et seq. 
Sec. 56-50. - Immediate reporting of accidents, assistance to injured. 
In case of accident due to the operation of any vehicle, the driver thereof shall stop immediately and render such assistance as may be possible, giving his correct name, address, and license number to the person injured or to any who request such information, and shall report the accident immediately to the police department or the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-848) 
State Law reference— Duties of persons involved in motor vehicle accidents, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-270 et seq. 
Sec. 56-51. - Written report of accident. 
The driver of vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more shall comply with the reporting requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-270 et seq. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-849) 
State Law reference— Due to make immediate report of accident, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-273. 
Sec. 56-52. - When driver unable to report. 
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the notice not given by the driver. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-850) 
Sec. 56-53. - Public inspection of reports relating to accidents. 
(a)  All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department for the records for accident prevention purposes, or for the administration of the laws of the state relating to the deposit of security and proof of financial responsibility by persons driving or the owners of motor vehicles, except that the identity of a person involved in an accident may be disclosed when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. 
(b)  All accident reports and supplemental information filed in connection with the administration of the laws of the state relating to the deposit of security or proof of financial responsibility shall be confidential and not open to general public inspection, nor shall copying of lists of such reports be permitted except, however, that such reports and supplemental information may be examined by any person named herein or by his representative designated in writing. 
(c)  No reports or information mentioned in this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police department shall furnish upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department in compliance with the law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-851) 
State Law reference— Uniform reports and procedures, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-278. 
Secs. 56-54—56-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES 

Sec. 56-80. - General operating regulations. 
(a)  The operation of a fire department vehicle, police department vehicle, or ambulance, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated herein. All other emergency vehicles, when escorted by an official vehicle, may exercise the privileges stated in subsection (b) of this section, but subject to conditions stated herein. 
(b)  The driver of a fire department vehicle, police department vehicle, or ambulance may: 
(1)  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this section; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement of turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein presented to a fire department vehicle, police department vehicle, or ambulance shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red (or blue) light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of a fire department vehicle, police department vehicle, or ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-852) 
State Law reference— Authorized emergency vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-6. 
Sec. 56-81. - Right-of-way of certain vehicles. 
All city vehicles being operated by fire department personnel while in the performance of their duty and all city vehicles being operated by police department personnel while in the performance of their duty shall have the right-of-way on any street and through any procession in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-831) 
Sec. 56-82. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than on official business, to follow at closer than 200 feet any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive into or stop any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-854) 
State Law reference— Following emergency vehicles prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247. 
Sec. 56-83. - Driving over fire hose prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used in any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-827; Ord. of 12-13-2004, exh. A(7-827)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248. 
Secs. 56-84—56-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 56-110. - City to provide for installation and maintenance. 
The city council shall provide for the installation and maintenance of traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-870) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of official traffic control devices preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(2); traffic signs, signals, etc., O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20 et seq. 
Sec. 56-111. - Manual and specifications. 
(a)  State routes. All traffic control signs, signals, and devices installed on state routes within the city after adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall comply with the provisions of the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration under 23 CFR 655, subpart F (23 CFR 655.601—655.607), as adopted by the state department of transportation. 
(b)  Non-state routes. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this section shall be official traffic control devices. Traffic control devices on non-state routes shall be as specified by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-871) 
Sec. 56-112. - Driver to obey. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instruction of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-872) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 4-6-20. 
Sec. 56-113. - When traffic signs required for enforcement purposes. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-873) 
Sec. 56-114. - Traffic control signal legend. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, the following colors only shall be used and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green alone. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow alone. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter. 
b.  No pedestrians facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green is shown alone. 
(3)  Steady red alone. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain stopped until green is shown alone. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green is shown alone. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-874) 
State Law reference— Meaning of traffic signal indications, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-21. 
Sec. 56-115. - Flashing signals. 
Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-875) 
State Law reference— Flashing red and yellow signals, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-23. 
Sec. 56-116. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which supposed to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-876) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-25. 
Sec. 56-117. - Unlawful to paint street or curb without specific authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a citizen or a police officer, to paint any part of the street, curbing or sidewalk with paint of any color, except, however, duly constituted employees of the police department who may paint the street, curbing or sidewalk under authority of an ordinance or resolution of the mayor and city council specifically authorizing the painting or making. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-877) 
Sec. 56-118. - Interference with official traffic control devices or signals. 
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-878) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-26. 
Sec. 56-119. - Crosswalks and safety zones. 
The city council is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in its opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as it may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-879) 
State Law reference— Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalks, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-91; driving through safety zones prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-98. 
Sec. 56-120. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland hereby approve of and authorize the use of speed detection devices by the Cleveland Police Department in the use of traffic control within the city limits of the City of Cleveland. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland hereby name all streets, roads, or public ways inside the City of Cleveland in which such devices are to be used as set forth in a schedule, which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, the traffic engineer, and the Cleveland Police Department. The schedule is hereby incorporated herein and made part of the section by reference. 
(c)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland may apply to the Georgia Department of Public Safety for a permit to authorize the use and employment of speed detection devices on streets, above referred, and to take an action that may be appropriate to authorize use of the same as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, §§ I—III, 5-13-2013) 
Secs. 56-121—56-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 56-137. - Observance of rules and regulations required of operators of all vehicles. 
The owner, operator, driver, or person in charge of any cart, dray, wagon, hackney, coach, omnibus, automobile, truck, taxicab, carriage, buggy, motorcycle, tricycle, bicycle, or other vehicle used, propelled, or driven upon the streets of the city shall conform to and observe the following rules and regulations upon all such streets, alleys, avenues, and public places in said city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-811) 
State Law reference— Required obedience to traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1. 
Sec. 56-138. - General rules. 
Any vehicle, except when passing another vehicle going in the same direction, shall at all times keep as near the righthand curb as possible and shall at all times be driven in a careful manner with due care for the safety and convenience of pedestrians and all other vehicles. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-812) 
State Law reference— Driving on right side of roadway and exceptions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-40. 
Sec. 56-139. - Driver's license required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, driver, or chauffeur of any motor vehicle to drive or operate the same or permit the same to be driven or operated on the streets of the city, unless the person operating such motor vehicle has a valid and currently effective driver's license as required by the laws of the state. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-815) 
State Law reference— Drivers' licenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 56-140. - Minimum driving age. 
No person who is less than 16 years of age shall drive any vehicle within the corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise authorized by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-816) 
State Law reference— Drivers' licenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 56-141. - State license tags. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on the streets of the city a vehicle for which a state license tag is required, unless such state license tag for the current year shall be so attached to the vehicle as to be visible and legible at all times. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-817) 
State Law reference— Registration and licensing of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-20-1. 
Sec. 56-142. - Rules for passing overtaken vehicles. 
A vehicle overtaking another vehicle going in the same direction shall first give an audible warning and then pass on the left side of the overtaken vehicle and not pull to the right until entirely clear of it. No vehicle shall pass another overtaken vehicle on top of a hill, or a curve, or while passing a street intersection. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-813) 
State Law reference— Overtaking a vehicle on the left, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-42; overtaking a vehicle on the right, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-43. 
Sec. 56-143. - Boarding and alighting. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle, or ride or jump upon the vehicle without the consent of the driver, or have any part of the body protruding beyond the limits of the vehicle while the same is in operation. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-814) 
Sec. 56-144. - Driving while under influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person while in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics to such an extent as to deprive him of full possession of his normal faculties to drive or operate any vehicle in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-821) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391 et seq. 
Sec. 56-145. - Driving on sidewalk prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-828) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of sidewalks prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; stopping, standing, or parking on sidewalks prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-203. 
Sec. 56-146. - Limitation on backing. 
No vehicle shall be backed unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-829) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-240. 
Sec. 56-147. - Emerging from alley or private driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on to a sidewalk or on to the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-830) 
State Law reference— Vehicle entering roadway, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-73; entering highway from private driveways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-144. 
Sec. 56-148. - Driving past men working on streets. 
All drivers of vehicles, particularly motor vehicles, in approaching work being done upon any part of any street, by either city employees or employees of public utility corporations, or by permission of the city, shall slow down their vehicles until, in passing such work or workmen, the rate of speed shall be within the limit prescribed by the modifying word "slow" as prescribed elsewhere in this chapter; provided, however, that such workmen or the foreman in charge of them shall place ahead of the work or workmen, in such a conspicuous location that it can be seen by the driver of the approaching vehicle, a sign to read as follows: "Men working—slow—city law"; the letters of such sign to be in accordance with the Standard National Code, and preferably to be made of reflector buttons, but if reflector buttons are not used, such signs shall be properly lighted at night. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-835) 
State Law reference— Yielding right-of-way in highway construction zones and for maintenance vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-75. 
Sec. 56-149. - Reckless driving. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in the city recklessly or at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use of the streets or so as to endanger the property, life, safety or convenience of any person or property. It shall also be unlawful to suddenly accelerate the speed of a vehicle either from a stationary position or while in motion; or to accelerate the vehicle in such a manner as to cause any portion of the vehicle to swerve or slide, in any manner; or to drive a vehicle in such a manner as to cause the tires of the vehicle to make a loud or squealing noise; or to accelerate a vehicle in such a manner as to cause any tire of the vehicle to make or leave a black mark upon the surface of the street. Exceeding the speed limits provided in this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that said vehicle was operated in a reckless manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-822; Ord. of 12-13-2004, exh. A(7-822)) 
State Law reference— Driver to use due care; proper use of radio or mobile telephone, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-241; intentional operation of motor vehicles to create danger to persons or property, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-251; reckless driving prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390. 
Sec. 56-150. - Obstruction to driver's view or to driving mechanism. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive the same when such vehicle is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat thereof such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such position as to interfere with either the driver's view ahead or to the rear, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-823; Ord. of 12-13-2004, exh. A(7-823)) 
State Law reference— Obstruction to driver's view of control of vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-242. 
Sec. 56-151. - Use of bicycles, roller skates, scooters, skateboards, and other similar devices. 
(a)  Traffic ordinances apply to persons riding bicycles. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, roller skate, rollerblade, ride a skateboard, ride a scooter, or any other similar devices on public sidewalks or in city maintained parks, within the city limits. 
(c)  No person shall park a bicycle upon any street or highway other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrians. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to roller skate, rollerblade, ride a skateboard, or any other similar device on any public street or highway within the city limits of the city. Persons riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2004, exh. A(7-824)) 
State Law reference— Bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; bicycles to obey traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-291; authority to regulate persons on toy vehicles preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(18). 
Sec. 56-152. - Bicycles and motorcycles; one rider only. 
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride at the same time upon a bicycle or motorcycle, unless such vehicle is designed for the use of more than one person and equipped with a seat for each such person. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-820) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate persons on toy vehicles preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(18). 
Sec. 56-153. - Regulations for protection of the blind. 
(a)  All drivers of vehicles, motor-driven or otherwise, who observe any person in the act of crossing the street from one sidewalk to the other at intersecting streets, using a white cane or white cane with a red end or accompanied by a service dog, shall immediately bring such vehicles to a complete stop and permit such person to cross said street in safety. 
(b)  The protection granted in this section shall be given only to those pedestrians who are wholly or partially blind. It shall be unlawful for any person not wholly or partially blind to use a cane of the kind described in this section or service dog for the purpose of signaling or stopping vehicular traffic while crossing the street. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-825; Ord. of 12-13-2004, exh. A(7-825)) 
State Law reference— Blind pedestrian right-of-way, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-94. 
Sec. 56-154. - Officers may be detailed to control movement of vehicles during private funerals. 
It shall be within the power and discretion of the chief of police, upon notice from funeral directors, having in charge any funeral to occur at the residence of any person, of the time and place of such funeral, to detail police officers to direct the passing of such house by vehicles other than police or fire machines or ambulances, during the progress of the funeral. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-826; Ord. of 12-13-2004, exh. A(7-826)) 
State Law reference— Regulations regarding following too closely not applicable to funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-49; disruption of funeral procession prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34.2. 
Sec. 56-155. - Towing of vehicles restricted. 
No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 15 feet in length. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-833(e)) 
Sec. 56-156. - Improper operation of off-road vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Off-road vehicle unless the context otherwise requires, means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. The term "off-road vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel-drive or low-pressure-tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles (including trail bikes and minibikes), amphibious machines, ground effect or air-cushion vehicles, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind. The term "off-road vehicle" does not include any motorboats; any military, fire or law enforcement vehicle; any vehicles used exclusively on airports; all farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility service and maintenance, for earth moving, construction or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
(b)  This section shall be considered as cumulative to any and all other laws, rules and regulations regarding the subject matter; however, if this section is in conflict with existing rules, regulations and resolutions, then where it is in conflict this section shall prevail and be considered governing. 
(c)  As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-7-5, any person operating an off-road vehicle in the city under any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be in violation of this section: 
(1)  Without operative brakes, or without mufflers or other silencing equipment; 
(2)  In such a manner as to make, continue to make, or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which either endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the county, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 50 feet from the point of origin of such sound or noise; 
(3)  On any private property without the property owner or his agent being present or without being in possession of the expressed written permission of the property owner or his agent; 
(4)  On the right-of-way of any street, highway, avenue, lane, public throughway, etc., of the county; 
(5)  On the roadway of any street or highway of the county without complying with all appropriate state laws and county ordinances. 
Secs. 56-157—56-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TURNING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Turning, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-120 et seq. 

Sec. 56-181. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city council is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall provide for the placement of proper signs at such intersections. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-855) 
Sec. 56-182. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to disobey the directions of an authorized sign indicating that a right, left, or U-turn is not permitted. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-856) 
Sec. 56-183. - Limitations on turning around. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the city except at an intersection. Such a turn is then permissible only if the movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-857) 
Secs. 56-184—56-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, and parking generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 56-205. - Prohibited in specified places; no signs required. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, at any place where prohibited by official signs or regardless of the presence or absence of such signs, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  At any place marked by yellow curbing; 
(5)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(6)  On a crosswalk; 
(7)  Within ten feet of the corner of any street; 
(8)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(9)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of said entrance, when properly signposted; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  Any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of any provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the city prohibiting or regulating parking or vehicles upon the streets or other places of the city, or for a period exceeding 24 hours is hereby declared a public nuisance and a trespasser on the public right-of-way, and an obstruction upon the streets, and a hazard to traffic thereon, and any public officer upon discovering any such vehicle shall remove such vehicle or cause the same to be removed to any city-owned or operated property where the same shall be kept and detained until the owner of such vehicle, his agent or representative obtains an order from the chief of police authorizing such vehicle to be surrendered, or upon the order from the recorder's court of the city after a hearing shall be had thereon as herein provided. 
(d)  If such vehicle remains in the custody of the city exceeding a period of 30 days, under any one of the circumstances enumerated in subsection (c) of this section, and after a reasonable effort has been made on the part of the city police to locate the owner of such vehicle, then and in that event, the same may be advertised for sale one time in the official county organ and ten days after such advertisement, same may be sold at public sale on the property where the vehicle is located. Proceeds of said sale, after expenses, are to be deposited in the general funds of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-858) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-203; officers authorized to remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206. 
Sec. 56-206. - Parking prohibited after 12:00 midnight. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park and leave standing or cause to be parked or left standing any automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other similar vehicle on any of the paved streets and in the public square in the city for a period exceeding one hour after 12:00 midnight. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-859) 
Sec. 56-207. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-860) 
State Law reference— Parking procedure, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200; obstruction of intersection prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-205. 
Sec. 56-208. - Parking for repairs restricted to emergencies. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-861) 
State Law reference— Disabled vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-204. 
Sec. 56-209. - Parking vehicles for sale on rights-of-way prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended on or within the right-of-way of any public road in the incorporated areas of the city any used motor vehicle that is marked for sale or otherwise displayed for sale. A vehicle shall be considered to be displayed for sale when a reasonable person would perceive that the vehicle is for sale without having to inquire whether the vehicle is for sale. 
(b)  The law enforcement officials of the city are authorized and empowered to impound any vehicle found to be in violation of this section. The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible for all expenses and charges incurred in the towing and storage of the vehicle. 
Sec. 56-210. - Authority of city council to prohibit parking in certain areas. 
The city council is hereby authorized to provide, at its discretion, for the erection of signs prohibiting parking upon either or both sides of any street when such parking would, in the opinion of the council, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous or congested condition. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-862) 
Sec. 56-211. - Reserved spaces. 
Parking spaces may be reserved by the city council for the exclusive, free occupancy of such city and county officials as the council may designate. Any reserved spaces so provided shall be clearly marked as such. No vehicles except those permitted by this section shall be parked in these spaces. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-863) 
Sec. 56-212. - Standing for loading or unloading only in certain places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, or for the unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, and in no case shall a vehicle block the free movement of vehicles from parking spaces. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-864) 
Sec. 56-213. - Backing vehicles into curb to take on or discharge loads. 
In places where, and at such hours as, stopping for loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-865) 
State Law reference— Parking procedure, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200. 
Sec. 56-214. - Parking signs required. 
Whenever by any ordinance of the city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited in designated areas, except as provided in section 56-205, it shall be the duty of the city council to provide for the erection of appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-866) 
Sec. 56-215. - Motor vehicles left unattended; brakes to be set and engine stopped. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of said vehicle and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or the side of the street or highway. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-867) 
State Law reference— Parking procedure, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200. 
Sec. 56-216. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped on a street during the time between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise, or at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any vehicle on the street from a distance of 200 feet, there shall be displayed upon such vehicle two or more lamps, one of which shall be on the roadway side and project a white light visible under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and one of which lamps shall project a red light under like conditions for a distance of 500 feet to the rear of such vehicle, except that such parking lights need not be displayed upon any vehicle stopped or parked in accordance with other provisions of this chapter upon any street designated by the mayor and city council where there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet upon such street. If a red glass reflector is installed in the rear of such vehicle and is in place, same may be used without turning on the red taillight provided for elsewhere in this chapter; but said glass reflector must be of approved design. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-868) 
State Law reference— Parking procedure, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200. 
Secs. 56-217—56-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPEED REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; power of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 56-241. - Maximum speed allowed. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on the public streets of the city at a rate of speed greater than 25 miles per hour, excluding state routes unless otherwise posted. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-844) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 56-242. - Reduced speed required at intersections. 
Upon approaching any street intersection, curve, or other place of danger, all drivers of vehicles shall slow down to such a speed, not exceeding ten miles per hour, as not to endanger the life or limb of any pedestrians or other persons and shall have said vehicle under complete control. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-845) 
Sec. 56-243. - Reduction of speed when speed hazards exist. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions and with due regard for the actual and potential hazards that exist. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street, road, highway or other avenues of travel, in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care and caution. 
(b)  Where no speed hazards exist that require lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the speed of any vehicle not less than the minimum limits or not in excess of the maximum limits or established as authorized herein, shall be lawful, but no speed in excess of the maximum limits specified in this section, or established as authorized by this section, shall be unlawful unless special hazards exist that might require lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section. 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 56-244. - Driving at unnecessarily slow speed prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person unnecessarily to drive at such slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-846) 
State Law reference— Minimum speed regulation, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-184. 
Sec. 56-245. - Slow moving vehicles. 
Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets abreast, but one must follow behind the other and keep as near the righthand curb as possible. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-847) 
State Law reference— Minimum speed regulation, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-184. 
Sec. 56-246. - Speed detection device authorized. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland hereby approve of and authorize the use of speed detection devices by the Cleveland Police Department in the use of traffic control within the city limits of the City of Cleveland. 
(Res. of 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 2016-14, § I, 11-14-2016) 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; authority for use or speed detection devices by local law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2; requirements that local government obtain state permit, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Sec. 56-246.1. - Schedule of streets, roads, and public ways in which speed detection devices used. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland hereby name all streets, roads, or public ways inside the City of Cleveland in which such devices are to be used as set forth in a schedule, which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, the traffic engineer, and the Cleveland Police Department. The schedule is hereby incorporated herein and made part of the section by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14, § II, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 56-246.2. - Permit for use and employment of speed detection devices. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland may apply to the Georgia Department of Public Safety for a permit to authorize the use and employment of speed detection devices on streets, above referred, and to take an action that may be appropriate to authorize use of the same as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14, § III, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 56-247. - List of roadways for city on-system. 

 
(Ord. of 2-9-2004(2), § II; Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
Secs. 56-248—56-272. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 56-273. - Lights on vehicles operated at night required. 
All vehicles used or operated on any street, alley, or highway in the city during the time from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise shall have thereon two lighted lamps not to exceed 32 candlepower, each visible from the front of every such vehicle, excepting bicycles and motorcycles which shall have one such light on the front. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-818) 
State Law reference— Lighting equipment, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 56-274. - Light dimmers required. 
The operator of a motor vehicle shall use his lights during the prescribed hours in such manner as to exhibit only the dim or short range lights while operating said vehicle within the city limits. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-833(c)) 
Sec. 56-275. - Use of spotlights prohibited. 
The use of a spotlight on a vehicle is prohibited, except that it may be used to illuminate only the right side of the street and for a distance not to exceed 15 feet diagonally in front of the vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-833(f)) 
Sec. 56-276. - Improper wheels. 
No vehicle with wheels so constructed as to cause dents or imprints on paved streets shall be allowed on any paved streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-819) 
Sec. 56-277. - Unnecessary noise, sounding of horns prohibited. 
No person shall make, cause, or permit to be made any unnecessary noise by any vehicle, its horn, or other noise-making device. Operators of vehicles are prohibited from sounding their horns while said vehicle is stopped or waiting for a traffic block to pass. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-832) 
State Law reference— Operation of radio at level audible at distance of 100 feet or more prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; exhaust systems, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71. 
Sec. 56-278. - Use of siren or gong prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle actually on emergency call, to use a siren or gong. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-833(a)) 
Sec. 56-279. - Brakes required. 
All motor vehicles shall be equipped with two sets of adequate brakes kept in good repair at all times, except that motorcycles shall be required to have only one set of brakes in good repair. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-833(b)) 
Sec. 56-280. - Projecting loads restricted. 
No vehicle shall be allowed the use of the streets with a load projecting more than four feet in rear of the body of said vehicle or more than one foot to either side of the vehicle, unless said load has a red flag at least 12 inches square attached to the extreme ends of said projecting load during the daylight hours, and a red light or lantern securely attached to the projecting load during the night hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-833(g)) 
Secs. 56-281—56-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Rights and duties of pedestrians, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-90 et seq. 

Sec. 56-309. - Right-of-way. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk, or within any unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by a police officer or traffic control signals, or at any point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead crossing has been provided. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any intersection, to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(c)  Pedestrians shall not cross streets or thoroughfares at any point other than legally designated marked or unmarked crosswalks. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle or the pedestrian from the duty to exercise due care. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-839) 
State Law reference— Pedestrian's right-of-way in crosswalk, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-91; blind pedestrian right-of-way, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-94; pedestrians required to yield to authorize3d emergency vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-99. 
Sec. 56-310. - Controlled intersections. 
On streets where traffic at intersections is controlled by traffic control signs or by a police officer, pedestrians shall not cross a roadway against a red or stop signal and between adjacent intersections so controlled and shall not cross at any place except in a marked or unmarked crosswalk. A pedestrian crossing or starting across in any such crosswalk on a green or go signal shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, including those making turns, until such pedestrian has reached the opposite curb or a safety zone, and it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail to yield the right-of-way to any such pedestrian. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-840) 
State Law reference— Pedestrian's right-of-way in crosswalk, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-91; blind pedestrian right-of-way, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-94; pedestrians required to yield to authorized emergency vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-99. 
Sec. 56-311. - Jaywalking prohibited. 
Pedestrians shall cross streets only at street intersections or crosswalks and shall not cross street or crosswalk intersections diagonally. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-841) 
State Law reference— Pedestrian required to obey traffic control devices and traffic regulations, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-90. 
Sec. 56-312. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk. 
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of a crosswalk. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-842) 
Sec. 56-313. - Pedestrians soliciting rides. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any private or commercial vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 7-843) 
State Law reference— Pedestrians soliciting rides or business, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97. 
Chapter 58 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq.; municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; public water systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.; water supply, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-470; sewage and waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 et seq.; refusal by city or county to supply water because of indebtedness of prior owner, occupant, or lessee prohibited and limited liens for unpaid utility charges, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND CHARGES 

Sec. 58-19. - Monthly rates. 
(a)  All water furnished by the city to users shall be computed monthly on rates set by city council and will be paid promptly by the water customers. The council may require a deposit from the customer before installing the water meters. 
(b)  Set rates shall apply only to users or property served by water within the corporate limits of the city. Higher rates for water furnished by the city to users or property outside the corporate limits shall be set if the council deems necessary. 
(c)  Users or property served by the city system shall be charged an amount determined by the city council and paid promptly. The city council is authorized to discontinue water service to any customer who is not current in payment of his water bill upon written notice by the city of the user or customer that unless his delinquent account is not paid within 15 days from receipt of the notice. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-501) 
Sec. 58-20. - Deposits. 
(a)  Residential deposits. An applicant, seeking water or sewer service, or both, to users or property situated within or without the corporate limits, shall be required to provide to the City of Cleveland a deposit. Only one deposit, per location, shall be required from each applicant, whether or not said applicant is seeking only water service, only sewer service, or both water and sewer service. The schedule for determining the amount of the deposit required is as follows: 
(1)  Persons seeking water and/or sewer service who own the property to be serviced: $75.00. 
(2)  Persons seeking water and/or sewer service who rent the property to be serviced: $150.00. 
(b)  Commercial deposits. An applicant seeking water or sewer service, or both, to users or property situated within or without the corporate limits shall be required to provide to the City of Cleveland a deposit. Only one deposit, per location, shall be required from each applicant, whether or not said applicant is seeking only water service, only sewer service, or both water and sewer service. The schedule for determining the amount of the deposit required is as follows: 
(1)  Restaurants—Water and/or sewer service: $500.00. 
(2)  Hotels, convention centers, water parks, industrial and manufacturing—Water and/or sewer service: $1,000.00. 
(3)  Other commercial accounts—Water and/or sewer service: $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, adopted Nov. 7, 2011, repealed former § 58-20, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-506. 
Sec. 58-21. - Liability of property owner for water and/or sewer bills of tenants. 
In every instance the property owner, where only city water service is used, only city sewer service is used, or both city water and city sewer service is used, to users or property situated within or without the corporate limits, shall be liable to the city for applicable rents and in the event his tenant shall fail to pay the charges when presented, then the bill shall be presented to the property owner or his agent, and on his failure or refusal to pay same, the city water and/or city sewer shall be at once cut off from the premises and no connection shall be made with such premises until all arrears together with the cost of connection shall have been paid to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-508; Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Sec. 58-22. - Notice to discontinue service. 
Any persons wishing to discontinue the use of city's water system, use of the city's sewer system, or both the city's water and sewer system, must give notice to the office of the Cleveland Utility Department; and they will be charged for the water and/or sewer until such notice is made. A final bill will be charged if the customer's request is received ten or more days after the 15th of the month. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-509; Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Sec. 58-23. - Special rate or meter required. 
No continuous flow of water will be allowed unless a special rate is fixed or a meter used. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-510) 
Sec. 58-24. - Metering and billing. 
(a)  All water service shall be fully metered and said water meters shall be read monthly to the nearest 100 gallons and bills rendered monthly on such reading. 
(b)  All sewer service shall be computed from the monthly water usage. Sewer users only will be computed by the water meter installed from another source, or by a sewer use meter installed by the user. 
(c)  All water furnished by the City of Cleveland to users or property situated within or without the corporate limits shall be metered and computed monthly and paid for at the rates set in section 58-31. 
(d)  All sewer service furnished by the City of Cleveland to users or property situated within or without the corporate limits shall be computed monthly and paid for at the rates set in section 58-31. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-513; Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Sec. 58-25. - Faulty or inaccurate meters. 
In the event any meter shall be found to be inoperative at the end of any given billing period or to be faulty or inaccurate for any reason, the meter will be replaced or repaired as soon as possible, and the bill for water used during the current period shall be the average of the last three monthly bills. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-514) 
Sec. 58-26. - Additional charge for overdue bills. 
If any bill for water service and sewerage service shall be and remain due and unpaid for as long as 15 days after rendition, there shall be an additional charge of ten percent added thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-515) 
Sec. 58-27. - Discontinuance of service for overdue bills. 
If any bill for water service and sewerage service shall be and remain past due and unpaid for as long as 30 days, water service and sewerage service to such delinquent consumer shall be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until all past due bills including cut-off fee and cut-on fee have been paid. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the operator of the water and sewerage system of such delinquency, who shall proceed immediately to the premises, of the customer so in arrears and disconnect service. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-516) 
Sec. 58-28. - Fire hydrant rentals; automatic sprinkler system charges. 
The rental for public and private fire hydrant service and the charge for service to automatic sprinkler systems shall be as set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-517) 
Sec. 58-29. - Unlawful to tamper with meters or system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or change any water meter, or to make any connection to the system without permission or to reconnect service, until such bill has been paid in full, including the cut-off fee and the cut-on fee. In addition to all other applicable penalties, any person violating this section shall be subject to a meter tampering fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-518) 
Sec. 58-30. - No free service. 
No water or sewerage service shall be furnished or rendered without charge. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-520) 
Sec. 58-31. - Water and sewer rates. 
Rates for water and sewer services shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 58-32. - Methods of payment. 
(a)  The City of Cleveland shall accept as payment for amounts due under this article, the following methods of payment: 
(1)  Cash; 
(2)  Check; 
(3)  Money order; 
(4)  Credit card/debit card (Visa, MasterCard, Discover). 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall require the City of Cleveland to accept a particular type of credit card for the payment of amounts due under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Sec. 58-33. - Sewer service availability. 
Unless otherwise determined, and as the city can feasibly accommodate, sewer service is only available to areas within the Cleveland water service area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Secs. 58-34—58-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation, the authorized representative means: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manner in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, the authorized representative means a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, the authorized representative means a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c)) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR 405—471. 
City means the city council, or personnel appointed by the city council, to enforce and carry out duties of this article. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastewater and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the board of commissioners and their duly appointed assistants. 
High strength wastewater means wastewater which contains quantities of specified constituents that exceed the quantities normally encountered in domestic wastewater as defined in section 58-104. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial wastewater means wastewater in which the solid, liquid, and gaseous wastes from process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development or recovery of any natural resource (as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes) is found. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: 
(1)  Section 405 of the Act; 
(2)  The Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); 
(3)  Any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; 
(4)  The Clean Air Act; 
(5)  The Toxic Substances Control Act; and 
(6)  The Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infections agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
New source. 
(1)  The term "new source" means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or (1)c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant means dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment coordinator means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 58-84. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which are owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler lowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 58-84. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Superintendent means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § II; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1.4) 
Sec. 58-52. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 

 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1.3) 
Sec. 58-53. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote refuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all users of the city's publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the establishment of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § I; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1.1) 
Sec. 58-54. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city council shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city council may be delegated by the city council to other city personnel. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 1.2) 
Sec. 58-55. - Toilets or privies required. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain, or use any residence, place of business or other buildings or place where persons reside, congregate, or are employed which is not provided with means for the disposal of human excreta, either by a flush toilet connected with a sewerage system approved by the state health department or a privy which meets the requirements of construction and maintenance, set out by the state health department, of the ordinances of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-502) 
Secs. 58-56—58-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 58-84. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 11.0 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the pretreatment coordinator in accordance with section 58-93(d); 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permits; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the pretreatment coordinator; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the pretreatment coordinator in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; or 
(17)  Fats, oils, or grease concentrations of vegetable or animal origins in concentrations greater than 150 mg/l. 
(c)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § III; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.1) 
Sec. 58-85. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR 405—471 are hereby incorporated: 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the pretreatment coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the pretreatment coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § IV; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.2) 
Sec. 58-86. - Local limits. 
(a)  The city is required to develop and enforce local limits governing the quality and quantity of user discharges to the city's POTW. The city has established limits for a number of critical pollutants based on the design capacity of the POTW, NPDES permit requirements, receiving stream water quality standards, and POTW worker safety. Background loadings for the domestic and commercial loadings were based on locally collected data where possible, otherwise EPA data was used. Maximum industrial discharge concentrations were derived for various pollutants to accomplish the requirements of this subsection to protect human health and the local environment. 
(b)  Because plant operation characteristics can change and state and federal standards for water quality are subject to change, the local limits are also subject to revision. Therefore, the city reserves the right to revise a user's discharge permit to restrict the volume or mass of particular pollutants previously permitted. If necessary, the city has the right to revoke a user's permit if such discharge would result in a direct or indirect violation of state or federal standards by the POTW. 
(c)  Local limits have been calculated in accordance with the considerations of this section and are provided in the following table: 

 
*Equivalent mass-based limits may be imposed at the city's discretion 
Note: All metals are "total" metals unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § III(p); Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.3) 
Sec. 58-87. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements than the provisions of this article, including the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.4) 
Sec. 58-88. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The pretreatment coordinator may impose mass limitation on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.5) 
Sec. 58-89. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Generally. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction, methods used in excavating and placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench for building sewers, shall all conform to local building codes, plumbing codes and all other applicable requirements of the city. In cases of conflict or in the absence of guiding provisions, materials and procedures set forth in ASTM and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall govern. All joints of the building sewer shall be tight and waterproof. No installation of pipe or other materials for sewer extensions shall be allowed until required information is received and the design is approved by the city. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city's supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe. Bolted mechanical joints may be required by the superintendent where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the city. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and water tight. 
a.  Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C564. 
b.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
c.  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber O-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of the gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
d.  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the city. 
(6)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hold into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45 degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city. 
(b)  Prohibitions. No building sewers shall be connected to a sanitary sewer until drawings are received and until the extension has been inspected, tested, and accepted by the city. Groundwater, rainwater, mud, and gravel shall be kept out of the sanitary sewer system at all times, including during construction. 
(c)  Other regulations. Design and construction of sanitary sewer extension shall comply with all local, state, and federal rules and regulations pertaining to sewer installation, including, but not limited to, rules and regulations for safety, erosion and sediment control, stream buffer protections, wetlands, and water quality standards. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.6) 
Sec. 58-90. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city's sewer system, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this division. 
(d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(e)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.7) 
Sec. 58-91. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  When a public sanitary sewer is not available in accordance with this division, building sewers shall be connected to private on-site sewage management systems complying with the provisions of the city, the health officer, and the state department of human resources. The following conditions shall apply for private on-site sewage management systems: 
(1)  Approval to construct, repair, alter, enlarge and/or use privies, privy vaults, cesspools, aeration systems and septic tanks shall be granted by the health officer. The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal in a sanitary manner at all times in accordance with the conditions of this article, and any special conditions imposed by the city, at no expense to the city. The city or health officer shall have the right to inspect such facilities at reasonable times with prior notice. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the applicable local, state and federal laws. The city will not approve any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil disposal where the lot area is less than 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Approval to install and operate private sewage lift stations that discharge sewage from private property into the POTW must be obtained from the city. Final approval shall be granted only after the city reviews and approves the plans and specifications. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage lift station at no expense to the city and according to established standards. The city shall have the right to inspect at reasonable times with prior notice the private sewage lift stations and require improvements necessary to satisfy the requirements set forth in this article. 
(3)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(4)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(5)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(6)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(b)  No requirement contained in this division shall be construed to relieve the applicant of any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction. 
(c)  At such time as public sewer becomes available within 100 feet to the property served by a private sewage disposal system, the city may require a direct connection to be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(d)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(e)  Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening, into the city sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided herein. 
(2)  A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. 
(f)  Any premises that have a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer stating that the system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and ordering that the system be corrected. 
(g)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(h)  No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.8) 
Sec. 58-92. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as specified in the city fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(b)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(c)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(d)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(e)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city or its representative. 
(f)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(g)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(h)  If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(i)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 2.9) 
Sec. 58-93. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 58-84 with the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the pretreatment coordinator, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator for review, and shall be acceptable to the pretreatment coordinator before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the pretreatment coordinator may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(2)  The pretreatment coordinator may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided in accordance with the requirements outlined in subsection (e) of this section when, in the opinion of the pretreatment coordinator, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential uses. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the pretreatment coordinator and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(5)  Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to install a suitable monitoring manhole on the building sewers on their property to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewaters. The manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the industrial user at his expense and shall be maintained by the industrial users as to be safe and accessible at all times. It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge, or cause, or allow to be discharged, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the city, any industrial wastewater which bypasses or does not flow through, the monitoring manhole, unless discharged through a NPDES permitted facility or disposed of off-site at a licensed disposal facility. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the pretreatment coordinator shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The pretreatment coordinator may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the pretreatment coordinator may develop such a plan for any user at the user's expense in the event that a user does not develop a plan in a timely manner. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the pretreatment coordinator of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 58-96(f); 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response; 
(5)  A drawing of sufficient scale and quality to identify chemical and wastewater storage areas in the facility, sewer drain locations in and around the facility, material handling areas, and storage of emergency response equipment if required to protect the POTW from a slug discharge. 
(d)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the pretreatment coordinator, and at such times as are established by the pretreatment coordinator. Such waste shall not violate this division or any other requirements established by the city. 
(2)  The pretreatment coordinator shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The pretreatment coordinator may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The pretreatment coordinator also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this division. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the pretreatment coordinator. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the pretreatment coordinator. The pretreatment coordinator may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The pretreatment coordinator may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(e)  Commercial wastewater pretreatment. 
(1)  Requirements for installation of a sand and oil/grease interceptor shall be as follows: 
a.  All users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide oil/grease interceptors or traps. Additionally, any user who generates wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of oil and grease regulated under section 58-84(17), and provided that the excess oil and grease is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease interceptor or trap, then said user will be required to install a grease/oil interceptor. 
b.  All users whose wastewater stream is associated with unusually large quantities of grit, sand, or gravel shall be required to install a sand trap. All car/truck wash systems shall be required to install sand traps. 
c.  The requirements of this section shall not apply to private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(2)  Design criteria for required sand and oil/grease interceptors at restaurants and other eating establishments shall be as follows: 
a.  All interceptors shall have a capacity of 15 gallons per seat. 
b.  No grease trap shall be smaller than 750 gallons nor larger than 3,000 gallons. 
c.  All sand and oil/grease interceptors shall be sized, located and constructed in accordance with the plumbing code, adopted by the city, city specifications, and/or approved by the city. 
(3)  Design criteria for required sand and oil/grease interceptors for establishments other than eating establishments shall be as follows: 
a.  All interceptors shall have a capacity that will provide not less than ten minutes nor more than 30 minutes retention time at the peak eight hour flow rate. 
b.  Flow through velocities shall not exceed one foot per second at the peak eight hour flow rate. 
(4)  Maintenance requirements. 
a.  All grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense. The frequency of removal shall be such as to ensure that no overflows of oil, grease, or sand into the wastewater system ever results. 
b.  All grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall provide continuous efficient operation. 
c.  Users shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates, means of disposal which are subject to review by the city. 
d.  At a minimum, grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained at the following intervals: 
1.  Monthly for establishments serving an average of 200 or more customers per day; 
2.  Quarterly for establishments serving an average of 100—200 customers per day; 
3.  Every six months for establishments serving an average of 100 or fewer customers per day; and 
4.  Or a schedule set forth by the pretreatment coordinator. 
e.  Within 30 days of a pumping or maintenance activity, each user shall submit records of proper maintenance and disposal of wastes to the city. The following information, as applicable, must be provided as a minimum: 
1.  Generator information. 
(i)  Name and physical address of facility; 
(ii)  Volume of waste pumped; 
(iii)  Date and time of pumping activity; 
(iv)  Signature of authorized representative. 
2.  Transporter information. 
(i)  Name and address of hauler; 
(ii)  Permit number; 
(iii)  Name and signature of driver. 
3.  Receiver information. 
(i)  Name and physical address of facility; 
(ii)  Permit number; 
(iii)  Volume of waste received; 
(iv)  Date and time waste was received; 
(v)  Signature of authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § IX; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 3; Ord. No. 2014-11, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-94. - Wastewater discharge permit—Application. 
(a)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the pretreatment coordinator, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 60 days of the request. The pretreatment coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the pretreatment coordinator, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The pretreatment coordinator may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 58-100 through 58-102. 
(4)  Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(c)  Permitting for existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the pretreatment coordinator for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the pretreatment coordinator. 
(d)  Permitting for new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(e)  Application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application supplied by the city. The pretreatment coordinator may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 58-96(a)(2); 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by: 
a.  Type; 
b.  Amount; 
c.  Process; and 
d.  Rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. 
(1)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person who manages the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(2)  Permit application and user report certification statements must be signed as follows: 
a.  By a responsible corporate officer, defined as follows: 
1.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
2.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operating facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
b.  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; 
c.  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (f)(2)a and (f)(2)b of this section if: 
1.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections (f)(2)a and (f)(2)b of this section; 
2.  The authorization specifies either an individual or position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator or a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental affairs for the company; and 
3.  The authorization is submitted to the city. 
(g)  Permit decisions. The pretreatment coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the pretreatment coordinator will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The pretreatment coordinator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § VIII(a)—(c); Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 4) 
Sec. 58-95. - Same—Issuance process. 
(a)  Permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the pretreatment coordinator. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the pretreatment coordinator to ensure compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Permit appeals. The pretreatment coordinator shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the pretreatment coordinator to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the pretreatment coordinator fails to act within 60 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the appropriate court within the legal designated statute of limitations. 
(d)  Permit modification. The pretreatment coordinator may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(e)  Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days' advance notice to the pretreatment coordinator and the pretreatment coordinator approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the pretreatment coordinator must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(f)  Permit revocation. The pretreatment coordinator may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the pretreatment coordinator of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the pretreatment coordinator of changed conditions pursuant to section 58-96(e); 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the pretreatment coordinator timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(g)  Permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 58-94(e), a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(h)  Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(1)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the pretreatment coordinator shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (h)(1) of this section, the pretreatment coordinator shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as the pretreatment coordinator may deem necessary. 
(3)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (h)(1) of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this division and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 58-87. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
b.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
c.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the pretreatment coordinator; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the pretreatment coordinator; 
d.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the pretreatment coordinator with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
g.  A provision ensuring the pretreatment coordinator access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator; and 
h.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § VIII(d), (e); Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 5) 
Sec. 58-96. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the information listed in subsections (a)(2)a through (a)(2)e of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall submit the following information: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner; 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes; 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e); 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the pretreatment coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (j) of this section; 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (k) of this section; 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section; 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 58-94(f). 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (d) of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the pretreatment coordinator no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the pretreatment coordinator. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(2)d through (a)(2)f of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 58-94(f). 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Both categorical industrial users and significant industrial users shall, at a frequency specified by the user's permit, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and local permit limits and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 58-94(f). 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the pretreatment coordinator, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (k) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the pretreatment coordinator of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 58-94(e). 
(2)  The pretreatment coordinator may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 58-94(g) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 58-95(d) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 30 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by the industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the pretreatment coordinator of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the pretreatment coordinator, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (f)(1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the pretreatment coordinator as the pretreatment coordinator may require. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must verbally notify the pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the pretreatment coordinator within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The pretreatment coordinator has the authority to waive resampling requirements if the pretreatment coordinator monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the pretreatment coordinator samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information, to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: 
a.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
b.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and 
c.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (e) of this section. The notification requirement in this subsection does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c), and (d) of this section. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (i)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the pretreatment coordinator, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutants analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(k)  Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (k)(2) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the pretreatment coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. All wastewater monitoring samples, required by the city, shall be tested by an independent Georgia certified laboratory for the parameters required, with the results submitted to the city on the original laboratory report sheets. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. All measurement, test, in house monitoring analyses of the characteristics of wastewaters shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, or in accordance with any applicable EPA testing procedure of general acceptance in the chemical testing industry, however, all such analyses shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 136, in which requirements shall prevail in the event of conflict. 
(3)  All pretreatment plants shall be operated by an individual with a minimum Georgia Certified Wastewater Industrial Operator. 
(l)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(m)  Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques or methods used; 
(5)  Preservative used to protect the samples; and 
(6)  Results of such analyses. 
Also, a chain-of-custody record should be maintained that records the signatures of all persons handling the samples, date and time that samples changed hands, type of samples collected, and security measures employed such as sealed containers, etc. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, §§ VI, XI; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 6; Ord. No. 2014-11, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-97. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this division and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into the user's premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the city has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant to enter the facility. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § XIII; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 7) 
Sec. 58-98. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the pretreatment coordinator, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 8) 
Sec. 58-99. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance; pretreatment violations. 
The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the pretreatment coordinator believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violations which the pretreatment coordinator determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 9) 
Sec. 58-100. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pretreatment coordinator may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the pretreatment coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The city may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city council at a regular or called meeting to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 60 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1½ percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city will hear the matter at a regular or called council meeting. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. The city may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (h) of this section are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the pretreatment coordinator prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (c) or (h) of this section. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 58-95(f), any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in this division. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, §§ XIV, XV; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 10) 
Sec. 58-101. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the county superior court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of not less than $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other longterm average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this division, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § XVIII; Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 11) 
Sec. 58-102. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The pretreatment coordinator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this division, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated to the city its ability to comply. 
(c)  Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the pretreatment coordinator. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of local regulations governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 12) 
Sec. 58-103. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  An upset is an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 58-84(a) or the specific prohibitions in section 58-84(b)(3) through (b)(7) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  Exceptions. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c)(3) and (c)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Notices. 
a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the pretreatment coordinator, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the pretreatment coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain: 
1.  A description of the bypass and its cause; 
2.  The duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
The pretreatment coordinator may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Prohibition or approval of bypass. 
a.  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
1.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
b.  The pretreatment coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the pretreatment coordinator determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (c)(4)a of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 13) 
Sec. 58-104. - Wastewater treatment rates. 
(a)  Establishment of high strength wastewater. All users discharging high strength wastewater into the city wastewater system shall be assessed a monetary surcharge, in addition to the normally required sewer use charges, in an amount to be calculated as shown below. The surchargable parameters shall be determined by the utilization of the sampling and testing procedures as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The term "high strength wastewater" means wastewater which contains pollutant concentrations that exceed the following surcharge threshold concentrations: 

 
(b)  Fees for high strength wastewater. When the concentrations of the surcharged parameters shown in subsection (a) of this section exceed the values of the constituents as set forth in the table in subsection (a) of this section, the excess concentrations shall be subject to a surcharge in the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: 

 
Where: 
;sz=9.5; P Is equal to the average concentration in mg/l of the parameter being evaluated (BOD or TSS) as established in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. The surcharge is for pollutants in excess of the amounts established by the city in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
;sz=9.5; G Is equal to the user's monthly water consumption in thousands of gallons as determined in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
;sz=9.5; 8.34 Is a conversion factor. 
;sz=9.5; C Is equal to the unit cost in dollars per pound for the treatment of the surcharged parameters. This value shall be established by the city and revised from time to time as necessary in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  Quantitative measurement of surchargable parameters. The measurement of the surcharge parameters shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Unless a user has indicated on the wastewater permit application, or otherwise demonstrated that seasonal or otherwise predictable fluctuations may occur, the city shall sample and test the user once per year, except that the duration of the sampling to determine surcharges shall be for a period of not less than three calendar days. Procedures regarding collection of representative samples are provided in subsections (c)(5) and (c)(6) of this section. 
(2)  A 24-hour composite sample shall be collected over three consecutive days. Samples shall be taken in increments of not more than one hour, properly refrigerated and composited in proportion to the flow for a representative sample. If a flow monitoring structure is available, or required by the city, flow-weighted samples may be collected in lieu of time-weighted samples. 
(3)  All wastewater monitoring samples required by the city shall be tested by an independent laboratory using acceptable procedures in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
(4)  The city need not provide any prior notice to the industry with regard to the sampling period. 
(5)  The city may sample the user as often as desired at the city's expense if, in the opinion of the city, representative samples have not been previously obtained. 
(6)  If in the opinion of the user, the samples taken by the city are not representative of the user's typical wastewater, then the user may request a resampling. At the user's request, the city shall grant the user not more than two resamplings per year. All users requested resampling shall be done at the user's expense. A reasonable cost shall be charged to the user by the city therefor. 
(7)  The surcharge rate shall be established based on an average concentration for each surchargable parameter identified in accordance with subsections (c)(1) through (c)(6) of this section. The average concentration will be used in the formula in subsection (b) of this section. Surcharge rates per unit mass will be established in accordance with subsection (e) of this subsection. 
(d)  Determination of wastewater volume. Unless otherwise provided, the volume of wastewater delivered to the POTW will be based upon the quantity of water purchased from and metered by the city. If the volume of water delivered to the POTW is greater or less than the volume purchased from the city, the user shall make known to the city such differences. If differences do exist, it shall be the obligation of the user to install city approved meters or other devices to determine the portion or quantity of wastewater delivered to the POTW. At locations readily accessible for meter reading by the city, separate water meters installed in the city right-of-way are preferred for measuring nonsewered consumptive water usage. The city may consider establishing a constant ratio, factor, or percentage to be applied to the metered water quantity delivered by the water industry. Determining, as well as justifying, the factor to the city will be the responsibility of the user. The value of this factor may be periodically reviewed for accuracy by the city. Other methods may be established by the city to estimate the quantity of wastewater released to the sanitary sewer which considers the amount of water consumed during different seasons. Users that claim wastewater volumes to be inaccurately determined by these methods shall bear the expense of installing city-approved meters to estimate flows to the POTW more accurately. 
(e)  Authority to collect fees. The city has the authority to collect fees and surcharges necessary to implement this article. The city shall elsewhere maintain a list of fees and surcharges required under the terms of this article. Limits and fees may be modified from time to time and may change without notice to users. This list shall be available for review or copying from city hall, the director of public works, or the pretreatment coordinator upon written request. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 14) 
Sec. 58-105. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2000, § 15) 
Secs. 58-106—58-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARD DEVELOPMENT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 58-124. - Description and general requirements. 
This section provides the requirements for furnishing and installing sewer pipe, precast concrete manholes, casings, service lines, railroad crossings, highway crossings, jack and bores, sewage lift stations, and related equipment and materials. 
(1)  Sewer mains. All sewer mains shall be eight-inch diameter pipe minimum. All sewer mains shall terminate at a manhole. 
(2)  Service lines. Service lines serving a single-family residence shall be four-inch or six-inch diameter pipe. Service lines serving multifamily units or large water using commercial establishments shall be six-inch diameter pipe, or larger. Each residential unit shall be served by a single service line that exclusively serves only one unit. 
(3)  Street crossings. All street crossings shall be by jack and bore unless expressly approved otherwise by the city in writing, and shall be cased. 
(4)  Small sewage lift stations (three horsepower pumps and smaller, serving no more than two residential or commercial units). All small sewage lift stations, where required, shall be approved by the city on a case-by-case basis. The city will not accept ownership or operational responsibility of small sewage lift stations. At a minimum all small sewage lift stations shall have the following: 
a.  Dual solids-handling pumps, each pump having its own check and gate valve. 
b.  Hank and automatic operation of both pumps. 
c.  The pumps shall operate on the lead-lag principal. 
d.  The pumping system shall have audio and visual high level alarms. 
e.  The access hatch for all sewage lift stations shall be three inches or greater aboveground surface elevation. 
f.  The developer and/or property owner shall maintain ownership and operational responsibility for all small sewage lift stations. 
g.  Small sewage lift station force mains shall be pressure tested. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(A)) 
Sec. 58-125. - Submittals. 
The developer shall submit drawings and product data conforming to the requirements of these specifications for all proposed sanitary sewers and appurtenances. Plans should meet the appropriate requirements specified in this division. In addition to plans, the following forms and letters must be submitted to the city for each gravity sewer, force main and pump station submittal: 
(1)  Provide a sanitary sewer extension submittal form that is signed by the mayor or city clerk. The engineering consultant must not sign the form; 
(2)  Verify whether the project is within the city limits. Provide a report of technical review prepared by the Soil and Water Conservation District (project is within the city limits), or a state-waters-determination letter from EPD indicating whether state waters are present on the project site (project is under county jurisdiction); 
(3)  Provide a letter indicating that the city has adequate transport and treatment capacity to treat wastewater from this project and is willing to accept the project wastewater. Also that the city will ensure that all provisions of the applicable erosion and sedimentation control programs will be enforced; 
(4)  Provide a letter indicating that according to the records of the city none of the sewers, services, or any other utilities associated with the project is to be constructed on a solid waste landfill. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(B)) 
Sec. 58-126. - Materials. 
(a)  Gravity sewer mains. A gravity sewer is a pipe that transports wastewater from a lateral to an interceptor. A gravity sewer is a minimum of eight inches in diameter or greater and/or contains manholes. All gravity sewer mains shall be eight-inch diameter pipe minimum. All sewer mains shall terminate at a manhole. All sewer mains shall be designed to maintain a minimum flow velocity of two feet per second or greater when flowing one-half full based on Kutter's formula using an "n" value of 0.013. The following are the minimum slopes which shall be provided; however, slopes greater than these are desirable: 

 
These minimum slopes shall be used only when sufficient flows are expected to maintain a velocity of more than two feet per second and maintain a cleansing action in the line. Sewers shall be laid with uniform slope between manholes. Sewers on 20 percent slope or greater shall be ductile iron pipe and shall be anchored securely with concrete anchors (see standard details) to prevent displacement by erosion or shock. Maximum slope of sewers shall be 30 percent and sewers shall be designed at less than 20 percent whenever possible. 
(b)  Service laterals. A lateral is an extension from a building drain to a public sewer. A lateral is less than eight inches in diameter, does not contain manholes, may contain cleanouts and is less than 250 feet in length. A lateral should be installed in accordance with the state plumbing code. Service laterals serving a single-family residence shall be four- or six-inch diameter pipe. Service laterals serving multifamily units or large water using commercial establishments shall be six-inch diameter pipe, or larger. Each residential unit shall be served by a single service line that exclusively serves only one unit. 
(c)  Interceptors. An interceptor is a large sewer that is used to intercept a number of main sewers and convey the wastewater to a wastewater treatment facility. 
(d)  Street crossings. All street crossings shall be ductile iron pipe (DIP) and by jack and bore unless expressly approved otherwise by the city in writing, and shall be cased. 
(e)  Small sewage lift stations (three horsepower pumps and smaller, serving no more than two residential or commercial units). All small sewage lift stations, where required, shall be approved by the city on a case-by-case basis. The city will not accept ownership or operational responsibility of small sewage lift stations. At a minimum all small sewage lift stations shall have the following: 
(1)  Dual solids-handling pumps, each pump having its own check and gate valve; 
(2)  Hand and automatic operation of both pumps; 
(3)  The pumps shall operate on the lead-lag principal; 
(4)  The pumping system shall have audio and visual high level alarms; 
(5)  The access hatch for all sewage lift stations shall be three inches or greater aboveground surface elevation; 
(6)  The developer and/or property owner shall maintain ownership and operational responsibility for all small sewage lift stations; 
(7)  Small sewage lift station force mains shall be pressure tested. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(C)) 
Sec. 58-127. - Large sewage lift stations. 
See section 58-255. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(D)) 
Sec. 58-128. - Pipe materials. 
(a)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
(1)  PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall be plastic gravity sewer pipe with integral wall bell and spigot joints for the conveyance of domestic sewage. Pipe and fittings six inches in diameter, and larger, shall meet extra strength minimum of SDR-26 of the requirements of ASTM D3034-73. Four-inch sewer pipe shall be schedule 40, nonpressure pipe. Minimum wall thickness shall be as follows: 

 
(2)  Each length of pipe shall be marked with the manufacturer's name, trade name, nominal size, class, hydrostatic test pressure, manufacturer's standard symbol to signify it was tested, and date of manufacture. Each rubber ring shall be marked with the manufacturer's identification, the size, the year of manufacturer and the classes of pipe with which it can be used. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall PVC pipe be installed above ground. PVC pipe shall have a minimum three feet of cover and a maximum 12 feet of cover. 
(4)  Mylar marking tape and detection wire should be installed one foot above all nonferrous pipe and properly connected to fittings and valves so that the sewer line can be located with a pipe detector after burial. In the alternative, 14 gauge minimum stranded solid or braided coated wire shall be installed above all nonferrous pipe and properly connected to fittings and valves so that the sewer line can be located with a pipe detector after burial. 
(b)  Ductile iron pipe (DIP). Ductile iron pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A21.51 (centrifugally cast in metal or sand lined molds). Pipe shall be pressure class 350. The pipe shall be standard cement lined and seal coated with approved bituminous seal coat in accordance with ANSI A21.4. In general the following conditions require the use of ductile iron pipe and fittings: 
(1)  A sewer line crossing a road under pavement or within the road bed shall be DIP and shall be cased ditchline to ditchline. SDR-26 PVC pipe may be used under streets where the sewer line parallels the street; 
(2)  A sewer line outside the roadbed that has less than three feet of cover; 
(3)  All sewer lines that have greater than 12 feet of cover; 
(4)  All stream crossings shall be DIP and cased. 
(c)  High-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe. High-density polyethylene pipe and fittings shall be made of high density, high molecular weight polyethylene pipe material meeting the requirements of type III, class C, category 5, grade P34, as defined in ASTM D1248 Standard Specification for Polyethylene Plastics Molding and Extrusion Materials. Mylar marking tape should be installed two feet below ground level and detection wire should be installed one foot above all nonferrous pipe and properly connected to fittings and valves so that the sewer line can be located with a pipe detector after burial. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(E)) 
Sec. 58-129. - Joint materials. 
(a)  Joints between DIP. Ductile iron pipe shall be of the bell and spigot type with push-on joints, conforming to ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111). 
(b)  Joints between PVC. PVC pipe shall be jointed with a rubber or PVC ring or gasket designed to prevent inflow or exflow. Mechanical compression joint or molded plastic or similar material (with or without the use of rubber or elastic plastic compressions rings) as described as ASTM C-425 for polyvinyl chloride (slip joint) precast joints or rubber pushtype gaskets for compressions joint sealing (ASTM D3312 or F477) are all acceptable. PVC pipe shall not be joined by a solvent cement joint in which the pipe spigot wedges into the tapered socket and the surfaces fuse together. 
(c)  Joints between HDPE. HDPE pipe shall be joined by bell and spigot gasket style or thermal weld type connections in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and shall show no sign of leakage. In the case of gasket type, all surfaces of the joint upon which the gasket may bear shall be smooth and free of such imperfections, ridges, fractures or cracks that could adversely affect sealability. 
(d)  Joints between sewer pipes of different materials. Transition joints between sewer pipes of different materials shall be accomplished by the use of adapters made especially for that purpose. The transition between clay pipe and cast iron pipe shall be by clay double bell cast iron adapters with compression joints conforming to ASTM C425, latest edition. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(F)) 
Sec. 58-130. - Precast concrete manholes. 
(a)  Precast concrete manholes shall consist of precast reinforced concrete sections, a conical, eccentrical, or flat slab top section, and a base section. 
(b)  Precast manhole sections shall be manufactured, tested, and marked in accordance with the latest provision of ASTM C478. 
(c)  Joints of the manhole sections shall be of the tongue-and-groove type. Sections shall be joined using O-ring rubber gaskets, flexible plastic gaskets conforming to the applicable provisions of ASTM C443, latest revision, or an approved bituminous mastic joint material. In addition, the inside joint shall be sealed with cement mortar using one part Portland cement to two parts clean sand, meeting ASTM C144, latest revision. 
(d)  Each section of the precast manhole shall have not more than two holes for the purpose of handling and laying. These holes shall be tapered and shall be plugged with mortar after installation. 
(e)  Manhole steps conforming to the applicable provisions of ASTM C478, latest edition, shall be manufactured as one piece, ferrous casting or plastic coated steel and shall be factory built into the precast sections. 
(f)  Holes in precast bases to receive sewer pipe shall be precast at the factory at the required locations and heights. Knocking out of holes in the field will not be permitted. All manholes shall have Kor-N-Seal (or equal) rubber boots for all pipe entries/exits and also sealed with cement. 
(g)  Manhole base and inverts shall be constructed of 2,500 psi concrete and inverts shall have the same cross section as the invert of the sewers which they connect. The manhole base and invert shall be carefully formed to the required size and grade by gradual and even changes in sections. Changes in direction of flow through the sewer shall be made to a true curve with as large a radius as the size of the manhole will permit. 
(h)  Brickwork required to complete the precast concrete manhole shall be constructed using one part Portland cement to two parts clean sand, meeting ASTM C144, thoroughly mixed to a workable plastic mixture. Brickwork shall be constructed in a neat and workmanlike manner. 
(i)  The cast iron frame for the manhole cover shall be set at the required elevation and properly anchored to the masonry. Frames and covers shall be Vulcan VM-3MOD or equal. Where manholes are constructed in paved areas, the top surface of the frame and cover shall be titled to conform to the exact slope, crown and grade of the existing adjacent pavement. Sanitary sewer manhole covers shall conform to the applicable portions of ASTM C478 and D410. Bolt-down manhole covers shall be used for all manholes located within the 100-year floodplain. 
(j)  Masonry work shall be allowed to set for a period of not less than 24 hours. Outside forms, if any, then shall be removed and the manhole backfilled and soil compacted. All loose or waste material shall be removed from the interior of the manhole. The manhole cover then shall be placed and the surface in the vicinity of the work cleaned off and left in a neat and orderly condition. 
(k)  The distance between manholes should be 400 feet or less for sewers up to 15 inches in diameter, or 500 feet or less for sewers larger than 18 inches in diameter. 
(l)  The elevation drop between the inlet and outlet pipe inverts shall be a minimum of 0.2 feet. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(G)) 
Sec. 58-131. - Casings. 
(a)  Steel casing pipe shall be used for all cased piping where the carrier pipe is eight inches or greater in size. PVC casing may be utilized for six-inch and four-inch service laterals. 
(b)  Steel casing pipe shall have a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A139. It shall be exterior coated with a coal tar coating. The casing pipe diameter shall be six to eight inches greater than the "bell" diameter of the carrier pipe. Minimum wall thickness shall be as follows: 

 
(c)  PVC casing pipe, if approved by the city, shall meet or exceed the strength characteristics described in ASTM A139, section IV.C.1. for PVC carrier pipe. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(H)) 
Sec. 58-132. - Bedding methods. 
(a)  Class A, B, and C bedding methods are allowed by the city while the class D bedding method is not allowed. Bedding methods must comply with the applicable sections of ASTM C12. Each method is described as follows: 
(1)  Class A bedding method: Complete concrete encasement. 
(2)  Class B bedding method: The sewer pipe is installed on a compacted bed of granular material six inches thick. Additional compacted granular material is added around the pipe up to the spring line, or centerline. Next, additional compacted granular material is added to completely encase the pipe to a depth of 12 inches above the pipe crown. 
(3)  Class C bedding method: The sewer pipe is installed on a six-inch deep compacted bed of granular material and then an additional granular material up to spring line is added. 
(4)  Class D bedding method: The sewer pipe is installed on either four inches of compacted trench backfill or natural undisturbed soil. This method is not allowed. 
(b)  Trench backfill installed above the bedding must comply with ASTM C12, section II.Q. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(I)) 
Sec. 58-133. - Installation of sewer pipe. 
(a)  Pipe and accessories shall at all times be handled with care to avoid damage. Whether moved by hand, skidways or hoists, material shall not be dropped or bumped. The interior of all pipe shall be kept free from dirt and foreign matter at all times. Each joint of pipe shall be unloaded opposite or near the place where it is to be laid in the trench. 
(b)  All such material that is defective in manufacture or has been damaged in transit or after delivery shall be removed from the job site. 
(c)  Sewer pipes shall be joined by push-on joints using elastomeric gaskets to affect the pressure seal. The ends of pipe to be jointed and the gaskets shall be cleaned immediately before assembly, and the assembly shall be made as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. Lubricant used must be nontoxic and supplied or approved for use by the pipe manufacturer. Sewer pipes shall be laid in the uphill direction with the bells pointing upgrade. Any variation from this procedure shall require approval from the city. 
(d)  When pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of installed pipe shall be plugged by approved means to prevent entrance of trench water into the line. 
(e)  No special laying conditions are required for ductile iron pipe (DIP) other than haunching and soil compaction to 12 inches above the spring line for DIP laid under pavement, and any other conditions which are stipulated elsewhere in these specifications. Granular bedding material shall be used under DIP in poor soil (e.g., wet, swampy, etc.) to stabilize the subgrade. 
(f)  The following laying conditions shall be followed with PVC pipe: 
(1)  By embedding PVC pipe in sand or graded gravel, no special compaction requirements will be necessary. However, the sand or gravel must extend from six inches below the pipe to twelve inches above the pipe and the material must be firmly placed under the pipe haunches. 
(2)  When embedding PVC pipe in friable, compressible soils (e.g., silt, clay, sandy clay, silty clays, etc.), special care must be exercised to provide a uniform (undisturbed or fully compacted) trench bottom. Additionally, the backfill must be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor in six-inch to eight-inch lifts to 12 inches above the top of the pipe. 
(g)  Bell holes shall be provided of sufficient size to allow ample room for making the pipe joints properly. The bottom of the trench between bell holes shall be carefully graded so that the pipe barrel will rest on a solid foundation for its entire length as shown on the plans. Each joint shall be laid so that it will form a close concentric joint with adjoining pipe and in order to avoid sudden offsets or inequalities in the flow line. 
(h)  Water shall not be allowed to run or stand in the trench before the trench has been backfilled. The developer at no time shall open up more trench than his available pumping facilities are able to dewater. 
(i)  Any sewer pipe which has its alignment, grade or joints disturbed after laying shall be removed and relaid. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(J)) 
Sec. 58-134. - Connections. 
(a)  Service connections generally. 
(1)  A sewer service stubout with plugged stub and cleanout (see service lateral detail, S11, sheet 2 of 2) shall be provided for every existing or proposed lot or building. All services shall be shown on the construction drawings. Wye branches of the same material as the collector sewer shall be installed on the collector sewer lines at the locations shown on the construction drawings for each service connection. A single service stub shall be provided for each residence being served. The service stub shall extend from the wye to the property line of the lot being served. 
(2)  The developer shall be responsible for serving all lots developed. On any lot where the service stub cannot be found, the developer shall install or be responsible for payment of the cost of installation of the service stub. Also, unless otherwise noted on the final plat, the service stub shall be low enough to serve the first ground level floor elevation, and where grades permit it shall be low enough to serve the basement. 
(3)  For new construction, the developer shall be responsible for the location of the service line and checking its elevation prior to the pouring of the foundation, driveway or other appurtenance. The city will not be responsible for any house built too low to be served nor for any service covered by construction. 
(4)  Riser connections shall be installed on service lines which are greater than nine feet deep. 
(5)  Service stubs shall be laid in compacted or undisturbed soil from the main sewer to the property line. The slope shall be two percent or greater. All house or service lines not immediately connected to a service stub shall be located and marked in the same manner as described for plugged stubs in subsection (b) of this section. 
(6)  No plumber or developer will be allowed to make a tap onto the city sewage system without prior approval. 
(7)  All service connections shall include a cleanout pursuant to the city standard detail. 
(b)  Plugged stubs. 
(1)  All service lines extending from collector sewers must utilize a plugged stub at the termination point. 
(2)  Service lines shall be plugged with an airtight, removable plastic plug. 
(3)  The precise location of each plugged stub shall be indicated on the as-built plans to the nearest foot and marked in the field with a wooden stake. 
(c)  Service connections where plugged stub not provided. 
(1)  Connections to existing sewer lines where no plugged stub exists shall be made by removing a section of the sewer from the existing line and inserting, in the space, a wye branch of proper size, or by the construction of a manhole. 
(2)  Connections to existing manholes where no plugged stub exists shall be made by neatly cutting a hole in the wall of the existing structure with a coring machine at or near its invert, inserting a length of sewer pipe into the hole, and securing with a flexible rubber boot and cementing inside and out. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(K)) 
Sec. 58-135. - Relationship to water lines. 
(a)  The following clearances from water pipes shall be maintained: 
(1)  Ten feet horizontal distance between sewer and water main for parallel installation; 
(2)  Eighteen inches vertical distance for water main and sewer crossings. 
(b)  The city may allow parallel installation of a sewer line closer than ten feet to a water line, provided that the water main is in a separate trench or on an undisturbed earth shelf located on one side of the sewer and at an elevation so the bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches above the top of the sewer. 
(c)  For sewer and water main crossings the crossing shall be arranged so that the sewer joints will be equidistant and as far as possible from the water main joints. Where a water main crosses under a sewer, adequate structural support shall be provided for the sewer (e.g., concrete encasement). 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(K)) 
Sec. 58-136. - Sediment and erosion control. 
(a)  See chapter 22, article II. 
(b)  The city shall have personnel on call for consultation regarding the implementation and maintenance of erosion and sedimentation controls. Contact information regarding such on-call personnel is available on the city's website or from the office of the city clerk. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(M)) 
Sec. 58-137. - Sewage bypassing. 
The bypassing or raw wastewater onto the ground or into a receiving stream is expressly prohibited. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(N)) 
Sec. 58-138. - Deflection test (using a mandrel). 
All PVC pipe must pass a 7.5 percent deflection test as follows: Not before 30 days after pipe is laid and backfill placed, unless otherwise approved by the city inspector, the developer shall, in the presence of the city inspector, test the pipe for deflection using a mandrel test procedure complying with the applicable sections of ASTM D3034, ASTM F679 or ASTM D2122. A mandrel, sized to permit up to 7.5 percent deflection, shall be used. The sequence for testing is as follows: 
(1)  Completely flush the line making sure the pipe is clean of any mud or debris that would hinder the passage of the mandrel. 
(2)  During the final flushing of the line, attach a floating block or ball to the end of the mandrel pull rope and float the rope through the line. 
(3)  After the rope is threaded through the line, connect the pull rope to the mandrel and place the mandrel in the entrance of the pipe. 
(4)  Connect a retrieval rope to the back of the mandrel to pull it back if necessary. 
(5)  Remove all the slack in the pull rope and place a tape marker on the rope at the ends of the pipe where the mandrel will exit, determining the location of the mandrel in the line. 
(6)  Draw mandrel through the sewer line. 
(7)  If a section with excessive deflection is found: 
a.  Locate it; 
b.  Dig down and uncover the pipe; 
c.  Inspect the pipe, if any damaged pipe is found, replace it; 
d.  If pipe is not damaged, replace and thoroughly tamp the haunching and initial backfill; 
e.  Replace remainder of backfill. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(O)) 
Sec. 58-139. - Low-pressure air leakage test. 
(a)  Prior to making any house connections, the developer shall test the entire sewer and appurtenances for leakage by testing with low pressure air in accordance with ASTM F1417. 
(b)  All wyes, tees, and service laterals shall be plugged with flexible joint caps, or acceptable alternate, securely fastened to withstand the internal test pressures. Such plugs or caps shall be readily removable, and their removal shall provide a socket suitable for making a flexible jointed lateral connection or extension. 
(c)  Immediately after pipe cleaning, the pipe shall be tested, as follows: 
(1)  Air shall be slowly supplied to plugged pipe installation until internal air pressure reaches 4.0 pounds per square inch (psi) greater than average back pressure of any groundwater that may submerge pipe. Regulate the air supply so that the pressure is maintained between 3.5 to 4.0 psi greater than groundwater backpressure. 
(2)  At least two minutes shall be allowed for temperature stabilization before proceeding further. The pressure will normally drop slightly until equilibrium is obtained; however, a minimum of 3.5 psi above groundwater pressure should be maintained. 
(3)  Disconnect the air supply and decrease the pressure to 3.5 psi above groundwater pressure. Measure the time that it takes for the pressure in the pipe to drop from 3.5 to 2.5 above groundwater pressure and compare this interval to the minimum holding time requirement in the table below for the pipe diameter and pipe length being tested. 
(d)  The pipe line shall be considered acceptable when tested at an average pressure of 3.0 psi greater than average back pressure of any groundwater that may submerge pipe for duration of the test time shown in the table in this subsection: 
Minimum specified time required for all 0 psig pressure drop for size and length of pipe indicated for kQ = 0.0015 

 
Note— See Practice UNI-B-6-90. 
Note— Consult with pipe and appurtenance manufacture for maximum test pressure for pipe size greater than 30 inches in diameter. 
(e)  If the pipe installation fails to meet the requirements in subsection (d) of this section, the developer shall determine the source or sources of leakage, and shall repair or replace all defective materials or workmanship. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(P)) 
Sec. 58-140. - Negative air pressure (vacuum) test for manholes. 
(a)  Prior to making any house connections, the developer shall test all sanitary sewer manholes for leakage in accordance with ASTM C1244. This test method is used for testing concrete manhole sections utilizing mortar, mastic, or gasketed joints to test manholes for leakage after they have been backfilled. All lift holes and any pipes entering the manhole are to be plugged and a vacuum will be drawn within the manhole. The vacuum drop over a specified time period is used to determine the acceptability of the manhole. 
(b)  Prepare the manhole for test by making sure that all lift holes have been grouted in and that all pipes entering the manhole are temporarily plugged, taking care to securely brace the pipes and plugs to prevent them from being drawn into the manhole upon application of the vacuum. 
(c)  The test head shall be placed at the top of the manhole in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(d)  A vacuum of ten inches of mercury is drawn on the manhole, the valve on the vacuum line of the test head closed, and the vacuum pump shut off. The time shall be measured for the vacuum to drop to nine inches of mercury. 
(e)  The manhole shall pass if the time for the vacuum reading to drop from ten inches of mercury to nine inches of mercury meets or exceeds the values indicated in the table in this subsection. If the manhole fails the initial test, necessary repairs shall be made and the manhole shall then be retested until a satisfactory test is obtained. 

 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(Q)) 
Sec. 58-141. - Grease traps. 
(a)  This article requires all sewer system users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes, and, any facility of any type that has the potential to discharge oil and grease above the city's discharge limit (currently 150 mg/l), shall provide oil/grease interceptors or traps. This requirement shall apply to all restaurants, cafeterias, fast food establishments, schools, and other facilities such as churches and medical centers where food may be prepared. All such grease traps shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All grease traps shall have a minimum volume of 1,000 gallons and a maximum volume of 3,000 gallons, and shall be constructed in conformity with the standard development specifications, standard detail No. S12. 
(2)  Under-the-counter grease traps shall not be allowed. 
(3)  All grease traps shall include grease trap filters mounted on the effluent pipe. The grease trap filters must be certified in accordance with NSF/ANSI standard 46, or otherwise approved by the city. The grease trap filters must be removable for purposes of cleaning. The removal and cleaning of grease trap filters shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(b)  Each length of pipe shall be marked with the manufacturer's name, trade name, nominal size, class, hydrostatic test pressure, manufacturer's standard symbol to signify it was tested, and date of manufacture. Each rubber ring shall be marked with the manufacturer's identification, the size, the year of manufacturer and the classes of pipe with which it can be used. 
(c)  Under no circumstances shall PVC pipe be installed above ground. PVC pipe shall have a minimum three feet of cover and a maximum 12 feet of cover. 
(d)  Mylar marking tape and detection wire should be installed one foot above all nonferrous pipe and properly connected to fittings and valves so that the sewer line can be located with a pipe detector after burial. In the alternative, 14 gauge minimum stranded solid or braided coated wire shall be installed above all nonferrous pipe and properly connected to fittings and valves so that the sewer line can be located with a pipe detector after burial. 
(e)  Ductile iron pipe (DIP) and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A21.51 (centrifugally cast in metal or sand lined molds). Pipe shall be pressure class 350. The pipe shall be standard cement lined and seal coated with approved bituminous seal coat in accordance with ANSI A21.4. In general the following conditions require the use of ductile iron pipe and fittings: 
(1)  A sewer line crossing a road under pavement or within the road bed shall be DIP and shall be cased ditchline to ditchline. SDR-26 PVC pipe may be used under streets where the sewer line parallels the street; 
(2)  A sewer line outside the roadbed that has less than three feet of cover; 
(3)  All sewer lines that have greater than 12 feet of cover; 
(4)  All stream crossings shall be DIP and cased. 
(f)  High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe and fittings shall be made of high density, high molecular weight polyethylene pipe material meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  Inlet connections shall be six inches or greater. 
(2)  Joints shall, in all cases, be mechanical joint (MJ) unless prior written approval is given by the engineer. 
(3)  The design of the hydrant shall be of the compression type main valves and O-ring seal between the operating nut and the bonnet. 
(4)  Openings shall be counterclockwise, unless specifically ordered otherwise. 
(5)  Painting of the hydrant shall be accomplished at the factory with enamel approved per AWWA specifications and shall conform to standard red in all cases, unless specified otherwise elsewhere herein or on the plans. 
(6)  The ground line flange shall be constructed so as to permit adding of extensions, replacing of upper barrel section, etc., without closing off the water supply. 
(7)  The operating nut shall be national standard 1½ inches, hexagon in shape. 
(g)  All dead end lines must have an approved flushing device. A fire hydrant at the end of a line is an approved flushing device. For lines smaller than six inches, a flushing device shall be used equal to GIL Industries' Aquarius or Eclipse Truflo No. TF500 blow-off. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1988, § X; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(IV)(R); Res. of 3-10-2008, exh. A(IV)(R)) 
Sec. 58-142. - Water meters. 
(a)  Residential. This item pertains to two-inch and smaller water meters (small meters). Small meters shall conform to the AWWA C700 (latest revision) and shall be the displacement nutating-disc type designed for complete frost protection whereas the bottom cast iron caps will yield under normal freezing conditions and thus, protect the interior working mechanism from damage. The bottom shall be enamel coated, unless otherwise shown on the plans. All residential water meters shall be five-eighths inch by three-fourths inch. Manufacture of all materials and assembly thereof for this item shall be within the continental United States and no foreign made meters will be allowed. All meters shall be radio read meters as manufactured by Neptune compatible with the city's radio read hardware and software. 
(b)  Large water meters. Water meters two inches and larger in size shall be compound meters per AWWA C702, latest revision. 
(c)  Fire lines and irrigation water lines. Water lines installed to provide flow to irrigation systems, fire sprinkler systems, fire hydrants, or any other fire prevention device located on the user's property may not be used for any purpose other than for irrigation and fire flows. All irrigation and fire lines installed after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be installed using a compound water meter in a meter vault near the edge of the right-of-way. Water lines for potable use or that will return spent wastewater to the sewer system shall be separately metered. All meters shall be radio read meters as manufactured by Neptune (or approved equal) compatible with the city's radio read hardware and software. (Also see article V of this chapter.) Fire lines in existence prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived which have indicator meters shall not be required to install a radio read meter or a compound meter, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Indicator meters. Any facility having a fire line served by an indicator meter shall use the fire line water only for fire flows or for fire flow tests. The city shall be notified seven days in advance of any fire flow tests. Usage of any water through a fire line with an indicator meter as indicated by the indicator meter, other than for bona fide fires or prenotified fire flow tests, shall be charged a user fee of $500.00 per month. Should any user have, in any six months out of any 12-month period, indicated usage through an indicator meter other than for bona fide fires or prenotified fire flow tests, then that user shall be required to install a compound meter in place of the indicator meter. 
(Res. of 3-10-2008, exh. A(IV)(T)) 
Sec. 58-143. - Meter boxes. 
Cast iron meter boxes for meter sizes five-eighths inch, three-fourths inch and one inch shall be of the Rome-Type. The cover will contain, as a part of the casting, the word "Water" on its surface thereof. The box and cover shall be coated with coal tar pitch varnish and its finish shall not be tacky or brittle when cold. Boxes for meter sizes larger than one inch shall be of the traffic-type, and will, in all respects, meet, as a minimum, the requirements set forth in this section for castings for meters one inch and smaller. 
(Res. of 3-10-2008, exh. A(IV)(U)) 
Secs. 58-144—58-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORM DRAINAGE 

Sec. 58-170. - Description. 
This article provides the requirements for furnishing and installing storm drainage facilities, including reinforced concrete pipe, corrugated metal pipe, catchbasins, drop inlets, manholes, junction boxes, curb inlets, drain inlets, special inlets, iron castings, and headwalls. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(A)) 
Sec. 58-171. - Submittals. 
The developer shall submit drawings and product data conforming to the requirements of these specifications for all pipe greater than 24 inches in diameter, precast concrete items, and castings. Approval of same shall be obtained from the city before any materials of this item may be delivered or erected at the jobsite. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(B)) 
Sec. 58-172. - Materials. 
(a)  Unless a certain type of construction is specified by the city the various structures included in this section may be constructed of brick, cast in place concrete or precast concrete at the option of the developer. Rubble masonry may be used only when approved by the city. 
(b)  Iron castings. 
(1)  Cast iron for iron castings shall conform to the requirements of Class No. 30 cast iron of the latest ASTM A48, for gray iron castings. 
(2)  Castings shall be sound, smooth, clean and free from blisters and other defects. No plugging of defective castings will be permitted. All unfinished edges of castings shall be neatly cast with suitable rounded corners and all inside angles shall have ample fillets. Where required or called for on the plans, castings shall be machined smooth. Surfaces shall be finished to such smoothness and accuracy of dimensions as to ensure good workmanship when assembled. All castings shall be annealed to remove internal stress before being machined and shall have the mark number and heat number cast on them. 
(3)  All castings shall be cleaned of sand and scale by sandblasting or other effective methods so as to present a smooth, clean and uniform surface. After cleaning, the castings shall be coated with bituminous paint of such properties that a smooth finish is obtained, that is not tacky when warm and that is tough when cold. 
(c)  Reinforced concrete pipe shall meet ASTM C76 for class II, wall B pipe. Joints shall be tongue and groove compression gasket joints meeting ASTM C443. 
(d)  Corrugated metal pipe shall be fully bituminous coated. Joints for corrugated metal pipe, pipe arches and fittings shall be outside collars or coupling bands. Coupling bands shall have galvanized steel angles riveted near the ends and bolts through the angles to draw the bands tight. 

 
*12-inch and 15-inch may be used only under special circumstances. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(C)) 
Sec. 58-173. - Construction of structures. 
(a)  Poured-in-place units. Construction details shall be shown on the detailed engineering plans. 
(b)  Precast reinforced concrete units. 
(1)  Holes for pipe. Each unit shall be cast with pipe holes of the specific number and dimensions necessary to incorporate the unit into the drainage system as shown on the plans. In the event conditions during installation require additional pipe for which no holes have been cast, the developer may make such holes provided he replaces or repairs any damaged units to the satisfaction of the owner. 
(2)  Pipe connections. Pipe shall be connected to units with either mortar or 3,000 psi concrete. There shall be no voids between the pipe and structure for the full in the structure wall. 
(3)  Installation. Installation is as follows: 
a.  Precast reinforced concrete units. Such units shall be set to within ;pm; one-half inch of grade on a bed of compacted sand bedding material which is approximately two to three inches thick. 
b.  Sectional precast reinforce concrete units. When such units are used to build up extra depth catchbasins or drop inlets, the joints between sections shall be filled with mortar and all such joints shall be wiped smooth. 
(c)  Brick construction. 
(1)  Brickwork shall be constructed using one part Portland cement to two parts clean sand, thoroughly mixed to workable plastic mixture. Not over 20 pounds of hydrated lime per sack of cement may be added. No retempered mortar shall be used. Brick shall be laid with mortar joints three-eighths-inch thick. The inside of the inlet shall be neatly finished with cement mortar one-half-inch thick. 
(2)  After the foundation has been prepared, the concrete bottom shall be constructed to the required line and grade. After the bottom has been allowed to set for a period of not less than 24 hours, the inlet shall be constructed thereon, care being exercised to form the outgoing sewer pipe into the wall of the inlet at the required elevation. 
(d)  Iron castings. Iron castings shall be installed as shown on the plans. All surfaces shall be accurately set to the line and grade and carefully leveled unless otherwise shown. Castings to be embedded in concrete shall be supported firmly and properly until the concrete has been placed around them and hardened. Castings to be embedded in brick masonry shall be inserted as the work progresses. Care shall be exercised in bolting castings to prevent misalignment or springing of any of the parts. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(D)) 
Sec. 58-174. - Installing storm sewers. 
(a)  Excavation, backfilling and compaction shall be in accordance with normal acceptable standards and shall be in a neat and workmanlike manner. 
(b)  Pipe shall be inspected prior to installations in trench. No defective or damaged pipe shall be installed. 
(c)  Each pipe shall be clearly marked to show its class or gage, date of manufacture and name or trademark of the manufacturer. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(E)) 
Sec. 58-175. - Pipe laying—Concrete pipe. 
(a)  Immediately prior to laying the pipe, all projections or irregularities that will prevent the joints from closing properly shall be removed. 
(b)  Concrete pipe shall be laid true to the grade on a bed which is uniformly firm throughout its entire length. If material in the bottom of the excavation is of such character as to cause unequal settlement along the length of the storm sewer or culvert, the material shall be removed below the grade given, to such depth as ordered and shall be backfilled with granular bedding material and thoroughly tampered or otherwise compacted to insure an unyielding foundation. Pipe shall not be laid upon the frozen ground. 
(c)  Pipe, unless otherwise provided or directed by the city, shall be laid beginning at the lower end and with the hubs of receiving ends upgrade. 
(d)  The pipe shall be protected from water during placing and until the mortar in the joints has thoroughly set. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(F)) 
Sec. 58-176. - Same—Corrugated metal pipe and pipe arch. 
(a)  Corrugated metal pipe or pipe arch shall be laid true to line and grades on a bed which is uniformly firm throughout its entire length. 
(b)  Pipes shall be laid only on a foundation which is essentially free of water. 
(c)  The ends of sections shall be fully and closely jointed according to applicable standards and true to the lines and grades given. Each section or joint of pipe shall be securely attached to the adjoining section or joint of pipe with connecting bands or other approved type of joint. The bands or other type of joint shall be tightly drawn or connected so as to form a rigid joint. 
(d)  Any breaks in the bitumen or treatment of bituminous coated pipe shall be refilled with the type and kind of bitumen used in coating the pipe originally. 
(e)  The ends of pipe shall be rigidly supported to prevent any movement pending and during the construction of end supports. 
(f)  Any pipe which is not in true alignment or which shows any settlement after laying or is damaged shall be taken up and relaid. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(G)) 
Sec. 58-177. - Riprap. 
(a)  All stone for riprap shall be sound, durable pieces meeting the quality requirements of class "A" or "B" coarse aggregate and shall be resistant for use as riprap. Materials not meeting these requirements shall not be used unless approved by petrographic analysis. Flat, slabby, and shaley pieces are not acceptable. Stone for riprap shall be one of the following as called for on the plans: 
(1)  Stone dumped riprap. Stone for dumped riprap shall be processed in such a manner as to produce a quarry-run material including rock fines which will meet the gradation for the following two types: 
a.  Type 1. For severe drainage conditions or moderate wave action: The largest pieces of material shall have a maximum of two cubic feet. At least 35 percent of the mass shall be comprised of pieces which weigh 125 pounds or more. 
b.  Type 3. For general use normal drainage conditions the largest pieces of material shall have a maximum approximate volume of one cubic foot. At least 35 percent of the mass shall be comprised of pieces which weight 15 pounds or more. 
c.  The remainder of Type 1 or 3 shall be well-graded down to the finest sizes. Rock fines shall comprise a maximum of ten percent of the total mass. Rock fines are defined as material passing through a No. 4 sieve. 
(2)  Stone for plain riprap (dumped and hand-placed). Stone for plain riprap shall be clean and essentially free of rock dust and fines. The material shall be processed such that the larges pieces have a volume of not more than two cubic feet and not more than ten percent of the total weight of riprap shall consist of spalls passing a five-inch sieve. 
(b)  Installation of riprap shall be either stone dumped, dumped and hand-placed, or cement grouted as called for on the plans. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(V)(H)) 
Secs. 58-178—58-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 58-207. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device, and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on, or available to, the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural resource such as a well, spring, river, stream, pond, etc., or used water industrial fluids. They may be polluted or contaminated therein being objectionable and constituting an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow preventer means a device or means to prevent backflow or back-siphonage through a cross connection. 
Backflow preventer assemblies means and includes an approved backflow prevention device, approved isolation valves, and test cocks. For fire lines, the backflow preventer assemblies shall also include a flow detection meter. 
Contaminant means a toxic substance that, if introduced into the potable water supply, would create a health hazard. 
Cross connection means a physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water, the other a nonpotable fluid. 
Cross connection control (CCC) means a general term applied to a program, an ordinance, a code, etc., designed to discover, eliminate, prevent, etc., all cross connection, existing or potential. 
Cross connection control by containment means the installation of a backflow preventer at the service connection to a premises to protect the water main (secondary protection). 
Cross connection control by isolation means the installation of a backflow preventer or a vacuum breaker at the source (point) of each cross connection on a premises to protect both the premises and main (primary protection). 
Cross connection, nonpressure type, means a low inlet installation where a potable water supply pipe is connected or extended below the overflow rim of a receptacle or an environment that contains a nonpotable fluid and is at atmospheric pressure. 
Cross connection, pressure type, means a low inlet installation where a potable water supply is connected to a closed vessel or a piping system that contains nonpotable fluid and is above atmospheric pressure. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly of at least two independently acting approved check valves. 
Fire lines means water pipes which deliver water to a customer for the sole purpose of suppressing fires. Such flow of water through fire lines is not metered and billed monthly as is water used through nonfire lines. 
Manager of the water system means the city employee who serves as the public works supervisor, who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective backflow and cross connection control program and for the enforcement of this article. 
Nonresidential user means all users other than residential users. 
Open water supply system means one with no checking device installed in the service pipe and water from the customer's system is free to backflow into the main. 
Pollutant means a nontoxic substance that, if introduced into the potable water system, would be objectionable but would not create a health hazard. 
Reduced pressure principle or approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device that consists of two spring-loaded, independently acting, check valves with an intermediate or reduced pressure zone draining to the atmosphere by an independently acting relief valve. The unit operates on the hydraulic principle that water will not flow from a zone of lower pressure to a zone of higher pressure. 
Residential user means a water customer whose water service connection serves a residential unit or units in which people dwell and where no commercial or industrial activities take place on the premises. 
Vacuum breaker (VB) means a general term applied to a back-siphonage prevention device that introduces air into the potable water system when the system pressure approaches zero pounds per square inch (psi). It is designed for use where the receptacle or environment being served is subject to atmospheric pressure only. 
Vacuum breaker, anti-siphon, atmospheric type (VB-AT) means a vacuum breaker designed for use under flow conditions only, not to exceed 24 consecutive hours, and where it will be subject to no static pressure and no back pressure. 
Vacuum breaker, anti-siphon, pressure type (VB PT) means a vacuum breaker designed to operate under continuous pressure, static or flowing, but no back pressure. 
Vacuum breaker, anti-siphon, hose type (VB-HT) means a vacuum breaker designed for hose connection only. It is not approved for continuous pressure, static or flowing. 
Vacuum relief valve means a device to limit the degrees of vacuum in a vessel or pipe. It is neither approved nor designed for use as a cross connection control device. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § II; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(II)) 
Sec. 58-208. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Any person, business or company who fails to: 
a.  Install a proper backflow preventer assembly or assemblies in accordance with the provisions herein within 60 days, following proper notification from the manager, shall pay a penalty of $100.00. 
b.  Install a proper backflow preventer assembly or assemblies in accordance with the provisions herein within 90 days, following proper notification from the manager, shall pay a penalty of $500.00. 
c.  Install a proper backflow preventer assembly or assemblies in accordance with the provisions herein within 120 days, following proper notification from the manager, shall pay a penalty of $5,000.00. 
d.  Pay any monetary penalty provided herein within 30 days of notification of the penalty being due, or who fails to install a proper backflow preventer assembly or assemblies in accordance with the provisions herein within six months following proper notification from the manager shall have their water service terminated. 
(2)  Any person, business or company who uses water through a fire line or fire lines for purposes other than the suppression of fire shall be penalized as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § X; Ord. of 7-8-1996, § X; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(X)) 
Sec. 58-209. - Required; general requirements. 
(a)  All water service connections must have a backflow prevention device in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Any deviation from these specifications or the city's standard details must be approved in writing by the city prior to the start of installation. 
(c)  All assemblies must be installed as near as possible to the water meter/main. 
(d)  All four test cock fittings must have either brassed plugs, plastic plugs, or plastic caps installed. 
(e)  Galvanized nipples and fittings may not be installed directly into/onto an assembly unless a dielectric/insulation fitting is used to separate the dissimilar metals. 
(f)  All assemblies must be tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester at the time of installation, prior to obtaining the final city inspection for acceptance. Thereafter, all assemblies must be tested annually. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(A)) 
Sec. 58-210. - Meter boxes. 
(a)  Cast iron or HDPE meter boxes may be used for the installation of two inches and smaller assemblies to long as adequate access is available for maintenance and testing. The minimum acceptable dimensions at the base of the box are 27 inches by 40 inches. If the meter box is to be set in concrete, asphalt, and/or in an area subject to other than foot traffic, the meter box must be designed for such an installation. 
(b)  The assembly must be centered in the meter box eight inches to 18 inches deep, from device to top of meter box. 
(c)  There must be a minimum of six inches of gravel covering the entire bottom of the meter box, with six inches of clearance beneath the assembly above the gravel. Mud, dirt, debris, etc., may not be left in the meter box. If the service line is at a depth that warrants an adjustment, complete courses of bricks or concrete blocks, properly mortared in place, or a commercial meter box riser may be used in order to properly support the meter box and to bring the meter box top level with grade. The meter box cannot rest directly on the water line. Pipe cutout holes must be sealed. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(B)) 
Sec. 58-211. - Underground vaults for BFP systems having no discharge. 
(a)  Unless otherwise approved by the city, the attached vault detail sheets for specifications pertaining to the proper installation of all 2½ inches and larger assemblies in precast, reinforced concrete vaults must be followed. A complete package precast vault such as the one offered by Tindall Concrete that has a backflow prevention assembly already installed, or one that is its equal is acceptable. 
(b)  All 2½ inches and larger assemblies must be supported with commercial pipe supports, as shown on the attached vault detail sheets. Concrete blocks, bricks, pieces of wood, etc., are not acceptable. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(C)) 
Sec. 58-212. - Aboveground enclosures for BFP systems which have a discharge, e.g., RPZs. 
All BFP systems which discharge shall be installed aboveground. Such above ground installations shall be covered and insulated to prevent freezing. Enclosures shall have a removable top and/or side panels to allow access for testing and repair. All aboveground assemblies shall have a positive drain located above grade. All aboveground enclosures shall be bolted to a concrete base pad which extends four inches beyond the edges of the enclosure. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(D)) 
Sec. 58-213. - Interior. 
Prior to a backflow prevention assembly being installed inside a building or any structure for the purpose of isolating a service connection from the city's water main, approval in the form of a written variance pertaining to the reason, the assembly's exact location and method of installation must be obtained from the city. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(E)) 
Sec. 58-214. - Notice of closed system. 
(a)  Installation of a backflow prevention assembly on a service line creates a closed system. An auxiliary relief valve or an expansion chamber should be installed to allow for thermal expansion as pursuant to the city's standard detail. 
(b)  The city accepts no responsibility or liability pertaining to any backflow prevention assembly being properly installed, tested, maintained, serviced, or operating properly. Full responsibility and liability is that of the owner. 
(c)  Information regarding backflow prevention assemblies may be obtained from the city backflow prevention inspector. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(F)) 
Sec. 58-215. - Cross connection. 
(a)  Responsibility. The water system manager, or his designee, shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connections, and for the administration of this article. 
(1)  If, in the judgment of said manager or his designee, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city's service connection to any customer's premises, the manager, or his designee, shall give notice, in writing, to said customer to install such an approved backflow preventer assembly at each service connection to the premises. 
(2)  Upon notification by the manager, the customer being so notified shall install an approved backflow preventer assembly as provided herein within the time frames provided in subsection (a)(4) of this section. Failure to install such a backflow preventer assembly within the time frames provided shall result in penalties as set forth in section 58-208. 
(3)  Four classes of customers for purposes of regulating back prevention are provided, as follows: 
a.  Class I. All fire service lines which are designed and intended for suppression of fires. 
b.  Class II. All hospitals, medical service centers, doctor's offices, funeral homes, dental offices, industries, wood treatment companies, pesticide or pest control businesses, printing or photographic development companies, fertilizer companies, and all water customers (residential and nonresidential) who have auxiliary water supplies. 
c.  Class III. All nonresidential users not otherwise included in Classes I or II of subsections (a)(3)a and b of this section. 
d.  Class IV. All residential users not otherwise included in Class II of subsection (a)(3)b of this section. 
(4)  The following implementation goals are provided for all users within each class: 

 
(5)  Notification implementation. It is the intention of the city for all water customers of the city to have backflow preventer assemblies installed, with the greater emphasis being on the higher class categories. All new water service connections following the adoption of this article shall have a backflow preventer assembly installed in accordance with the provisions herein. Existing water customers shall be notified by the manager of the need to install such a backflow preventer assembly. Upon such notice, the customer shall have 60 days from receipt of said notice to install a proper backflow preventer assembly, or assemblies, as provided herein. 
(6)  Unauthorized water use. Except for fire lines, all water used by water system customers shall pass through metered water lines. Unmetered water may be used through fire lines only for the purpose of suppressing fires. The unauthorized use of water through fire lines shall be penalized as set forth in section 58-208. Testing of fire line is not an unauthorized water use so long as: 
a.  The manager is notified of the test seven days prior to the test; 
b.  The manager is informed as to the volume of water used for the test; and 
c.  The user conducts no more than two tests per year. 
Any usage through fire lines less than ten gallons per month is not an unauthorized use of water. 
(b)  Inspections. Inspections required under the provisions of this article shall be made by the manager, or his designee. 
(1)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the manager, or his designee, may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the city, and any building, structure or premises which is being served by the water system of the city, to perform any duty imposed by this article. The manager, and his designees are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this article, and are hereby vested with all police power necessary for the purpose of enforcing this article, including but not limited to the making of arrests, issuing citations, and the prosecution of any persons or entities that may be charged with any violations of this article. 
(2)  All installations of any equipment, appliance, or systems, as prescribed in this article or any other ordinance of the city, shall be subject to inspection by the manager, or his designee. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § III; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(III)) 
Sec. 58-216. - Selection of devices. 
Vacuum breakers and backflow preventers shall be selected based upon the degree of hazard and the type of cross connection. The degree of hazard is to be determined by whether or not the impurities which constitute the risk of contamination are contaminants or pollutants; and the type of cross connection is to be determined by whether or not the type of cross connection is nonpressure or pressure in nature. 
(1)  Class I installations. A double check valve assembly with flow detection meter may be utilized for fire lines with a direct connection from the city's water system to the facility's sprinkler system. All other class I installations from detection meter shall utilize a backflow preventer assembly which operates by the reduced pressure principle. All fire lines which utilize pumps, storage tanks, antifreeze, auxiliary water supplies, etc., will not be considered a direct connection system. 
(2)  Class II installations. All class II installations shall utilize a backflow preventer assembly which operates by the reduced pressure principle. 
(3)  Class III and class IV installations. All class III and IV installations may use any type of backflow preventer assemblies set forth herein. However, if the manager or his designee determines that any specific situation represents an unusual risk of contamination or pollution, the manager or his designee may require the installation of a backflow preventer assembly which operates by the reduced pressure principle. 
(4)  Cross connections, nonpressure type. This type of connection, when not protected by a minimum air gap, shall be protected by an appropriate vacuum breaker or by an appropriate backflow preventer. 
(5)  Cross connection, pressure type. This type connection shall be protected by an appropriate backflow preventer only. Neither atmospheric nonpressure type vacuum breakers shall be used on pressure type cross connections. 
(6)  Lawn sprinkler systems. Because lawn sprinkler systems serve an environment that is open to the atmosphere, it is not classified under this article as a pressure type cross connection. Due to the special nature of the installation, however, it is mandated that all such systems which are connected the city water system shall have at minimum as backflow protection, a double check valve assembly, in order to preclude the risk of herbicides and other chemicals which may be injected into said lawn sprinkler systems being pulled back into the city system. 
(7)  Accepted materials for devices. Vacuum breakers shall be bronze. Backflow preventers, including accessories, components and fittings in sizes two inches in diameter or less, shall be bronze with threaded connections. Backflow preventers, including accessories, components and fittings in sizes greater than two inches in diameter shall be either iron or bronze with flanged connections. 
(8)  Thermal expansion control device. A thermal expansion control device shall be used between a backflow preventer and a water heater, as described in the state plumbing code, section 1114, as amended. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § IV; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(IV)) 
Sec. 58-217. - Approval of devices. 
Vacuum breakers and backflow preventers shall be approved in accordance with the applicable standards of the American Water Works Association and the American Backflow Prevention Association. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § V; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(V)) 
Sec. 58-218. - Installation of devices. 
Vacuum breakers and backflow preventers equipped with atmospheric vents, or with relief openings, shall be so installed and so located as to prevent any vent or any relief opening from being submerged. Such breakers and preventers shall be installed in the position recommended by the manufacturer and shall be protected from freezing. 
(1)  Vacuum breaker, atmospheric type (VB-AT). These devices shall be installed at least six inches above the highest outlet or the overflow level on the nonpotable system. It shall be installed downstream of the last shutoff valve on the customer's system. 
(2)  Vacuum breaker, pressure type (VB-PT). These devices shall be installed at least 12 inches above the highest outlet or the overflow level on the nonpotable system. It shall be installed downstream of the last shutoff valve on the customer's system. 
(3)  Vacuum breaker, hose type (VB-HT). If not an integral part of a faucet or hydrant, this device shall be attached directly to the hose threads of the valve. It may not be subjected to continuous pressure, static or flowing, nor shall it be attached to a freezeless type hydrant unless it is a model specifically designed for this service. 
(4)  Backflow preventer, dual check (BFP-DUC). This device shall not be buried in earth, but may be installed below ground in a vault or meter box so as to permit ready accessibility for testing and repair. A positive shutoff valve shall be installed near the inlet side of the device and a union shall be installed on either side of said device in such a manner as to allow the flow through said device to be stopped by the shutoff valve so that the unions will allow the removal of said device without further disturbance of the customers water system. 
(5)  Backflow preventer with intermediate atmospheric vent (BFP-IAV). Installation of this device below ground is prohibited. When relief valve discharge could cause water damage, it shall be piped via an air gap, or a funnel, at the vent-relief port to a floor drain or other approved location. A positive shutoff and union shall be near the inlet and outlet side of the device. A strainer with a No. 20 mesh stainless steel screen shall be included between the inlet shutoff valve and the device. 
(6)  Backflow preventer, double check valve (BFP-DCV). This device shall not be buried in earth but may be installed below ground in a vault or meter box, provided ball valve test cocks fitted with brass plugs are used. A positive shutoff valve shall be near the inlet and outlet sides of the device, and three ball valve test cocks shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shutoff valve. When below ground, a union flange shall be installed near the inlet and outlet sides of the device. No intervening connection(s) shall be installed between the shutoff valves and the backflow preventer. 
(7)  Backflow preventer, reduced pressure zone (BFP-RPZ). Installation of this device below ground is prohibited. When relief discharge fro the device could cause water damage, it shall be piped via an air gap, or a funnel, at the relief port to a floor drain or other approved location. A positive shutoff valve shall be installed near the inlet and outlet sides of the device, and three approved test cocks shall be provided on the device. A fourth test cock shall be installed on the upstream side of the inlet shutoff valve. No intervening branch connections shall be allowed between the shutoff and the backflow preventer. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § VI; Ord. of 2-10-1997, exh. A; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(VI)) 
Sec. 58-219. - Additional installation requirements. 
When the reduced pressure zone device is installed in a line subject to periodic no-flow conditions, and the supply pressure on such a line is subject to fluctuations, a auxiliary directional check with soft-disc, capable of functioning in any position the backflow preventer may be installed in, shall be provided between the inlet shutoff valve and the backflow preventer head to lock the supply pressure in and prevent unnecessary discharge of water through the vent-relief port. When a water pressure reducing valve is required in the same line with the reduced pressure zone device, the auxiliary directional check will not be required, if and only if, the pressure reducing valve is located upstream of the reduced pressure zone device so as to take advantage of the check valve effect of the pressure reducing valve. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § VII; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(VII)) 
Sec. 58-220. - Maintenance and testing of devices. 
(a)  Requirements. All vacuum breakers and backflow preventers shall be maintained in working order, and shall be tested on an annual basis. Field testing and repairs shall be performed by personnel of the city or by such outside contractor approved by the manager. The customer shall keep records of the testing, maintenance and repair activities, and shall make such records available to the manager upon request. All vacuum breakers and back flow preventers shall be individually tested at the factory. Reduced pressure zone backflow preventers and double check assemblies shall be tested immediately after installation, and thereafter on an annual basis. The standard fee shall be charged by the city for all tests conducted by city personnel. 
(b)  City's duty. The manager or his designee shall have the duty to investigate all suspected violations of the provisions of this article and any suspect cross connections or suspect failures of backflow prevention devices. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § VIII; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(VIII)) 
Sec. 58-221. - Summary. 
(a)  Approved backflow prevention required. All public and all private water supply systems shall have approved protection against backflow to prevent the return of water from these systems back to the supply lines of the city water system. 
(b)  Auxiliary. All auxiliary water supply systems for fire protection, irrigation, or industrial processes shall have approved protection against backflow to prevent the return of water from these sources the same, or potentially the same, as those for potable water systems. 
(c)  General public. All consumers whose water systems are supplied from the city water system's water mains shall have approved protection against backflow at the service connection to the consumer's system, or the closest practical proximity to the service connection. 
(d)  Isolation. In addition to protection against backflow at the service connection, or entrances from other sources of supply referred to generally as containment, all cross connections (existing or potential) on the consumer's system shall have approved protection against backflow at the points of such cross connections, referred to generally as isolation. 
(e)  Thermal expansion control device. If water is heated in a distribution system, or a branch of the system, that has been closed by the installation of a backflow preventer, a pressure reducing valve or other checking devices, an approved thermal expansion control device shall be installed to limit the pressure build-up of the heated water to not more than 80 psi no-flow pressure at any fixture on the system. 
(f)  Notification of containment/isolation. Prior to containing a system, the manager, or his designee, shall give the plumbing official and the consumer proper notice of his intent to do so, along with an explanation of a closed system. He shall give the consumer a reasonable length of time to add a thermal expansion control device to his water supply system, in accordance with the appliable plumbing code, to control the resulting thermal expansion pressure buildups when his system is closed, unless an immediate hazard to health exists. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § IX; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(IX)) 
Sec. 58-222. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Termination of service; lien created by nonpayment of amounts due; interest on amounts due. In order to enforce the operation of this article, the city shall have the power and authority to enter upon the property of any user who has violated any provision of this article following due notice of the violation, to terminate the user's water and/or wastewater service in any manner deemed necessary and appropriate by the city. In the event of such termination under this section, the city shall retain all rights to collect unpaid bills or amounts owed by the terminated user according to law or other provision of this article. Such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served. Past due amounts shall bear interest at the same rate as would unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
(b)  Civil liabilities and penalties. Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provisions contained in this article shall be liable civilly to the city. Said civil liability may be in a sum not to exceed $10,000.00 for each day in which such violation occurs. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. If any person violates the provisions of this article, the city may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief including injunctive relief, in the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Consent orders. Consent orders may be utilized by the manager to enforce the provisions contained in this article. A consent order may be issued to any person, business or company who violates any provisions of this article. The consent order shall be an agreement between the city and the entity in violation that shall operate as follows: 
(1)  The city shall agree not to prosecute under the law relative to the particular violation or violations being considered if the terms and conditions of the consent order are complied with by the entity in violation. 
(2)  A schedule including various terms and conditions, as necessary for the entity in violation to achieve compliance shall be provided. 
(3)  A monetary payment of an amount commensurate with the nature and magnitude of the violation may be stipulated in the consent order. This monetary payment shall be from the entity in violation to the city and shall have the legal effect of consideration provided in exchange for the city's covenant not to sue or prosecute on the violation or violations stipulated in the consent order. 
(4)  Any party to any consent order shall agree that any such consent order may be filed with the county superior court along with pleadings seeking to make such consent order an order of the superior court or enforceable as such court order in any subsequent enforcement action which may be necessary. 
(e)  Criminal sanctions and fines. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, and every day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as herein set out. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § XI; Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VI)(XI)) 
Secs. 58-223—58-254. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LARGE LIFT STATIONS AND FORCE MAINS 

Sec. 58-255. - Specifications. 
(a)  Large lift stations are those with pumps greater than three horsepower or that serve more than two residential or commercial units. There are two categories of large sewage lift stations associated with the city's sewage system, as follows: 
(1)  Inside city. All large sewage lift stations located within the city limits will be dedicated to and owned and operated by the city so long as all requirements of the city are met. Until such time as all the city's requirements have been met and the city has accepted ownership of the lift station in writing, it shall be the sole responsibility of the developer/applicant to operate and maintain the lift station. 
(2)  Outside city. Except as may be expressly approved by the city council on a case-by-case basis, all large lift stations located outside of the city limits shall be owned, operated and maintained by the owner/applicant, and the city shall have no responsibility for the operation thereof. 
(b)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Lift stations will be permitted only when gravity sewer is unavailable to the property being served. 
(2)  Except as may be approved on a case-by-case basis by the city council, the owner/applicant shall furnish and install the entire lift station/force main system. The system will be designed by the owner/applicant's engineer (designer) licensed to practice engineering in the state. The design must be reviewed and approved by the city. The designer shall consult with the city's engineer during the design of the system. 
(3)  The designer shall locate the lift station to drain the largest possible subbasin. The city's engineer shall approve the location prior to final design to ensure proper location. 
(4)  Generally a pump station will not be allowed to be installed downstream from an existing pump station with its flow going to the existing pump station. The city may, at its discretion, require that a gravity line be installed to carry flow from the existing pump station to the proposed pump station thus eliminating the existing pump station. 
(5)  The merging together of two or more force mains into one force main is referred to as manifolding. The manifolding of force mains is discouraged. However, in the event that manifolding is determined to be the only practical solution to sewage transmission, for all lift stations which connect to an existing force main, the designer must show by proper engineering calculations that the capacities of all related force mains and lift stations in the system will not be exceeded considering the reasonably anticipated worst case conditions. These engineering calculations must be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Site development plans and profiles must show the following: 
(1)  Gravity system and connection to lift station; 
(2)  Force main design showing connection to existing system; 
(3)  Design calculations, including pump curves also showing the pump and system head curves; 
(4)  Plan of the subbasin which drains to the lift station to include contours and projected flow calculations for the entire subbasin; 
(5)  Details of the lift station installation including grades, materials of construction, control systems, etc. Plan and profile views are required; 
(6)  Electrical supply and control diagrams showing all electrical requirements as well as control logic diagram (or a written description of the control logic); 
(7)  Site plan showing finished grade contour lines (two-foot intervals) in and around lift station and access road and all existing and proposed utilities. 
(d)  Large lift stations shall be below grade with duplex (two) submersible pumps operating in the lead-lag configuration such that the pumps alternate after each pump cycle. The lift stations shall be made of concrete, fiberglass, or other structurally suitable, noncorrosive material. Each lift station shall have an above grade access hatch of a size, configuration and elevation that is readily accessible for a human being and suitable for easy installation and removal of the pumps. The hatch shall be designed and located such that surface water flow cannot enter the lift station. The pump manufacturer shall be approved by the city. All pumps shall be able to pass a three-inch diameter solid except those pumps serving individual commercial or residential units shall be able to pass a one-inch diameter solid. 
(e)  Provide fresh water (20 psi minimum) for wash down (50-foot of three-fourths-inch hose supplied with nozzle installed), with back flow preventer installed in accordance with the city's backflow prevention program. The water meter must be set at the edge of the right-of-way. 
(f)  Large lift stations with pumps exceeding three hp shall have the following (unless otherwise approved by the city): 
(1)  Fenced area (25 feet by 25 feet minimum) eight-foot-high fabric nine gauge wire (chainlink type) with top rails and bottom tension wires; three strands barbed wire at top on angled extension arms; posts in three-foot concrete minimum ten-inch diameter spaced ten feet apart; 
(2)  Fourteen-foot wide gate on four-inch diameter posts; 
(3)  High pressure sodium security light on 20-foot pressure treated pole with automatic eye; 
(4)  The wetwell shall be sized to prevent excessive cycling of the pumps. Starts shall be limited to one shart per ten minutes unless otherwise recommended by the pump manufacturer. Size shall be as recommended by the pump supplier and shall be approved by the city. Minimum six-foot diameter wetwell for suction lift pumps. Hatch doors shall be sized by the pump supplier to allow adequate clearance to easily remove the pumps; 
(5)  The force main must have a cutoff valve positioned after the check valve pit. On long force mains the city may require additional in-line valves to isolate sections of the force main in the vent of a pipe failure. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VII)(A)) 
Sec. 58-256. - Electrical specifications. 
(a)  Prior to any approval, the appropriate power company or the city engineer must notify the city that three phase power and voltage is available to the site. In the event that three-phase power is not readily available to the site, the developer may be permitted to utilize a phase converter upon submittal of a letter showing that the cost to install three-phase service is excessive. Approval for the use of a phase converted will be granted by the city based on the specific site conditions. Single phase power will be allowed only for lift stations with pumps less than three horsepower serving individual commercial or residential units. 
(b)  Pump stations installed in developments with underground power will be permitted to utilize three-phase 208 voltage for stations with up to 15 horsepower motors. 
(c)  All aboveground conduit work shall be galvanized rigid conduit (IMC). 
(d)  Switching gear (transfer switch, breakers, etc.) shall be mounted in panel box made of either stainless steel or aluminum minimum of one-eighths-inch thickness of NEMA 4 rating with hinged door with lock. Panel is to set on legs mounted to concrete base, conduit stubs to enter at bottom of panel and to be set in the concrete base for support. 
(e)  No conduit runs or junction boxes are to be installed inside or on top of wet well. 
(f)  Lift stations shall have factory installed hour meters to show pump's running time to the tenth of an hour. 
(g)  Phase converter, when utilized, shall be of the rotary type; manufactured by Kay Industries, distributed by Power Systems Engineering. Stationary type, such as add-a-phase, will not be allowed. 
(h)  The electrical system shall include the means to send a signal to the telemetry system that the incoming power has failed or has lost one phase. 
(i)  A phone dialer shall be provided. 
(j)  An emergency generator or power supplied from two independent sources with automatic switchover capability. All gasoline or diesel powered emergency generators shall have secondary containment to protect against releases of fuel. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VII)(B)) 
Sec. 58-257. - Ownership. 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the city, the developer shall maintain ownership and responsibility of all large sewage lift stations. 
(Res. of 11-13-2006(2), exh. A(VII)(D)) 
Secs. 58-258—58-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-280. - Water usage policy for cleanup and inspections. 
(a)  The city will charge a flat rate, $25.00 nonrefundable fee for contractors, property owners, inspectors, and potential tenants for the use of the city's water if there is not an active account registered with the city's utility department. 
(b)  Persons who request the water meter to be on and pay the required deposit will be able to clean and/or inspect the property for a period of three days. 
(c)  Water usage that exceeds 500 gallons will be billed a minimum water bill in addition to the $25.00. 
(Policy of 4-12-2004) 
Sec. 58-281. - Unlawful for unauthorized persons to tap or open mains or lines. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the city in the performance of his duties as such, or a person having secured a prior permit from the city, to tap into or make any opening in connection with the water mains or waterlines of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, § 6-505) 
Secs. 58-282—58-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-18, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 58-311—58-324, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 58-311. - Authority and purpose. 
The city, under its powers pursuant to state law, has adopted this division to protect the public health and welfare. This division implements the city's authority to impose water use restrictions, conditioned upon a restricted water use period declared by the city pursuant to the terms of this division or a declared drought response level implementation declared by the state pursuant to chapter 391-3-30 of the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, entitled Drought Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-30-.01 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-312. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the house number (a number or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. 
Declared drought response level (DDRL) means one of three levels of drought that may be declared by the state department of natural resources based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and three being the most severe, as provided in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-30-.01 et seq., pertaining to outdoor water use. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Even-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. 
Odd-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Outdoor watering means any watering of decorative lawns, trees or shrubbery or ornamental fountains, or uses defined in GA. Comp Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia 391-3-30. 
Water users means all persons or municipalities using water from any public water source irrespective of that person's responsibility for billing purposes for use of the water. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-313. - Declaration of period of restricted water use. 
The mayor or city manager shall declare a period of restricted water use in either of two circumstances: 
(1)  State DDRL announcement. In the event of imposition by the division of a DDRL encompassing the geographical area of the city's water service area or any part thereof, the mayor or city manager shall declare a water emergency and the level thereof under the approval of the division. Upon the declaration, the restrictions of this division shall apply to all water use within the city's water service area until the restrictions are lifted by the mayor or the city council; provided, however, that the restrictions shall remain in full force and effect until any state outdoor watering ban has been lifted. 
(2)  Local declaration. In the event of prolonged drought, failure of equipment, or any other factor that substantially affects or may affect the supply of water to the city and the city's water users, the mayor or city manager may declare an emergency and the level thereof with an approved variance from the division. Upon the declaration, the restrictions of this division shall apply to all water use within the city until the restrictions are lifted. The declaration should be, where appropriate, conditioned on the identification of an emergency or water shortage by the city personnel, county personnel, state agency, federal agency, or the state governor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-314. - Notice of declaration. 
Upon declaration of a period of restricted water use, the mayor or city manager shall notify all users through news releases to the media, through notices mailed to all users, or through such other means as the mayor or city manager shall deem expedient and appropriate. Notice shall be given as soon as practical after the declaration of a period of restricted water use is made. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-315. - Watering methods. 
During a period of restricted water use of any level, outdoor watering is restricted to bucket, can or handheld hose watering with automatic shutoff nozzle. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited, except watering of newly installed landscaping as permitted herein and except testing of a newly installed or newly repaired sprinkler system by a commercial enterprise engaged in the installation or repair of lawn irrigation systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-315.01. - Pre-drought mitigation strategies. 
(a)  During non-drought periods, irrigation outdoors for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants, shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a.1)(1) and (2). 
(1)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  Subdivision (a)(1) shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor uses: 
a.  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
b.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
c.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
d.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the department to provide reclaimed waste water; 
e.  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
f.  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
g.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
h.  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
i.  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
j.  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
k.  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
l.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
m.  Hydroseeding. 
(3)  Subsection (a)(1) shall not create any limitation upon outdoor water uses for purposes other than planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants. 
(b)  The state has already made, and continues to make, extensive investments in water efficiency since conservation measures play such an important role in water stewardship. Therefore, with the exception of the outdoor irrigation requirements in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a.1)(1) and (2) and the Drought Contingency Plans and Water Conservation Plans required under Rules 391-3-2-.04(11), 391-3-6-.07(4)(b) 8, and 391-3-6-.07(4)(b) 9, this rule does not repeat or modify any existing predrought mitigation strategy or create any new predrought mitigation strategies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-316. - Drought response level 1. 
Permittees that are public water systems shall implement a public information campaign that shall include, at a minimum, public notice regarding drought conditions and drought specific public-service messages in one or more of the following ways: newspaper advertisements, bill inserts, website homepage, social media, and notices in public libraries. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-317. - Level two restrictions. 
During drought response level 2, permittees shall implement all drought response level 1 measures plus the following additional drought response level 2 measures: 
(1)  General outdoor watering. Outdoor irrigation for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants, as described in Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(a), shall be limited to two days a week on an odd-even schedule. Even-numbered addresses may irrigate on Wednesday and Saturday between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. Odd numbered addresses may irrigate on Thursday and Sunday between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. "Even-numbered address" means an address number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or the site does not have a numbered address. "Odd-numbered address" means an address ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
(2)  Specific categories of outdoor water use . The outdoor water uses listed in Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(b) shall be allowed. 
(3)  The following outdoor water uses shall not be allowed, except as provided below: 
a.  Washing hard surfaces such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety; 
b.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls; 
c.  Use of fire hydrants, except for the purposes of firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing; 
d.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, or golf carts; 
e.  Non-commercial washing, or pressure washing, of buildings or structures, except for immediate fire protection; and 
f.  Charity, or non-commercial fund-raiser, car washes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-318. - Level three restrictions. 
During drought response level 3, permittees shall implement all drought response level 1 and 2 measures plus the following additional drought response level 3 measures: 
(1)  General outdoor watering. Outdoor irrigation for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants, as described in Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(a), is not permitted. 
(2)  Specific categories of outdoor water use. The outdoor water uses listed in Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(b) shall be allowed, subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Irrigation of personal food gardens shall be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., unless done using drip irrigation or soaker hoses. Irrigation of personal food gardens using drip irrigation or soaker hoses may be done at any time; 
b.  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container may be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; 
c.  Irrigation of athletic fields or public turf grass recreational areas may be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., subject to the two days a week odd-even schedule described in drought response level 2; 
d.  Irrigation of golf courses shall be conducted in accordance with the "Golf Irrigation Prediction and Estimation Worksheet" and only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., provided, however, irrigation of golf course greens may occur at any time of day; 
e.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the division to provide reclaimed waste water shall not be allowed for general outdoor watering as described in Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(a). It shall be allowed for any use described in Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(b) subject to the limitations in Rule 391-3-30-.07(4)(b); 
f.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems is allowed, provided that it is done by professional landscapers or golf course superintendents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-319. - Drought response strategies. 
(a)  Public information campaign that goes significantly beyond the minimum notice and public service messages associated with drought response level 1; 
(b)  Reduce system pressure, unless such reduction would create unsafe water supply conditions; 
(c)  Pool cover requirements; 
(d)  Implement a drought surcharge program, or tiered conservation rates, that satisfy the criteria of this rule; 
(e)  Suspension of street cleaning program(s); 
(f)  Implement, or accelerate, leak detection and repair program(s); 
(g)  Impose monetary penalties or terminate water services to customers to reduce outdoor water waste due to excessive application, outdoor leaks, improper irrigation, or other similar reasons. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-320. - Professional exemptions. 
The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use restrictions of this rule: 
(1)  Pressure washing; 
(2)  Permanent car wash facility, provided that it is connected to a sanitary sewer system of a political subdivision or local government authority or recycles used wash water; 
(3)  Construction sites; 
(4)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf; and 
(5)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-321. - Application for waiver. 
Any water user that considers the restrictions imposed during a period of restricted water use to adversely affect their livelihood, health or sanitation, may make written application for a waiver. Any such application should be directed to the attention of the mayor or city manager who shall make a determination regarding waiver within five business days of receipt of the application. The determination of the mayor or city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-322. - Issuance of written warnings to violators. 
Persons violating water use restrictions as provided herein shall be given one warning in writing prior to the issuance of a citation, unless: 
(1)  The period of restricted water use is declared in response to a DDRL imposed by the state and applicable in the geographical limits of the city; or 
(2)  The declaration of a period of restricted water use specifically provides that no warnings will be given. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-323. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Every police officer of the city shall, in connection with his duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this division, or any provision of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this division, or any written order of the mayor and council issued pursuant to this division. 
(b)  The mayor and council or the city's designated representative shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this division, or any provision of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this division, or any written order of the mayor and council issued pursuant to this division, by the discontinuance of water service in the event of a violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 58-324. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate a provision of this division, or any provision of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this division, or any written order by the mayor and council or the city's designated representative, issued pursuant to this division, or shall withdraw water from the water supply system of the city for uses prohibited, or in an amount in excess of limitations placed thereon by any such ordinance or order of the mayor and council, or the city's designated representative, shall be penalized as follows: 

 
(b)  Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this division, or failure to comply with any such ordinance or order, is committed or continued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18, 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 58-325—58-353. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS 

Sec. 58-354. - Water meter installation. 
The installation of water meters to monitor the water and sewer consumption in a multiple-unit building shall be pursuant to the requirements of this division. 
(1)  Installation of one water meter (one meter to serve multiple units). The owner is responsible for all applicable tap and connection fees. Fees are assessed per entry doorway and not per meter. If one water meter is installed to monitor the water and sewer consumption in more than one unit in a multiple-unit building, the owner of the building must register the water and sewer services in the name of the owner, and the owner will be billed and shall be responsible for payment of all water and sewer charges. Once the amount of connections have been determined, the same amount of users will be billed monthly to the owner of the building. Sufficient outside curbstop valves for each unit must be installed so that the utility services can be independently shut off without disrupting utility services to the other units in the building Sewer tap and connection fees are assessed per entry and not per meter. 
(2)  Installation of multiple water meters (meter per unit). The owner is responsible for all applicable tap and connection fees. Fees are assessed per meter. If multiple water meters are installed to monitor the water and sewer consumption in a multiple-unit building, the owner of the building must comply with one of the following requirements for the installation: 
a.  If the water and sewer services for the building are registered in the name of the owner, the owner will be billed and shall be responsible for payment of all water and sewer charges; or 
b.  The water and sewer services for each unit in the building may be registered in the name of the tenant, provided the owner agrees to install and maintain in working order, at the owner's expense, an outside curbstop valve for each water meter installed so that the utility services to a unit can be independently shut off without disrupting utility services to the other units in the building. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2007, § I) 
Sec. 58-355. - Existing service. 
(a)  Existing water and sewer services for any multiple-unit building that does not have sufficient outside curbstop valves for each water meter installed so that the utility services can be independently shut off without disrupting utility services to the other units in the building may be billed to the individual tenants provided that the water and sewer charges were billed to the individual tenants prior to the adoption of this division and have been continuously billed to the individual tenants since November 2001. 
(b)  If an existing tenant moves from the building, the water and sewer services may be registered in the name of the new tenant provided the new tenant pays a deposit for water and sewer services as established by the current water and sewer rate ordinance. 
(c)  Remodeling, change of use, etc., may require the owner of the building to install outside curbstop valves for each water meter installed. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2007, § II) 
Sec. 58-356. - Access to premises. 
The owner of a multiple-unit building and/or tenant shall grant employees of the city public works department immediate access to each water meter when necessary for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, removing, or replacing the meter. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2007, § III) 
Sec. 58-357. - Penalties. 
Penalties shall apply for all unauthorized water and sewer connections. The penalty amount will be assessed at two times the amount of the tap and connection fees for water and sewer which are effective on the date of the discovery of the unauthorized connections. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2007, § IV) 
Chapter 60 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Plant disease, pest control and pesticides, O.C.G.A. § 2-7-1 et seq.; forest resources and other plant life, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-1 et seq.; timber harvesting and removal requirements, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-23 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 60-1—60-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 

Sec. 60-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Weeds includes, but is not limited to, jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, or other unsightly growths of a like kind. 
Sec. 60-20. - Prohibited growth. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within the city to permit any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths to obtain a height exceeding 12 inches on such property. Weed growth prohibited by this section shall be a public nuisance subject to abatement as set forth herein. 
Sec. 60-21. - Violation constitutes nuisance. 
It shall be a nuisance per se for the owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land or premises in the city to permit the growth thereon of weeds or vegetative undergrowth of a nature or density so as to violate the provisions of this article or so as to endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or so as to block public roads, streets, alleys or sidewalks. 
Sec. 60-22. - Notice to remove. 
It shall be the duty of the city police chief or designee to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which weeds or other prohibited flora permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this article that such growths must be removed, cut or destroyed within ten days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner or occupant, at his last known address, and by posting on the subject property. Notice shall be complete upon posting. 
Sec. 60-23. - Abatement. 
Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove, cut, or destroy such weeds or other unsightly growths within the designated time period, the appropriate city departments and employees are authorized and empowered to provide for the removal, cutting, or destroying of such growths by or for the city. 
Sec. 60-24. - Costs of abatement. 
The actual cost of such weed removal shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done and a statement of the sums due shall be provided to the owner in the same manner as provided for notices to remove. In the event the bill for such charges remains unpaid ten days after it has been rendered, shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
Secs. 60-25—60-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 60-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Crown spread means the distance measured across the greatest diameter of a plant. 
Park tree means either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs located on land designated as public park land. Public park land shall be land owned or leased by the city and used for public park purposes. 
Shade tree means any self-supporting woody plant of a species that is normally well-shaped, well-branched and well-foliated which normally grows to an overall height of at least 35 feet and normally develops an average mature crown spread greater than 30 feet. 
Small tree means either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs, which do not normally exceed 12 feet in height at maturity. No tree which exceeds 12 feet in height shall be classified as a small tree. 
Street tree means either evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs located on land lying within the public right-of-way on either side of all public streets, roads, avenues or ways within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § V(a)—(c)) 
Sec. 60-52. - Board to maintain list of recommended species. 
The city tree board shall develop and maintain a list of species of street, park, shade and small trees which said tree board recommends for the planting of new trees within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § V(d)) 
Sec. 60-53. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, legal or natural, found guilty of violation any provision of this article shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-18. 
(b)  Action pursuant to any provision of this article shall not be a bar to the enforcement of this article by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the city, acting by and through the city building inspector, or other duly authorized individual, shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the city any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person to institute and maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § XIII) 
Secs. 60-54—60-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 60-80. - Creation and establishment. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree board, which shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city, and who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § I) 
Sec. 60-81. - Term of office. 
The term of office for each the members of the city tree board shall be one year. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member of said board, the mayor and council shall appoint a successor to fill the unexpired portion of the term of such member. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § II) 
Sec. 60-82. - Compensation. 
Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation, except for such per-meeting stipends as may be authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § III) 
Sec. 60-83. - Duties, responsibilities, and operation. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study and investigate the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal and/or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along public streets and in other public areas, and to periodically report such studies and investigations to the mayor and city council. The tree board, when requested by the mayor and city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any specific matter or question coming within the scope of its work. All such studies, investigations, considerations, findings, reports and/or recommendations shall be advisory only. The mayor and council shall designate the chairman of said tree board. The tree board shall: 
(1)  By majority vote elect all other officers it deems necessary and appropriate; 
(2)  By majority vote adopt such rules governing the conduct of its meetings which are not contrary to law; and 
(3)  Keep minutes of its meetings. 
(b)  A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 60-84. - Interference, etc., with city tree board prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its members and/or agents, while engaged in conducting the activities of authorized by this division. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § XII) 
Secs. 60-85—60-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 60-112. - Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. 
No tree (whether street tree, park tree, shade tree or small tree) shall be planted or otherwise located closer than 20 feet from the intersection of any public street with another public street or with a designated private street, as measured from point of intersection of the nearest paved surfaces of such streets. However, shrubs of less than three feet in height are allowed to be located not less than four feet from such intersections. No tree (whether street tree, park tree, shade tree or small tree) shall be planted or otherwise located closer than ten feet from any fire hydrant. This section shall apply only to the planting and/or location of new trees and shall not be interpreted to require the removal of trees in the ground on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. This section shall not apply to the central business district of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § VI) 
Sec. 60-113. - Utilities. 
No tree, other than a tree meeting the definition of a small tree as set forth in this division, shall be planted or located under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, power line, or other utility. This section shall apply only to the planting or location of new trees and shall not be interpreted to require the removal of trees in the ground on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § VII) 
Sec. 60-114. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right, power and authority to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the boundaries and rights-of-way of the streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds of the city, as may be necessary to insure public safely and to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds of the city. 
(b)  The city shall have the right, power and authority to remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof within the boundaries and rights-of-way of the streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds of the city, which tree or any part thereof: 
(1)  Is in an unsafe condition; 
(2)  By reason of its nature or condition, is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements and/or the structural integrity of any public street or sidewalk; and/or 
(3)  Is infected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § VIII) 
Sec. 60-115. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful, as a normal practice, for any person or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires where other pruning practices are impractical shall be exempted from this section. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § IX) 
Sec. 60-116. - Pruning corner clearance trees on private property. 
Every owner of any tree overhanging any public street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches of such tree so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of lights along the street from a streetlight or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § X) 
Sec. 60-117. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
(a)  The city shall have the right, power and authority to cause the removal of any dead or diseased tree located on private property within the city, when such tree: 
(1)  Constitutes a hazard to life; 
(2)  Constitutes a hazard to property; and/or 
(3)  Harbors insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. Diseased or dangerous trees constitute nuisances per se. 
(b)  The city shall have the right, power and authority to take such action immediately in those instances which present a clear and immediate danger of substantial harm to persons and/or property. In all other instances, the city may initiate action to have such tree removed under the applicable provisions of the nuisance provisions of article IV of chapter 36, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 12-10-2003, § XI) 
Sec. 60-118. - Buffer and landscaping requirements. 
The city has adopted, as stated in chapter 64, Standard Development Specifications, April 2002, that include specifications with regard to tree and shrub buffers and other landscaping requirements. The adopted specifications shall be applicable to vegetation within the city to the extent set forth therein. A copy of the adopted specifications are available in the office of the city clerk. 
Chapter 62 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to require certificate of public necessity and convenience as prerequisite to operation of taxicab within local government's geographical boundaries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05, adopted Apr. 9, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 12-400—12-425. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 62-19—62-43. 

Sec. 62-19. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, welfare and safety of its citizens through the proper licensing of taxi businesses and require that those persons operating taxicabs do so in a safe, fair and efficient manner. To provide for application requirements, licensing, required issuance of insurance, permits, permit fees, fines and penalties, appeal of suspension or permit denial and severability. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings given in this section. 
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city clerk authorizing the holder to conduct a taxicab business in the city. 
City means City of Cleveland, Georgia. 
Holder means a person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. 
Taxicab means any vehicle designed and used for the purpose of transporting less than 15 passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage, or length of time, not operating from a fixed terminal on a fixed route. 
Taxi operator's permit means the written permission, granted by the city, to a person to operate a taxicab on the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-21. - Certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
No person shall do business or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him/her to do business in the city without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-22. - Application of certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
An application for a certificate of public convenience shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided by the city. The applicant is required to submit to a criminal history background check. The applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States, an alien admitted for permanent residence, or has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Have not been convicted of any felony crime within the ten-year period prior to the date of application. 
(4)  File application for the initial licensing and inspections of vehicles along with a list of all drivers who will be scheduled for driver permitting. An insurance binder must be provided for each vehicle to be used by the company. 
(5)  Submit the application fees. 
(6)  Provide the following information: 
a.  Name of business. 
b.  Physical address of the business. 
c.  Mailing address of the business. 
d.  Federal employer ID number or Social Security number. 
e.  The insignia (in color format), to be used on the vehicle. 
f.  Details of insurance coverage including agency, policy, and/or binder number, length of coverage, amounts and types of coverage. 
g.  The number of vehicles to be used. 
h.  Applicants full name, race, sex, nationality, Social Security number, alien registration number (if applicable), driver's license number, date of birth, home address, home phone number, mobile (cell) phone number, email address, and the amount of experience in the transportation of passengers. 
i.  Submit to a criminal background check. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-23. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  No certificate shall be issued unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each vehicle authorized for injury to any one person; in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $700,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such liability insurance shall insure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of a holder or his/her agents. 
(b)  Written documentation of the above stated insurance coverage, signed by an authorized agent of the insurer shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Such insurance shall be carried with a company/agency authorized to do business in the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Each certificate of insurance submitted to the city clerk shall include, by endorsement to the policy, a statement that written notice shall be given to the city by certified mail, 30 days prior to cancellation or upon any material change in the coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-24. - Indemnity for the benefit of the city. 
Any taxicab company operating under this article shall hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss costs, damages, or expense, which may accrue, to the city by reason of the negligence of the holder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any taxicab company, its drivers, or other employees, during the operation of a taxicab business or service, either in respect to injuries to person or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-25. - Application fees. 
Before an application will be considered for approval, a $200.00 application fee shall be paid. In the event the application is approved, the applicant will be responsible for paying the occupational tax license fee in accordance with the city's occupational tax license fee schedule. In the event that the application is denied, the city will retain $100.00 of the application fee to cover administrative costs associated with processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-26. - Suspension or revocation of certificate. 
A certificate may be suspended or revoked by the city administrator, or his/her designee, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Furnishing fraudulent information requested in any application. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, or other charges imposed by this article. 
(3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a certificate. 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. 
(5)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(6)  Discontinuing operations for a period of more than 30 days, or failing to begin operations within 60 days of the date of issuance of the certificate. 
Prior to any suspension or revocation, the certificate holder shall be given written notification at his/her last known address of the action, which shall include ground for such action. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-27. - Renewal of certificates. 
(a)  All certificates shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year issued, but may be reinstated by the city administrator, or his/her designee, upon a renewal application being made and a determination that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in the ordinance, and upon payment of the appropriate fees. 
(b)  Certificates may be renewed only between November 15 and December 31 of each year for the following year. Certificates not renewed by December 31 shall be void and the certificate holder must re-apply as a new applicant in order to obtain a certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-28. - Alteration of certificates. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface or destroy a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-29. - Condition of vehicle and required markings. 
(a)  No automobile with less than four doors shall be operated as a taxicab on the streets of the city. 
(b)  The inside of all taxicabs shall be clean and free from liter. 
(c)  No taxicab shall be operated on the streets of the city which are in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-8-7 which requires that all equipment be in good working order and safe mechanical condition. 
(d)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with an inside dome light which shall light up when the rear door is open and provide enough light so that the taxicab operator's permit may be clearly seen. 
(e)  Each taxicab shall be equipped with turn signals and brake lights. 
(f)  It shall be necessary for each taxicab to have a sign affixed on each side of the vehicle in accordance with regulations established by the city. 
(g)  The certificate number issued by the city shall be affixed to the two sides and the rear of each taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-30. - Taxicab operator's permit required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a taxicab on the city streets unless a taxicab operator's permit has been issued. All taxicabs shall display a current taxicab operator's permit issued by the city to signify compliance with this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-31. - Application for taxicab operator's permit. 
Each applicant shall: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years old. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States, an alien admitted for permanent residence, or has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Have not been convicted of any felony crime within the ten-year period prior to the date of application. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency in the English language so as to be able to comprehend traffic signs and obey lawful orders of the police. 
(5)  The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name; 
b.  Age; 
c.  Race; 
d.  Sex; 
e.  Date of birth; 
f.  Social Security number; 
g.  Place of birth; 
h.  Nationality; 
i.  Alien identification number if applicant is not a United States citizen; 
j.  Residence address and telephone number; 
k.  Business address and telephone number; 
l.  Experience or training of applicant in transporting passengers for hire; 
m.  A complete disclosure of all arrests for criminal and traffic violations; and 
n.  Such other relevant information as shall be required by the city. 
(6)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A valid Georgia driver's license; 
b.  One fingerprint card prepared by a member of a Georgia law enforcement agency; 
c.  A driver's history from the Georgia Department of Public Safety containing the applicant's driving record for the previous seven years; 
d.  Criminal history consent form; 
e.  Certification that he/she has read and understands this article; and 
f.  Two current two-inch by two-inch full-faced photographs of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-32. - Criminal history record check. 
The Cleveland Police Department shall conduct an investigation into the criminal history of each applicant for a taxicab operator's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-33. - Taxicab operator's permit fee. 
The initial application and permit fee is $235.00 plus any fees associated with the occupational tax ordinance. The annual permit and certificate renewal fee is $135.00 plus any fees associated with the occupational tax ordinance. Certificates not renewed by December 31 shall be void and the certificate holder must re-apply as a new applicant in order to obtain a certificate at a fee of $235.00 plus any fees associated with the occupational tax ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-34. - Health. 
All persons driving taxicabs in the city shall be in good health and be capable of safely promoting the work of a taxicab driver. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-35. - Consideration of application. 
(a)  The city administrator or his/her designee shall upon consideration of the application approve or deny the taxicab operator's permit. 
(b)  The following shall be grounds for denial of permit: 
(1)  Failure to qualify under the criteria set forth in this article. 
(2)  A driver's history which contains more than five moving violations in the past five years. 
(3)  Current violation of any existing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event that the permit is approved, the city administrator shall issue the permit to the applicant, the certificate holder. 
(1)  The permit is valid for the calendar year in which it was issued and shall expire on December 31 of each year unless renewed. 
(2)  The permit is nontransferable and is valid only for the driver while employed by the certificate holder named on the permit. 
(3)  The permit shall contain the name, company name and address, race, age, and photograph of the applicant. 
(d)  In the event the permit is denied, the city administrator or his/her designee shall notify the applicant in writing at his/her last known address with the reason for denial. 
(e)  If the city finds that further taxicab services in the city is required by public convenience and necessity, and that the applicant is able to perform such public transportation and to conform with this article then the city shall issue a certificate in the name of the business as well as the owner named in the application. 
(1)  To help make its decision, the city administrator or his/her designee shall take into consideration the number of existing taxicabs, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the effect of this request on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant. 
(2)  The total number of taxicabs authorized under certificates issued shall not be greater than one vehicle per 1,000 residents of Cleveland, Georgia. Such population shall be based on the most current census information available from the Untied States Census Bureau. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-36. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
A permit may be suspended or revoked by the city administrator for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the issuance of the permit; 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this article; or 
(3)  Violation of any traffic law while operating a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-37. - Driving after a suspension or revocation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab during any period in which such permit is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-38. - Renewal of taxicab operator's permits. 
(a)  All permits shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reinstated by the city administrator, upon a renewal application being made and a determination that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this article, and upon payment of the appropriate fees. 
(1)  Each applicant for renewal must submit a driver's history from the Georgia Department of Public Safety for the previous calendar year. 
(2)  A valid Georgia driver's license. 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance for each vehicle authorized for injury to any one person, in the amount of $100,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such liability insurance shall insure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of a holder or his/her agents. 
(b)  Permits may be renewed only between November 15 and December 31 of each year for the following year. Certificates not renewed by December 31 shall be void and the certificate holder must re-apply as a new applicant in order to obtain a certificate. 
(c)  Certificate renewal fees are $100.00 per year in addition to the $35.00 taxicab operators permit fee. Occupational tax fees will also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-39. - Alteration of permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully alter, deface or destroy a taxicab operator's permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-40. - Permit not assignable. 
(a)  Every person to whom a taxicab operator's permit has been assigned shall return the permit to the city clerk upon discontinuing the operation of a taxicab for the certificate holder named on the permit. Such permit shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person or be valid for any other certificate holder. Permit holders who change employment shall apply to the city clerk's office for an updated permit that reflects the proper certificate holder for which the permitted will be employed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permit holder to allow his/her permit to be used by any other person. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-41. - Licenses, permits, subject to future terms and conditions. 
Any and all licenses or permits granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to any future ordinances and regulations further regulating and governing the operation of taxicabs, or to additional and other regulations, or changing, modifying or withdrawing in whole or in part the approval or any privilege for the operation of such vehicles, as may in the judgment of the city council be consistent and to the best interest of the public welfare and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-42. - Fines and penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 16-75(c) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 62-43. - Appeal of taxi driver's permit denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  An applicant whose permit is denied or a permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked may request a hearing before the Cleveland City Council. A request for hearing must be made in writing and addressed to the Cleveland City Clerk, 85 South Main Street, Cleveland, GA 30528. The applicant or permittee shall have 15 days from the date of the denial of a permit or notice of a suspension or revocation to request a hearing before the Cleveland City Council. 
(b)  All hearings shall be conducted within five working days of the date the request was received by the City Clerk of the City of Cleveland. The appellant may request one extension of the hearing date. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, 4-9-2012) 
Chapter 64 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; city and county zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local zoning proposal review procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 64-1. - Adoption of development specifications. 
The city Standard Development Specifications, dated April 2002, are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. A copy of the adopted specifications are available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 64-2. - Adoption of comprehensive plan. 
On April 14, 2008, the city adopted the county joint comprehensive plan, which is incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter, as amended from time to time. A copy of the adopted plan is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 64-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use or building means a use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse means any dwelling in which three or more persons either individually or as families are housed for hire with or without meals. 
Building means any structure intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Business sign means an attached or freestanding structure on which are announced the business use of the premises and for the name of the operation of the business. 
Centerline of streets means a line surveyed and monumented as such, or, if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Dwelling means a building designed or used for permanent living quarters for one or more families or individuals. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms with kitchen facilities designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Gas means any combustible gaseous or liquified mixture used for illumination or fuel including all forms of petroleum (gasoline, propane, butane). 
Home occupation means an occupation or activity and the retail sales of the products of such activity only when situated in the same building used as a private residence and conducted by residents only. Such activity shall be confined to 25 percent of the floor area of the residence, and one sign not over two square feet in area may be displayed. 
House trailer or mobile home means a vehicle with or without its own motive power, equipped for or used for living purposes and mounted on wheels or originally designed to be so mounted and transported. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings, including accessory buildings or used incidental to them, and including such open spaces as are required by this chapter. 
Lot width means the distance between the side boundaries of the lot measured at the front building line. 
Major street means a street or highway within the city which is designated as a state highway or as a federal highway. 
Map or zoning map means the official zoning map of the city. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something located on the ground. 
Trailer park or court means any portion or parcel of land designed to accommodate one or more house trailers to be used for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure or facility used by the occupants of house trailer on such property. 
Used or occupied, as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed" to be used or occupied. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except as permitted by this chapter. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building located between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, §§ 3.1, 3.2; Ord. of 9-29-2003, § A) 
Secs. 64-4—64-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 64-25. - Designation. 
For purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into six districts designated as follows: 

 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, art. IV(intro.)) 
Sec. 64-26. - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of these districts are as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Districts Map—Cleveland, Georgia," on file in the office of the city clerk and available for public inspection. The zoning map is for informational purposes only and may not reflect amendments in district boundaries. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 4.1) 
Sec. 64-27. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries portrayed on the zoning map, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 4.2) 
Sec. 64-28. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, centerline of streams or drainageways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highway, or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
(4)  Where a district boundary line as appearing on the zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 4.3) 
Secs. 64-29—64-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 64-60. - Use. 
No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 5.1) 
Sec. 64-61. - Height and density. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered to: 
(1)  Exceed the height limits; 
(2)  House a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or 
(3)  Have narrower or smaller front or side yards than as herein required. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 5.2) 
Sec. 64-62. - Lot size and occupancy. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots in the same ownership at the same time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards or lot area per family or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public use. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 5.3) 
Sec. 64-63. - Yards and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or other open space or the off-street parking or loading space required adjacent to any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of the yard or off-street parking or loading space required for another building. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 5.4) 
Sec. 64-64. - Number of buildings per lot. 
Within any district, more than one building (housing a permitted use together with accessory buildings) may be constructed upon any tract of land provided that yard and other requirements are complied with for each structure as though each structure were on an individual lot. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 5.5) 
Sec. 64-65. - Required street frontage. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 25 feet on a public street or at least 25 feet on a designated private street. For the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)  A public street shall be a street whose right-of-way has been dedicated to and accepted by: 
a.  The city; 
b.  The state acting by and through the state department of transportation, and such department's precursor agencies or departments; and 
c.  The United States of America, acting by and through its authorized departments and agencies. 
(2)  A designated private street shall be those streets, roads or drives, within the city, which are shown on the map attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived as exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference, which streets roads or drives are not now a public street as defined in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 5.6; Ord. of 9-29-2003, § B) 
Secs. 64-66—64-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 64-89. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter except that the nonconforming structure or use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Reestablished after discontinuance for one year; 
(3)  Extended except in conformity with this chapter; 
(4)  Rebuilt altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.1) 
Sec. 64-90. - Off-street automobile parking. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established. The number of automobile parking spaces provided shall be at least as great as the number specified in this subsection for various uses: 
(1)  Automobile repair garages: One space for each regular employee plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work. 
(2)  Gasoline filling stations: Three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility plus two spaces for each gas pump attendant. 
(3)  Hospitals and nursing homes or similar institutions: One space for each two beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one space for each three employees. 
(4)  Hotels: One space for each two guest bedrooms plus one space for each five employees. 
(5)  Industrial: One space for each two employees on a single shift plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
(6)  Lodges and clubs: One space for each ten members. 
(7)  Offices: One space for each 300 square feet of floor space. 
(8)  Places of amusement or assembly without fixed seats: One space for each 200 square feet of floor space devoted to patron use. 
(9)  Places of public assembly: One space for each four seats in the principal assembly room. 
(10)  Residential: One space for each dwelling unit. 
(11)  Restaurants: One space for each 75 square feet of floor area devoted to patron use, plus one space for each four employees. 
(12)  Retail business: One space for each 250 square feet of sales space. 
(13)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses: One space for each two bedrooms. 
(14)  Tourist courts and motels: One space for each accommodation. 
(15)  Wholesale business: One space for each two employees. 
(b)  Each space shall be at least 300 square feet in area and shall have vehicular access to a public street. Turning space should be provided, except for single-family residences, so that no vehicle will be required to back into the street. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.2) 
Sec. 64-91. - Location of parking space on other property. 
If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property provided such property lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.3) 
Sec. 64-92. - Extension of parking spaces into a residential district. 
Required parking space may extend up to 120 feet into a residential zoning district, provided that the space: 
(1)  Adjoins a commercial or industrial district; 
(2)  Has only access to or fronts upon the same street as the property in the commercial or industrial district for which it provides the required parking space; and 
(3)  Is visually separated from abutting properties in the adjoining residential district by suitable screening devices. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.4) 
Sec. 64-93. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Every building or structure used for a business, trade, or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. The following minimum loading and unloading spaced is required: 
(1)  Retail business: One space of 300 square feet for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; 
(2)  Wholesale and industry: One space of 500 square feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; and 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one time. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.5) 
Sec. 64-94. - Vision clearance. 
In all use districts except the central business district (B-1), no fence, walls, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.6) 
Sec. 64-95. - Location of house trailers (mobile homes). 
No house trailers shall be permitted in any district except R-2 and R-3, and then only under the following conditions: A single house trailer shall be allowed on a single lot only in the R-2 and R-3 districts provided said lot, whether existing or created, has the minimum square feet of area as herein specified for a lot in a residential district and provided that adequate sanitary sewage facilities are installed or connected to as recommended by the state health department. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.7) 
Sec. 64-96. - Classification of streets. 
(a)  Street divisions designated. For the purposes of this chapter, all streets in the city are hereby divided into three classes: 
(1)  Major streets. Major streets are those public streets which are designated as state or federal highways. 
(2)  Local streets. Local streets are those public streets which are not designated as either state or federal highways. 
(3)  Designated private streets. Designated private streets are those streets, roads or drives, within the city, which are shown on the map attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference, which streets, roads or drives are not now public streets as defined in section 64-65(1), and those subdivision streets designated on plats of surveys given final approval by the city under the provisions of the city standard development specifications. 
(b)  Determination and identification of public and private streets on map. The beginning and end of such public streets and private streets shown on the map attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be as determined and identified by the city, and such determination and identification shall control over the graphic representation shown on said map. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 6.8; Ord. of 9-29-2003, § C) 
Secs. 64-97—64-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITTED USE BY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 64-121. - R-1 residential district. 
(a)  The R-1 residential district is composed chiefly of existing low-density residential areas of the city, and vacant or open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to encourage similar and complementary type residential development together with associated recreational, religious and educational facilities. 
(b)  In the R-1 residential district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family residence; 
(2)  Churches, fraternal organizations and clubs not operating for a profit; 
(3)  Public buildings, structures and grounds; 
(4)  Accessory uses and home occupations.; 
(5)  Schools, including private schools, nursery schools and kindergartens; 
(6)  Agriculture, excluding the care and feeding of poultry and livestock. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 7.1) 
Sec. 64-122. - PUD planned unit development (single-family, medium-density). 
(a)  This zoning district is intended to establish truly unique developments in which conventional design requirements and districts cannot accommodate. The PUD district is not intended to allow developments in which higher densities are sought for the sole purpose of circumventing the existing zoning districts. The PUD district also allows for more truly mixed-use developments rather than a conventional residential subdivision. Upon approval of the mayor and council, the PUD designation shall be conditional with the site plan and written report becoming the actual zoning and development criteria for the land, unless otherwise required in this Code. 
(b)  The purpose of the PUD district is to allow for owner occupied fee simple row-houses, fee simple townhouses, condominiums, or fee simple single-family attached or detached dwelling units. A single-family dwelling, that may or may not be attached, in a row in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside and each attached unit is separated by one or more common fire resistant walls which conform to existing International Building Code Specifications. This district does not allow for apartments, rental duplexes, rental units or lease units. Each unit shall be platted and deeded separately in either condominium or fee simple form. This Code shall not dictate the form in which units are transferred and how associations are established and maintained. All common areas within the development shall also be owned by a homeowners association. PUD developments shall generally be situated in areas where higher density and clustering is logical and planned with infrastructure availability. Compatibility with existing land use patterns should also be considered. Minimal ancillary uses shall be allowed to complement the nature of the primary residential use of the property. Area, yard and height requirements describe in detail the density and development standards applied to this district. 
(c)  PUD districts shall be allowed at the discretion of the mayor and council. Areas zoned for multifamily is eligible to request a change to PUD zoning. Upon review and recommendation of the city planning and zoning board, along with typical city zoning criteria, rezoning proposals for PUD shall be subject to the following considerations. The following must be presented to the city at the time of the zoning application to qualify for the PUD district: 
(1)  A survey of the property in its entirety, including topography; 
(2)  A site plan drawn by a professional engineer indicating specific uses of land; 
(3)  Architectural renderings of the style of the overall development. If different styles are to be incorporated, give examples of all to be included; 
(4)  Calculations of the following: 
a.  Open space not to be otherwise occupied by buildings, parking, housing units, streets, driveways, etc.; 
b.  Areas of environmental sensitivity such as creeks, streams, wetlands, floodplain, etc.; 
c.  Amount of total impervious surface of the finished development; 
(5)  A traffic study of the proposed use as it would affect surrounding developments, properties, and transportation networks; 
(6)  A narrative describing in detail the nature of the development and why it needs consideration as a PUD zoning district; 
(7)  A narrative describing compatibility with surrounding land uses and mitigation of impacts to surrounding properties; 
(8)  Densities of all land uses included in the development concept; 
(9)  A schedule of the projected construction and build-out of the development; 
(10)  A cross section of all streets and road designs if not to current city standards; 
(11)  An example of covenants and agreements that would apply to all property owners as to the maintenance, ownership, and insurability of all privately owned improvements; 
(12)  Any and all means by which water and sewer are provided to the development. 
(d)  The following standards will be reviewed in addition to the zoning criteria set forth by the city: 
(1)  The proposed uses and intensities would not be detrimental to surrounding properties or uses; 
(2)  Mitigation of impacts is proposed and is considered to be adequate with regard to the protection of surrounding properties; 
(3)  The proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses; 
(4)  The proposed use or proposed density is not out of character with the comprehensive land use plan; 
(5)  There are substantial design and use concepts that make the proposed development distinct and unique; 
(6)  Impacts to surrounding properties are mitigated with the use of open space and buffering; 
(7)  Environmentally sensitive areas are protected to the standards set forth in this chapter and Code; 
(8)  The proposed development would not encumber or exhaust the city infrastructure. 
(e)  Design requirements. All PUDs shall be required to comply with the following requirements. Except as otherwise allowed in this Code, no variances shall be considered or allowed for a proposed PUD with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  Buffer requirements otherwise applicable to properties not included in the PUD; 
(2)  Stormwater, soil erosion, stream setbacks, or environmental criteria otherwise contained within this chapter; 
(3)  Landscape requirements shall not be varied; 
(4)  All PUD developments shall maintain the required common recreational area. 
(f)  Permitted uses. Principal, accessory, and special/conditional uses permitted in this district are listed as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached or attached dwelling unit; 
(2)  Townhomes. All developments containing fee-simple townhouses shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Lots. Each townhome shall be located on its own lot of record, and subdivision plat approval shall be required, in accordance with, the city development specifications. 
b.  Minimum lot size, frontage width. Each townhome shall contain a minimum lot area of 2,500 square feet, the minimum lot width and frontage for each lot shall be 22 feet. The minimum lot area for a townhome development shall be one acre. The maximum units, per acre, are ten. 
c.  Setbacks. Townhomes shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located, provided however, that zero lot line (no side unit setback) is permitted between individual townhome units forming the same building. The side yard setbacks, between buildings, shall not be less than 30 feet. The side yard area, between buildings, will be known as the common area. All side setbacks shall be kept clear of trees, fences, buildings, or other impediments to emergency vehicles in the event of fire or other emergencies. The rear setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Dwelling units, which form a part of a single building, shall have the front setbacks and rooflines varied/staggered by a minimum of two feet. 
d.  Proposed developments shall make maximum use of natural features of the land and set aside 1,600 square feet per acre or 200 square feet per unit (whichever is greater) for a recreational common area contiguous to the development. This may include playground, clubhouses, etc. A walking trail may be approved for lower density developments. 
e.  No more than 20 percent of floodplain or other unusable land from a developmental perspective may be used to calculate allowed density. 
f.  An "in home" business or other business will not be permitted in PUD districts. 
(3)  Minimum/maximum units per building. Single- and two-unit detached townhomes cannot exceed 50 percent of the total housing units inside a development. A maximum of six dwelling units shall be allowed in a row of townhomes. 
(4)  Minimum unit size. The minimum size per unit shall be as follows: 

 
(5)  Street parking. 
a.  All streets within a townhome development shall be built to city development specifications as set forth in the city development specifications handbook, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
b.  The minimum number of parking spaces, per unit, shall be three. Two of these parking spaces must be in located directly in the front or rear of each town home unit. All units shall require at least single-car garages. All additional parking spaces must be grouped in bays no more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from the building it is intended to serve. All parking areas must be paved (asphalt or concrete) and served by concrete sidewalks. Garages shall be included in the required three space parking per unit. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 42 inches wide from each unit of each building. All streets and parking areas within each townhome development shall be curbed and guttered. Such curb and guttering shall direct stormwater in a manner so as to have minimum impact on adjacent streets and property. 
(6)  Area, height, density and placement requirements. As per city development specifications. 
(7)  Internal yard requirements. A 30-foot grassed or landscaped strip shall be provided between all buildings and interior driveways/streets. 
(8)  Additional requirements. 
a.  Four complete detailed sets of building blueprints, stamped by a registered architect or engineer will be required to be submitted for approval. A detailed site plan shall be submitted with each request for development approval by the city. 
b.  A fire hydrant is required (at the expense of the developer) per acre of the development. 
c.  Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of the city. 
d.  All utilities shall be underground. 
e.  Proposed developments shall make maximum use of natural features of the land and set aside property for a recreational common area contiguous to the development in accordance with article XII of the city development specifications handbook, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
f.  No more than 20 percent of floodplain or other unusable land from a developmental perspective may be used to calculate allowed density. 
(9)  Condominiums. The condominiums district is intended to establish, preserve and maintain "in town" neighborhoods that are served by public water and sewer services. The district shall be created through a recommendation from the planning and zoning board to the mayor and city council for final approval. Areas zoned for multifamily are eligible to request a change to PUD zoning. Property to be considered for rezoning to PUD single-family must be made, with the proper application, to the city planning and zoning board and must meet the existing city development specifications and regulations. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three attached units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire resistant walls. In the PUD single-family, district, the use will not include any permitted uses in other zoning districts. An "in home" business or other business will not be permitted in PUD districts. 
a.  Condominiums development regulations. All developments containing condominiums shall conform to the following requirements. Condominium developments, public or private, shall meet all applicable state laws, including the state Condominium Act. Condominium bylaws shall be recorded with the county clerk of court. 
b.  Lots. Subdivision plat approval shall be required, in accordance with, the city development specifications. 
c.  Minimum lot size, frontage width. The minimum lot area for a condominium development shall be one acre. The maximum units, per acre, are 12. 
d.  Setbacks. Condominiums shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located, provided however, that zero lot line (no side unit setback) is permitted between individual condominium units forming the same building. The side yard setbacks, between buildings, shall not be less than 30 feet. The side yard area, between buildings, will be known as the common area. All side setbacks shall be kept clear of trees, fences, buildings, or other impediments to emergency vehicles in the event of fire or other emergencies. The rear setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Dwelling units, which form a part of a single building, shall have the front setbacks and rooflines varied/staggered by a minimum of two feet. 
(10)  Minimum/maximum units per building. Single- and two-unit detached townhomes cannot exceed 50 percent of the total housing units inside a development. A maximum of six dwelling units shall be allowed in a row of condominiums. 
(11)  Minimum unit size. The minimum size per unit shall be as follows: 

 
a.  Street parking: 
1.  All streets within a condominium development shall be built to city development specifications as set forth in the city development specifications handbook, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
2.  The minimum number of parking spaces, per unit, shall be three. Two of these parking spaces must be in located directly in the front or rear of each condominium unit. Garages are optional. All additional parking spaces must be grouped in bays no more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from the building it is intended to serve. All parking areas must be paved (asphalt or concrete) and served by concrete sidewalks. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 42 inches wide from each unit of each building. All streets and parking areas within each condominium development shall be curbed and guttered. Such curb and guttering shall direct stormwater in a manner so as to have minimum impact on adjacent streets and property. 
b.  Area, height, density and placement requirements. As per city development specifications; 
c.  Internal yard requirements. A 30-foot grassed or landscaped strip shall be provided between all buildings and interior driveways/streets; 
d.  Additional requirements. 
1.  Four complete detailed sets of building blueprints, stamped by a registered architect or engineer will be required to be submitted for approval. A detailed site plan shall be submitted with each request for development approval by the city; 
2.  A fire hydrant is required (at the expense of the developer) per acre of the development; 
3.  Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of the city; 
4.  All utilities shall be underground; 
5.  Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks and recreation area, provided that applicable sections of this Code are met; 
6.  Accessory buildings provided that the requirements in section of the area, yard, and height requirements are met; 
7.  Proposed developments shall make maximum use of natural features of the land and set aside 1,600 square feet per acre or 200 square feet per unit (whichever is greater) for a recreational common area contiguous to the development. This may include playground, clubhouses, etc. A walking trail may be approved for lower density developments; 
8.  No more than 20 percent of floodplain or other unusable land from a developmental perspective may be used to calculate allowed density. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2005; Ord. of 9-15-2008(1)) 
Sec. 64-123. - R-2 multifamily residential district (single-family, medium-to-high density). 
In the R-2 multifamily residential district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 district; 
(2)  Multifamily residences; 
(3)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses, tourist homes, provided they are located on a major thoroughfare; 
(4)  House trailer or trailers (see section 64-95). 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 7.2; Ord. of 9-15-2008(2)) 
Sec. 64-124. - R-2 medium density/apartment residential district (single-family, medium-density). 
(a)  R-2 medium density apartment residential districts shall be allowed at the discretion of the mayor and council. Upon review and recommendation of the city planning and zoning board, along with typical city zoning criteria, rezoning proposals for R-2 medium density apartment residential districts shall be subject to the following considerations. The following must be presented to the city at the time of the zoning and/or building permit application or development plans to qualify for the R-2 medium density apartment residential districts district: 
(1)  A survey of the property in its entirety, including topography; 
(2)  A site plan drawn by a professional engineer indicating specific uses of land; 
(3)  Architectural renderings of the style of the overall development. If different styles are to be incorporated, give examples of all to be included; 
(4)  Calculations of the following: 
a.  Open space not to be otherwise occupied by buildings, parking, housing units, streets, driveways, etc.; 
b.  Areas of environmental sensitivity such as creeks, streams, wetlands, floodplain, etc.; 
c.  Amount of total impervious surface of the finished development; 
(5)  A traffic study of the proposed use as it would affect surrounding developments, properties, and transportation networks; 
(6)  A narrative describing in detail the nature of the development and why it needs consideration as a PUD zoning district; 
(7)  A narrative describing compatibility with surrounding land uses and mitigation of impacts to surrounding properties; 
(8)  Densities of all land uses included in the development concept; 
(9)  A schedule of the projected construction and build-out of the development; 
(10)  A cross section of all streets and road designs if not to current city standards; 
(11)  An example of covenants and agreements that would apply to all property owners as to the maintenance, ownership, and insurability of all privately owned improvements; 
(12)  Any and all means by which water and sewer are provided to the development. 
(b)  The following standards will be reviewed in addition to the zoning criteria set forth by the city: 
(1)  The proposed uses and intensities would not be detrimental to surrounding properties or uses; 
(2)  Mitigation of impacts is proposed and is considered to be adequate with regard to the protection of surrounding properties; 
(3)  The proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses; 
(4)  The proposed use or proposed density is not out of character with the comprehensive land use plan; 
(5)  Impacts to surrounding properties are mitigated with the use of open space and buffering; 
(6)  Environmentally sensitive areas are protected to the standards set forth in this article and Code; 
(7)  The proposed development would not encumber or exhaust the city infrastructure. 
(c)  Design requirements. All R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts shall be required to comply with the requirements of this subsection. Except as otherwise allowed in this Code, no variances shall be considered or allowed for proposed R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  Buffer requirements otherwise applicable to properties not included in the R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts; 
(2)  Stormwater, soil erosion, stream setbacks, or environmental criteria otherwise contained within this chapter; 
(3)  Landscape requirements shall not be varied; 
(4)  All R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts developments shall maintain the required common recreational area. 
(d)  Permitted uses. Principal, accessory, and special/conditional uses permitted in this district are listed as follows: 
(1)  Attached dwelling unit. R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts. All developments containing R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Lots. Each development shall be located on its own lot of record, and subdivision plat approval shall be required, in accordance with, the city development specifications. 
b.  Minimum lot size, frontage width. The minimum lot area for an R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts shall be one acre. The maximum units, per acre, are ten. The minimum road frontage width is 40 feet. 
c.  Setbacks. R-2 medium-density apartment residential districts shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located. The side yard setbacks, between buildings, shall not be less than 30 feet. The side yard area, between buildings, will be known as the common area. All side setbacks shall be kept clear of trees, fences, buildings, or other impediments to emergency vehicles in the event of fire or other emergencies. The rear setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
d.  Proposed developments shall make maximum use of natural features of the land and set aside 1600 square feet per acre or 200 square feet per unit (whichever is greater) for a recreational common area contiguous to the development. This may include playground, clubhouses, etc. A walking trail may be approved for lower density developments. 
e.  No more than 20 percent of floodplain or other unusable land from a developmental perspective may be used to calculate allowed density. 
(2)  Minimum/maximum units per building. Three units minimum and a maximum of six dwelling units shall be allowed in a row of multifamily/apartment residential district, unless otherwise approved, in writing, by the city. 
(3)  Street parking. 
a.  All streets within an R-2 medium-density apartment residential district shall be built to city development specifications as set forth in the city development specifications handbook, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
b.  The minimum number of parking spaces, per unit, shall be three. Two of these parking spaces must be in located directly in the front or rear of each R-2 medium-density apartment residential unit. All additional parking spaces must be grouped in bays no more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from the building it is intended to serve. All parking areas must be paved (asphalt or concrete) and served by concrete sidewalks. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 42 inches wide from each unit of each building. All streets and parking areas within each R-2 medium-density apartment residential district development shall be curbed and guttered. Such curb and guttering shall direct stormwater in a manner so as to have minimum impact on adjacent streets and property. 
(4)  Area, height, density and placement requirements. As per city development specifications. 
(5)  Internal yard requirements. A 30-foot grassed or landscaped strip shall be provided between all buildings and interior driveways/streets. 
(6)  Additional requirements: 
a.  Four complete detailed sets of building blueprints, stamped by a registered architect or engineer will be required to be submitted for approval. A detailed site plan shall be submitted with each request for development approval by the city. 
b.  A fire hydrant is required (at the expense of the developer) per acre of the development. 
c.  Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of the city. 
d.  All utilities shall be underground. 
e.  Proposed developments shall make maximum use of natural features of the land and set aside property for a recreational common area contiguous to the development in accordance with article XII of the city development handbook, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
f.  No more than 20 percent of floodplain or other unusable land from a developmental perspective may be used to calculate allowed density. 
(Ord. of 9-15-2008(2)) 
Sec. 64-125. - R-3 residential-agricultural district. 
The R-3 residential-agricultural district is composed of low density residential areas intermixed with agricultural activities. The regulations for this district are designed to provide for, in addition to those uses allowed in R-1, the pursuits of farming activities until the rising property values make farming uneconomical. In the R-3 residential-agricultural district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any permitted use in R-1 district; 
(2)  The keeping of livestock or poultry, provided no building used for the keeping of poultry or farm livestock shall be closer to any property line or dwelling, other than the dwelling of the owner, than 300 feet; 
(3)  Static electrical transformer stations and gas regulator stations; 
(4)  Accessory farm uses including the sale of products grown on the premises; 
(5)  Radio and television transmission towers. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 7.3; Ord. of 9-15-2008(2)) 
Sec. 64-126. - B-1 central business district. 
(a)  The B-1 central business district is intended for the development of those business activities which primarily provide goods and services to the local citizens. Within the central business district of the city the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any retail business or service, including manufacturing in connection with a retail store or shop provided that such manufacturing is incidental to the retail use and all goods manufactured are sold on the premises; 
(2)  Automobile sales rooms and repair garages; 
(3)  Bus terminals and taxicab stands; 
(4)  Funeral parlors; 
(5)  Gasoline service stations, provided that points of access and egress shall be located not less than ten feet from the intersection of street lines; shall not exceed 40 feet in width; and shall not be closer than 20 feet apart; 
(6)  Hotels, offices, and banks; 
(7)  Motels; 
(8)  Newspapers and printing plants; 
(9)  Public uses and structures; 
(10)  Off-street parking lots; 
(11)  Radio stations and transmission towers; 
(12)  Public utility structures; 
(13)  Theaters, restaurants. 
(b)  In the event that a parcel which was formerly located in an R-1 residential district, R-2 residential district, and/or an R-3 residential-agricultural district, has been rezoned so as to be located in the B-1 central business district, then and in such event any residential structure located on said parcel which was lawfully used as a residence prior to said rezoning action, may continue to be used as a residence on said parcel until such time as said residential structure is used for one or more of the permitted purposes allowed under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(12) of this section. A home occupation, as defined under section 64-3, when located in said residential structure, shall also be deemed a permitted use under this provision. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 7.4; Ord. of 2-9-2004(1), § A; Ord. of 9-15-2008(2)) 
Sec. 64-127. - B-2 highway commercial district. 
(a)  The B-2 highway commercial district is intended primarily for the development of those business activities which mainly cater to the traveling public and which should be located on a major street. Within the B-2 district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Gasoline service stations, provided that points of access and egress shall be located not less than ten feet from the intersection of street lines; shall not exceed 30 feet in width; and shall not be closer than 40 feet apart; 
(2)  Motels; 
(3)  Drive-in restaurants; 
(4)  Business, professional and governmental offices; 
(5)  Retail shops customarily serving tourist or highway trade; 
(b)  In the event that a parcel which was formerly located in an R-1 residential district, an R-2 residential district, and/or an R-3 residential-agricultural district, has been rezoned so as to be located in the B-2 highway commercial district, then and in such event any residential structure located on said parcel which was lawfully used an a residence prior to said rezoning action, may continue to be used as a residence on said parcel until such time as said residential structure is used for one or more of the permitted purposes allowed under section 64-126(a)(1) through (a)(12). A home occupation, as defined under section 64-3, when located in said residential structure shall also be deemed a permitted use under this provision. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 7.5; Ord. of 2-9-2004(1), § B; Ord. of 9-15-2008(3)) 
Sec. 64-128. - I industrial district. 
The I industrial district is intended for the development of manufacturing, wholesale, adult entertainment and service establishments which are not obnoxious or offensive, by reason of emission of odor, smoke, dust, gas, noise, vibrations, light, heat, etc. Within this district a building or premises may be used for legal, nonresidential purpose except the following: 
(1)  Abattoir and slaughterhouse or stockyards; 
(2)  Acetylene gas manufacturer; 
(3)  Acid manufacturer; 
(4)  Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacturer; 
(5)  Asphalt manufacturer, refining or preparations; 
(6)  Auto wrecking or salvage, except when such activities are conducted wholly within a building; 
(7)  Blast furnaces; 
(8)  Boiler works; 
(9)  Brick, tile, pottery, terracotta manufacturer, excluding small handicrafts operations; 
(10)  Coal tar manufacturing or tar distillation, except as byproducts of public utility gas manufacturer, or mineral dye manufacturer; 
(11)  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacturer; 
(12)  Creosote manufacturer or treatment; 
(13)  Distillation of bones, coal or wood; 
(14)  Explosive or fireworks manufacturer; 
(15)  Fat rendering; 
(16)  Fertilizer manufacturer; 
(17)  Gas manufacturer (gas storage is allowed provided that such storage facilities are located no closer than 300 feet to a residential structure); 
(18)  Glue or gelatin manufacturer; 
(19)  Incineration, reduction or dumping of offal, dead animals, garbage or refuse; 
(20)  Junk, iron or rags storage or baling; 
(21)  Oilcloth or linoleum manufacturer; 
(22)  Oiled cloth or oiled clothing manufacturer or the impregnation of any fabrics by oxidizing oils, window shades or patent leather manufacturer; 
(23)  Ore reduction; 
(24)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacturer; 
(25)  Paper and paper pulp manufacturer; 
(26)  Petroleum refining; 
(27)  Rolling mill; 
(28)  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron; 
(29)  Tanning, curling or storage of raw hides or skins; 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 7.6; Ord. of 9-15-2008(3)) 
Sec. 64-129. - Intensity of use. 
For the purposes of the provisions of this article the zoning districts established under this chapter shall be ranked, in the order of increasing intensity of use, as follows: 
(1)  R-1 residential district; 
(2)  R-3 residential - agricultural district; 
(3)  PUD planned unit development; 
(4)  R-2 medium-density apartment residential district; 
(5)  R-2 multifamily residential district; 
(6)  B-2 roadside business district; 
(7)  B-1 central business district; 
(8)  I industrial district. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2003, § A(7.7)) 
Sec. 64-130. - Subdivisions. 
Any subdivision of land shall be in conformity with this chapter and with the following: 
(1)  The subdivider shall declare the uses intended for the subdivided tracts or lots on the face of the proposed plat of survey of such lots, and the present zoning district or districts in which said subdivision lies; 
(2)  The zoning district in which said subdivision lies shall not conflict with the declared uses set out on the face of said proposed plat of survey; and 
(3)  In each and every instance in which the proposed plat of survey shows more than one classification of declared use, the most intense use (as ranked in section 64-129), shall be located within such subdivision so that no street, public or private, shall pass through or along a less intense use to reach a more intense use. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2003, § A(7.8)) 
Sec. 64-131. - Camp with residential homes and commercial use buildings. 
(a)  Definitions. The term "camp" means a dedicated area with improvements and various facilities for day use or to reside or lodge somewhere temporarily. The camp/residential/commercial district may be composed of low-density residential housing (for yearround staff housing only), camp dormitories, administrative offices, commercial use cafeteria/conference center, and supply/gift store. 
(b)  The purpose of a camp, as used in this section, is to preserve, protect and enhance aesthetics of the city's natural resources and scenic beauty. A camp is an area organized, developed and operated by the owner for the primary purpose of education, recreation, health or other similar purpose for young persons less than 21 years of age. 
(c)  The minimum area for a camp development is 50 acres. 
(d)  PUD and R-2 density housing is prohibited in this zoning classification. This district does not allow for apartments or duplexes. 
(e)  RV/mobile campers that utilize sewer hookup require additional approval/permitting for this zoning classification. No more than three RV/mobile campers will be allowed to connect to the sewer system. 
(f)  The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family housing. No more than ten percent of the total site area of the campground can be used for single-family housing. Housing must remain under the ownership of the property owner. 
(2)  Dormitories. Temporary housing for camp events. No one person or family may live at the dormitory for a period longer than six months. 
(3)  Schools, including private schools, and churches. 
(4)  Accessory building, primary use. Camp, cafeteria/conference center, administrative offices, equipment building, supply and/or gift store. 
(5)  Gravel access road. To preserve the aesthetics of a natural campground, a gravel access road will be allowed. This road will be owned and maintained by property owner. The property owner will comply with all fire, life and safety codes concerning road width, access, etc. 

 
(g)  The city standard development specifications, along with adopted building and construction codes, must be followed for all developments. The only exemption for this development is the specification for streets/roads. 
(h)  The property owner will provide written and recorded covenants of the ownership and primary purpose of the property and all buildings. 
(Res. of 2-19-2007, exh. A) 
Secs. 64-132—64-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 64-161. - Existing lots. 
Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived did not at that time own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this article, such plot of land may nevertheless be used as a building site. The yard and other space requirements of the district in which the piece of land is located may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit a house of minimum acceptable size to be built upon the lot. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 9.1) 
Sec. 64-162. - Front yard setback for dwellings. 
The front yard setback requirements of this article for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the aforementioned existing buildings. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 9.2) 
Sec. 64-163. - Height limits. 
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; nor to monuments, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio or television towers or aerials. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 9.3) 
Secs. 64-164—64-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 64-195. - Submission for review and recommendation; hearing is prerequisite to enactment. 
(a)  This article, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the city, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendments. 
(b)  Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, art. VII) 
Secs. 64-196—64-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES, AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 64-214. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector, and he is hereby given the authority, to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 10.1) 
Sec. 64-215. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-18. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 10.5) 
Sec. 64-216. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building, structure, or land used in violation of this article, the city council, the building inspector, or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure, or land. 
(Comp. Ords. 1970, app. II, § 10.6) 
Sec. 64-217. - Initiation of proposals for zoning amendments. 
A zoning amendment may be proposed by the mayor and city council, the planning commission of the city, or by the owner of the property sought to be affected by said zoning amendment, or by a duly authorized agent of said owner. Regardless of the source of the proposed amendment, the procedures set out in this resolution shall govern: 
(1)  Zoning application fees. Fees for the administration of the zoning regulations of the city and the processing of any application for a zoning amendment shall be collected prior to any action of the city. An application shall not be considered complete until the requested fee is paid. The filing fee for an application for a zoning amendment shall be $350.00 plus the cost of advertising, except that application fees shall not be paid by the mayor and city council, nor by the planning commission of the city, when either acts in its official capacity. The fee includes the costs of administering and processing, and the advertising fee will be determine by the rate charged to the city by the local newspaper. 
(2)  Zoning applications. An application for a zoning amendment shall be filed with the city clerk, in accordance with the form established by the mayor and council and containing the information required by said form. Said application shall be filed during normal office hours. The city clerk shall forward any completed and duly filed application for a zoning amendment to the planning commission of the city for its evaluation within five of the filing thereof. 
(Res. of 7-16-1990, § II; Res. of 7-11-2005, § II) 
Sec. 64-218. - Action by planning commission on applications for zoning amendments. 
In order for applications for zoning amendments to be acted upon by the city in a timely manner, all such applications shall be filed with the city clerk not later than the eighth day of the month. 
(Res. of 7-16-1990, § III; Res. of 7-11-2005, § III) 
Appendix A - LOCAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Creation, dissolution, merger, boundary changes, and deannexation of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-2; municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; requirement for filing and publication of charter, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-5; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - CHARTER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The Town of Cleveland was incorporated by 1870 Ga. Laws (Act No. 121), p. 182. Printed herein is the most recent Charter of the city, Georgia House Bill 584 (2013-2014 Reg. Sess.), effective May 6, 2013. For prior history, see the Code Comparative Table for Georgia Laws. The sequence of sections is the same as in the act comprising it. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

[DIVISION 1.] - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1-1001. - Incorporation. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof, incorporated as the Town of Cleveland in an Act approved October 18, 1870 (Ga. L. 1870, p. 182), in an Act approved August 19, 1911 (Ga. L. 1911, p. 962), and incorporated as the City of Cleveland in an Act approved February 25, 1949 (Ga. L. 1949, p. 1024), and any territory subsequently added by annexation and embraced within the corporate boundaries together with the inhabitants of such area are reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Cleveland, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1-1002. - Corporate limits. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, Georgia, in White County, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1-1003. - General powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1-1004. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of the city shall include but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages. The keeping for sale, selling, or offering for sale of any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented wines or liquors within the corporate limits of said city shall be regulated by the city as provided by law. The city council shall have power or authority to license the sale thereof, consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia, and it shall be the council's duty to enforce this by the enactment of necessary ordinances with suitable penalties for violation; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at-large of animals, reptiles, and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, fire safety, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by O.C.G.A. Title 48, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Cemeteries . The council shall have jurisdiction over all cemeteries belonging to or located in said city, and may provide by ordinance for a public cemetery. It may appoint such employees to superintend the care of such public cemeteries established by the city by ordinance as it deems proper. It may enact such ordinances to prevent trespass therein and to prevent any person from defacing any work therein. It may regulate the charges for grave digging, hearse fees, and any and every thing pertaining to the care and operation of such cemeteries as are established by the city by ordinance; 
(7)  Condemnation . To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city or any combination thereof, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. Title 22, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(8)  Contracts . To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations and with other such legal entities which may be recognized by Georgia law, including but not limited to authorities, trusts, partnerships, and limited partnerships; 
(9)  Emergencies . To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(10)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of stormwater and establishment of a stormwater utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(11)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire district limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(12)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations and with other such legal entities which may be recognized by Georgia law, including but not limited to authorities, trusts, partnerships, and limited partnerships residing in or doing business therein and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collection; 
(13)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act or failure to act, practice, conduct, or use of property, or any combination thereof which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Gifts . To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions acceptable to the city which the donor or grantor may impose; 
(15)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(16)  Illegal and immoral conduct. To suppress lewdness and immoral conduct, gambling, gambling houses, and gambling contrivances of any kind; blind tigers, and places of illegal sale of liquors, wines, liquors or opiates of all kinds or nature; houses of ill fame, bawdy houses, lewd houses, and any premises where prostitution occurs; 
(17)  Sentences . To provide that persons given sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and other public property in the city, to provide for commitment of such persons to any detention center, to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any detention center by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(18)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles, and to exercise control over the movement and parking of such motor vehicles upon and across the streets, roads, designated private ways, alleys, walkways, and parks and the public square of the city; 
(19)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, and abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(20)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(21)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, hold (in trust or otherwise), lease, and dispose of any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, which property may be located inside the corporate limits of the city and to acquire, hold (in trust or otherwise), lease, and dispose of any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest which property may be located outside the corporate limits of the city; 
(22)  Municipal property protection. To establish ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the use, preservation, and protection of the real, personal, and mixed property of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(23)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, or dispose of (and any combination thereof) public utilities inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, (including but not limited to systems of waterworks, water distribution, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, wells (including, but not limited to, wells located on private property and leased by the city); gas works; electric light plants; cable television and other telecommunications; transportation facilities; public airports; and any other public utility); to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties for such utilities inside and outside the city's corporate limits; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay for any such utilities, regardless of whether such utilities are made available inside the city or outside the city, or inside and outside the city; 
(24)  Nuisance . To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(25)  Penalties . To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(26)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(27)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed law enforcement officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for, in any combination, a law enforcement agency. 
To exercise, establish, operate, abolish, or contract for, in any combination, a firefighting agency; 
(28)  Public hazards: Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(29)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. Title 22, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(30)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(31)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(32)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises to public utilities and public service companies, or make contracts with public utilities and public service corporations, or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies, or any combination thereof; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the public service commission; 
(33)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(34)  Retirement . To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for the elected officers of the city, the employees of the city, and for any such other appointed officers of the city which the city council may designate; 
(35)  Roadways . To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; 
(36)  Sewer fees. To levy such fees, charges, and taxes as may be authorized by ordinance for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of sewage treatment plants and sewerage systems and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available such service fees, charges, and taxes and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect from those seeking service from such plants and systems, such connection fees or charges for the privilege of receiving service from such plants and systems as may be authorized by ordinance; 
(37)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(38)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers and pawn shops, the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, traveling carnivals, helicopter rides, hot air balloon rides, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry, and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstores, stores offering adult videos, and stores offering adult toys to certain areas; 
(39)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(40)  Taxes: Ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(41)  Taxes: Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(42)  Trees . To adopt and enforce ordinances for the protection and preservation of trees on the streets, public places, cemeteries, new developments, parks, and public squares in the city and to prevent the cutting, impairing, or mutilations thereof by telephone, cable, or electric light linemen or employees or any other person unless the same is done under and with the express and formal consent of the council or some other officer appointed by the council to direct the same and then only when absolutely necessary for the public service or safety; 
(43)  Urban redevelopment. To organize, operate, and abolish an urban redevelopment program and to define the area in which said program may operate; 
(44)  Vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; and 
(45)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1-1005. - General police powers. 
The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to pass, enact, and adopt any and all ordinances they deem necessary to protect the peace, comfort, health, prosperity, and security of the city and its inhabitants, to foster good morals and virtues in said city, and to suppress any and all acts against the peace and good order. 
Sec. 1-1006. - Fire protection. 
The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to provide for fire protection, to organize, operate, maintain, and equip a fire department, either paid or volunteer, and to provide such buildings as necessary to house the same and to make, enact, pass, and adopt such ordinances, rules, and regulations necessary to promote the protection of the inhabitants of the city against fire or fire hazards. To condemn buildings and cause their removal when they become or are likely to become a fire hazard or fire trap or where such buildings endanger by being or becoming a fire hazard or fire trap. To pass, enact, and adopt such ordinances and procedures to enforce removal of such hazards and to promote the protection of all citizens from a fire hazard consistent with the laws of this state. 
Sec. 1-1007. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 1-1008. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its elected officials, officers, agencies, and employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
[DIVISION 2.] - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2-1001. - Mayor and council; powers and duties of same. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall have full power and authority from time to time to make and establish, enact and pass, such ordinances, laws, rules, regulations, and orders as may seem right and proper, respecting all matters and things whatsoever that may by them be considered necessary or proper or incident to good government of the city and to the peace, security, health, happiness, welfare, protection or convenience of the inhabitants of said city, and for preserving the peace and good order and dignity of the city. The mayor and council shall have power to pass all ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and orders as said mayor and council shall deem necessary to govern the city. The mayor and council shall have power and authority to suspend and remove all officers, agents, and employees of the city and to fix the amount of all salaries and other compensation and benefits of such officers, agents, and employees of said city. 
(b)  As the chief executive of the city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Supervise all officers, agencies, and employees of the city and all work of the city; 
(3)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in section 2-1011 of this charter; 
(4)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(5)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(6)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(7)  Sign on behalf of the city all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments which have been approved by the council in accordance with the provisions of this charter and the ordinances adopted pursuant thereto; 
(8)  Exercise all powers of the city administrator during all times in which said position is vacant and during all times when the city administrator has been suspended by action of the council as more specifically provided in section 2-1009; and 
(9)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or by ordinance. 
(c)  Members of the council shall attend all regular and special meetings of the council, faithfully and diligently look after the affairs of the city; and attentively perform such services as may be required on committees and otherwise. In addition, the council shall have authority to enter into such contracts and obligations and to adopt such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, the Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia as it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the governance of the City of Cleveland and may provide for enforcement of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations by establishing the penalties for violations. 
Sec. 2-1002. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as set by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-1003. - Mayor; council; wards; election. 
(a)  The municipal government of the City of Cleveland shall be vested in a mayor and four councilmembers. The city council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter. 
(b)  The four councilmembers shall be elected by the voters of the entire city. One councilmember shall be elected from each of the four wards of the city as delineated and described in this subsection, to wit: 
Ward No. 1 shall consist of that territory embraced and lying South of what is presently known as East Kytle Street and State Highway No. 115, and East of the centerline of what is presently known as the South Main Street and State Highway No. 11, embraced in the corporate limits of said city. 
Ward No. 2 shall consist of that territory embraced and lying West of the centerline of what is presently known as South Main Street and State Highway No. 11 and south of the centerline what is presently known as West Kytle Street and State Highway No. 115, embraced in the corporate limits of said city. 
Ward No. 3 shall consist of that territory embraced and lying North of the centerline of what is presently known as West Kytle Street and State Highway No. 115 and West of the centerline of what is presently known as North Main Street and State Highway No. 11, embraced in the corporate limits of said city. Said Ward No. 3 shall also include that part of the public square not included in the boundaries of any other ward. 
Ward No. 4 shall consist of that territory embraced and lying East of the centerline of what is presently known as North Main Street and State Highway No. 11 and North of the centerline of what is known as East Kytle Street and State Highway No. 115, embraced in the corporate limits of said city. 
(c)  The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city from the city at large. 
Sec. 2-1004. - Mayor and councilmembers; terms; qualifications. 
The mayor and councilmembers serving on the effective date of this charter shall serve until the expiration of the terms for which each was elected. Their successors shall be elected at the municipal election immediately preceding expiration of such term. The mayor and members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election. The mayor and each councilmember shall continue to reside within the city during the term for which elected and continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city and each councilmember shall continue to reside within the ward that such member represents during that member's period of service. No person shall be eligible to hold office of mayor or councilmember if convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of mayor or councilman until having passed his or her 21st birthday. 
Sec. 2-1005. - Organizational meeting; oath. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at its first meeting of the year in each even-numbered year. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths and shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I, __________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will truly and faithfully perform the duties of the Office of Councilmember for the City of Cleveland, White County, Georgia, for the ensuing term and will enforce the provisions of the Charter and all Ordinances made pursuant thereof to the best of my skill and ability, without fear or favor. 
I, do swear (or affirm) that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am prohibited from holding by the laws of the State of Georgia; and that I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and that I will support the Constitution of the United States and this state." 
Sec. 2-1006. - City administrator; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
(a)  The city council may appoint a city administrator for an indefinite term and shall set the administrator's compensation. The administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
(b)  Before taking office, the city administrator shall furnish a fidelity bond in the amount of $100,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties, with a corporation licensed to do business in this state as a surety. Such bond shall be filed with the city clerk after being approved by the mayor and council. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the city from city funds. 
Sec. 2-1007. - Powers and duties of city administrator. 
The city administrator, when duly appointed, and while acting as city administrator, shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The administrator shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the administrator's charge by or under this charter. The administrator shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the administrator deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the administrator appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. However, the mayor and council shall have the sole power and authority to appoint, suspend, supervise and remove, and to set the compensation of and benefits of the city attorney, judge of the municipal court, city clerk, fire chief, police chief, engineer, building inspector, ordinance enforcement officer, finance officer, and all department heads, and all members of boards, commissions, and authorities that the mayor and council have created or shall create or of which the city is a member. For the purposes of this section, a department head shall include, but not be limited to, the city solicitor and the municipal court public defender; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city administrator and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the administrator or by officers subject to the administrator's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the administrator's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the administrator deems desirable and as the mayor and council may require; and 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 2-1008. - Removal of city administrator. 
The city council may suspend the administrator from office for a period not to exceed 45 days, or remove from office the administrator, at any time and for any reason which the city council by affirmative vote of the majority may determine, upon such terms and conditions as the city council may determine. 
Sec. 2-1009. - Acting administrator. 
(a)  The council shall have the power to appoint the mayor to serve as acting administrator during the absence or disability of the administrator or during such time as the position of administrator is vacant, without limitation to the length of such appointment. For the purpose of this section, disability of the city administrator shall include being suspended from his or her duties by the mayor and council. 
(b)  During any period that the mayor is appointed as and serves as acting city administrator, the mayor shall continue to exercise all powers granted to him or her as mayor. The mayor shall not be entitled to receive the salary of the city administrator for service as acting administrator. In those instances in which the mayor has been appointed acting city administrator, the mayor shall cease exercising the powers and duties of the city administrator upon the earlier of: (i) appointment of a city administrator or (ii) upon the revocation of said acting city administrator's appointment by the council and appointment of a councilmember. 
(c)  If, in the discretion of the council, the mayor is unable to fulfill the duties of the acting administrator for any reason, the council shall have the power to appoint a councilmember to serve as acting city administrator. Such councilmember shall continue to exercise all powers granted to a councilmember during the period that he or she is serving as acting city administrator. Said councilmember shall not be entitled to receive the salary of the administrator while serving as acting administrator. The city councilmember shall cease exercising the powers and duties of the city administrator upon the earlier of: (i) appointment by the council of a city administrator, or (ii) upon the revocation of said acting city administrator's appointment by the council and the appointment of another city councilmember to serve as acting administrator. 
(d)  Any appointment of a city councilmember to serve as acting city administrator shall be for a period not to exceed six months. 
(e)  The acting city administrator shall take the same oath as the city administrator but need not furnish a fidelity bond. 
(f)  Any reference in this charter to the city administrator shall mean and include the acting city administrator. 
Sec. 2-1010. - Mayor pro tem; selection; duties. 
At its organizational meeting each year, by a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall preside at all meetings of the city council when the mayor is absent. The city council by a majority vote shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tem is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. When serving as mayor, the mayor pro tem shall not vote as a member of the council, except in order to break a tie. 
Sec. 2-1011. - Regular, special, and emergency meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmembers presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  When special circumstances occur and are so declared by the city council, it may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice with the consent of a majority of the councilmembers then serving upon giving such notice of the meeting and subjects expected to be considered at the meeting as is reasonable under the circumstances, including notice to the county legal organ or a newspaper having a general circulation in the county at least equal to that of the legal organ, in which event the reason for holding the meeting within 24 hours and the nature of the notice shall be recorded in the minutes. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. 
(d)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2-1012. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Two councilmembers and the mayor (three persons), shall constitute a quorum. In the event that the mayor is absent, a quorum shall consist of two councilmembers and the mayor pro-tem (three persons). 
(b)  The affirmative vote of at least two councilmembers and the mayor is required to conduct official business, and in the absence of the mayor, the affirmative vote of two councilmembers and the mayor pro-tem is required to conduct business; provided, however, that in the event of a vacancy on the council, the affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining members of the council shall be sufficient to conduct business. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the minute book or journal, but any councilmember shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the minute book or journal. All votes required by state law to be conducted by roll call must be so conducted and recorded. 
(c)  Under circumstances necessitated by emergency conditions involving public safety or the preservation of property or public services, the council may meet by means of teleconference so long as the notice required by section 2-1012 is provided and means are afforded for the public to have simultaneous access to the teleconference meeting. On any other occasion of a council meeting, and so long as a quorum is present in person, the mayor or a councilmember may participate by teleconference if necessary due to reasons of health or absence from the city so long as notice is provided and public access is provided. Absent emergency conditions or the written opinion of a physician or other health professional that reasons of health prevent the mayor's or a councilmember's physical presence, the mayor or a councilmember shall not participate by teleconference pursuant to this subsection more than twice in one calendar year. 
(d)  An abstention by any member of council shall be noted on the record but shall not be counted as an affirmative or negative vote. 
Sec. 2-1013. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter. The council shall keep a book of minutes, or journal, of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  The mayor shall have the power and authority to appoint committees made up of councilmembers, city employees, and other persons serving the city at the pleasure of the mayor and council, in any combination thereof, for the purpose of assisting the mayor in the exercise of his duties as mayor and, in the event that the mayor is appointed as acting city administrator, for the purpose of assisting the mayor while acting in such capacity. The members of such committees shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2-1014. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Cleveland" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or any councilmember and be considered at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon the first introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk. 
Sec. 2-1015. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
The city council shall provide in its rules of procedure those actions that require adoption of an ordinance to have the force and effect of law and those actions that may be accomplished by resolution. 
Sec. 2-1016. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of section 2-2014(b) for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; provided, however, that the mayor and councilmembers may waive their right to automatically receive copies of the technical regulations adopted by the city and instead elect to receive from the clerk such copies of said technical regulations as each may individually request from time to time; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2-1019. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2-1017. - Voting by mayor and council; signing of ordinances; duties of clerk. 
(a)  The mayor shall not vote on any question except in case of a tie among the members of the council casting votes. No ordinance or resolution adopted by the council shall become effective until the same shall have been approved by the mayor, unless the mayor shall fail within three days from its passage to file with the clerk of council his reasons for refusing to approve said ordinance or resolution. Upon the mayor filing his reasons for not approving the same, a meeting of the council shall be called for such time as may be request by a majority of the council at which the clerk shall read the order of the mayor refusing to approve such ordinance or resolution. A majority of the council may pass the ordinance or resolution without approval of the mayor. In the event that no special meeting is called, the clerk shall read the order refusing to approve any ordinance or resolution at the next regular meeting of the council, which may then pass the ordinance or resolution as provided above. 
(b)  In all cases where an ordinance or resolution has been duly adopted by a majority vote of the council or the mayor and council, and in all cases in which the mayor and council, by majority vote, have resolved to act by ordinance or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the mayor and all councilmembers to sign the ordinance, document, or instrument evidencing such act so resolved upon. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to attest to the signatures of the mayor and councilmembers and to affix the city seal thereto. If a councilmember abstains from voting, said councilmember shall not be required to sign the ordinance, document or instrument, and the clerk shall record such abstention. 
Sec. 2-1018. - Duties of clerk; signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the council. The codification maintained by such codification service with which the city may have contracted for ordinance codification services shall be a permissible substitute for such properly indexed book. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Cleveland, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(d)  The city may make the codification available by posting it on the internet. 
Sec. 2-1019. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Conflict of interest . No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment, or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 50, Chapter 14, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has a financial interest. 
(b)  Disclosure . Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  Use of public property . No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit or profit but shall use such property only in their capacity as an officer or employee of the city. 
(d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any material violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of an elected official, officer, or employee of the city who is a party to a contract with the city shall render said contract voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Ineligibility of elected official . Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(f)  Political activities of certain officers and employees . No appointive officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying for or election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
[DIVISION 3.] - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3-1001. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the mayor and council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions and duties, and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall have sole power and authority to appoint, suspend, supervise, remove, and to set the compensation of and the benefits of the city attorney, judge of the municipal court, city solicitor, and public defender of the municipal court, city clerk, finance officer, chief of police, fire chief, public works director, engineer, building inspector, ordinance enforcement officer, and all department heads, and all members of boards, commissions, and authorities that the mayor and council have created, or shall create, or of which the city is a member. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. The city administrator shall not appoint, suspend, or remove any city government department head without the prior approval of the mayor and council. For the purpose of this section, a department head shall exclude those positions specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as set by the mayor and council. 
(e)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Except as noted in subsection (c) of this section, each department director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city administrator, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(f)  All persons under the supervision of the city administrator, excluding those persons (legal or natural) which are identified in subsection (b) of this section, shall be nominated by the city administrator with confirmation of appointment by the city council. If the administrator or acting administrator fails to make a nomination for a vacant position, the council shall be authorized to select such officers or directors. All appointive officers excluding those persons (legal or natural) which are identified in subsection (b) of this section, shall be employees at-will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city administrator unless otherwise determined by the mayor and city council. Those persons, legal or natural, who are identified in subsection (b) of this section shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and be deemed employees at will, unless otherwise provided in written agreements between such persons and the mayor and council. Said city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and be deemed an employee at will unless otherwise provided in a written agreements between said city administrator and said mayor and council. 
(g)  The mayor and council may from time to time adopt ordinances which authorize the city administrator to appoint, suspend, supervise, remove, set the compensation of, or set the benefits of (or any combination of such actions), the following: the city attorney, judge of the municipal court, city clerk, fire chief, police chief, engineer, building inspector, ordinance enforcement officer, finance officer, city solicitor, municipal court public defender, and all department heads, and all members of boards, commissions, and authorities that the mayor and council may have created, shall create, or of which the city is a member (or any condemnation thereof) for such limited periods of time which said mayor and council may determine; and the mayor and council may from time to time adopt ordinances withdrawing any and all such authorizations give to said city administrator. 
Sec. 3-1002. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The mayor and council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating such member to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All board members serve at-will and may be removed at any time by a vote of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. The number of votes required to remove a board member shall be set by ordinance. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice-chair, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
[DIVISION 4.] - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 4-1001. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. Title 21, Chapter 2) as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 4-1002. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  The mayor and two councilmembers shall be elected at one election and every four years thereafter. The remaining two city council seats shall be elected at the election alternating with the first election and every four years thereafter so that a continuing body is created. Terms shall be for four years. 
(c)  The city council shall set and publish a qualifying fee for the offices of mayor and councilmember according to state law, of three percent of the total gross salary including all supplements authorized by law. 
Sec. 4-1003. - Non-partisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 4-1004. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies . The office of mayor and the office of any councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies . A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment by the city council or those members remaining if less than six months remains in the unexpired term. If such vacancy occurs six months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election, in accordance with O.C.G.A. Titles 21 and 45, or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any councilmember. 
[DIVISION 5.] - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 

Sec. 5-1001. - City clerk. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall appoint a city clerk and treasurer who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
(b)  In addition to such duties as may be prescribed by the mayor and council or otherwise described in this charter, it shall be the duty of the clerk to attend all meetings of the council, keep a careful and accurate record of its proceedings, carefully collect all revenues due the city except such as the ordinances require to be collected by some other officer, and to faithfully account for the same, furnish to the mayor and council and the city administrator such information as may be requested by any of them, and open his or her books at any time to any citizen of the city requesting to see the same. 
Sec. 5-1002. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city attorney and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; shall review such ordinances as may be required by the council; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court when requested by the mayor or directed by the council; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney is not a public official of the city and does not take an oath of office. The city attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city attorney. 
Sec. 5-1003. - Removal of elected officers. 
Should the mayor or any member of the council be guilty of malpractice in office, willful neglect of his office, or abuse of the power conferred on such officer, or guilty of any other conduct unbecoming such an officer of the City of Cleveland, such officer shall be subject to impeachment by the mayor and council, and upon conviction, shall be removed from office. 
Sec. 5-1004. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. The cost of the bond for any officer or employee of the city shall be paid by the city, from city funds. 
[DIVISION 6.] - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 6-1001. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at-will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. The city council is authorized to adopt a pay and classification plan, which shall be maintained in the office of the clerk. For purposes of this section, elected and appointed officers are not considered employees. 
[DIVISION 7.] - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 7-1001. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Cleveland. 
Sec. 7-1002. - Chief judge; other judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such additional judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be set by council. 
(d)  Judges serve at-will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. 
Sec. 7-1003. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 7-1004. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed ten days in jail and a fine as authorized by law. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now, or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 7-1005. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection. 
Sec. 7-1006. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of White County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
[DIVISION 8.] - FINANCE 
[Part A.] - Taxation and Fees 

Sec. 8-1001. - Property tax. 
(a)  All persons and corporations owning property in the City of Cleveland, shall be required to make a return under oath, annually, to the board of tax assessors of said city, of all their property, real and personal, subject to taxation by said city, as of the first day of January of each year; and the books for recording the same shall be opened on the first day of January and closed on the first day of April of each year. Said property shall be returned by the property owner or his authorized agent, on blanks furnished for the purpose, at the fair market value thereof. 
(b)  The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 8-1002. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. 
Sec. 8-1003. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa.'s; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 8-1004. - Authority to contract with tax commissioner and county board of assessors. 
The city council may contract with the Tax Commissioner of White County for preparation of the municipal tax digest, assessment and collection of municipal taxes, and for collection of delinquent municipal taxes as authorized in general law. The city may contract with the White County Board of Assessors in lieu of maintaining its own board of assessors. 
Sec. 8-1005. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 8-1003. 
Sec. 8-1006. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 8-1003. 
Sec. 8-1007. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 8-1008. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 8-1003. The authority to collect fees provided in this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any authority granted by this charter for collection of fees. 
Sec. 8-1009. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 8-1003. The authority to collect assessments provided in this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other authority granted by this charter for collection of such charges. 
Sec. 8-1010. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
[Part B.] - Borrowing 

Sec. 8-1015. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 8-1016. - Revenue bonds. 
(a)  Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to acquire, construct, reconstruct, improve and extend revenue-producing projects, systems, to maintain and operate the same, to prescribe, revise, fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charge for services, facilities and commodities furnished thereby and, in anticipation of the collection of revenues, to finance the cost of construction and operation of the same and to exercise all the powers and authorities authorized by the "revenue bond law." 
Sec. 8-1017. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 8-1018. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
[Part C.] - Accounting and Budgeting 

Sec. 8-1025. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 8-1026. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 8-1027. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city administrator shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city administrator containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 8-1028. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city administrator; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 30th day of June of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 8-1027. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the city from amending its budget so as to adapt to changing governmental needs during the budget period. 
Sec. 8-1029. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as the city council considers as appropriate and necessary to conduct the business and governance of the city. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 8-1030. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. 
Sec. 8-1031. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city administrator shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2-1016. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 30th day of June of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city administrator may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 8-1032. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available to the public, upon payment of such costs as required by the Georgia Open Records Law, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
[Part D.] - Procurement and Property Management 

Sec. 8-1035. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney, and as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council minute book or journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2-1012. 
Sec. 8-1036. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council may by ordinance establish procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 8-1037. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell, convey, lease, or grant easements and other rights in (or any combination thereof), any real, personal, or mixed property, or any combination thereof owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city administrator and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cutoff or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city administrator to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Such sales shall be in accordance with the terms of contracts between such land owners and the city in accordance with the terms authorized by the city council. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances made in accordance with such contracts and so executed and delivered shall convey the interest set forth therein, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was made. 
Sec. 8-1038. - Sale of unneeded property. 
The mayor and council shall have power and authority to sell any property belonging to said city which shall have become unnecessary and useless for city purposes and to make good and sufficient title to the purchaser. The mayor and council shall pass a resolution and include a statement to such effect in the official minutes and may sell such property either at public or private sale. 
[Part E.] - General Provisions 

Sec. 9-1001. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 9-1002. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 90 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 9-1003. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 9-1004. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 9-1005. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 9-1006. - Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Cleveland in the County of White, approved February 25, 1949 (Ga. L. 1949, p. 1024), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 9-1007. - Effective date. 
This charter shall become effective on upon approval of the governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE OF LIQUOR[3] 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell, or cause to be sold, directly or indirectly, either by a clerk or agent, or in any other manner, for any money or thing of value, any spirituous, malt or intoxicating liquors, in any quantity whatever, within two miles of the court-house in the town of Cleveland, in the county of White, except upon the written prescription of a regular licensed physician for medical purposes, and any person or persons violating the provisions of this Act, whether as owner of such liquors, or merely as agent or clerk of such owner or owners, or advising, encouraging, aiding or assisting others to violate the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, for the first offense, shall be punished as prescribed in section 4310 of the Revised Code of Georgia of 1873, and for the second offense the fine shall not be less than twenty-five nor more than five hundred dollars, or imprisonment in the chain-gang not less than three nor more than twelve months; in the discretion of the court one or both may be imposed, according to the aggravation of the offense. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1880 Ga. Laws (Act No. 73), p. 592, being a local act of the Georgia General Assembly regarding Cleveland, Georgia. The sequence of sections is the same as in the act comprising it. Amendments to the charter are indicated by history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE III. - JOINT PLANNING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1953 Ga. Laws (Act No. 407), p. 2987, being a local act of the Georgia General Assembly regarding Cleveland, Georgia. The sequence of sections is the same as in the act comprising it. Amendments to the charter are indicated by history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Planning commission—Creation and appointment. 
The board of County Commissioners of the County of White (hereinafter referred to as the board of commissioners) and the Mayor and Council of the City of Cleveland, Georgia (hereinafter referred to as the mayor and council) be authorized to create a joint city-county planning commission (hereinafter referred to as the commission) of seven members, consisting of a member of the board of commissioners to be selected by that body, the mayor, a member of council to be selected by that body, two appointed members to be selected by board of commissioners and two appointed members to be selected by the mayor and council. 
Terms of appointive members shall be four years or thereafter until their successors are appointed, except that the members first appointed shall have terms of one and three years for the county appointees and two and four years for the city appointees. Any vacancy in an appointive membership shall be filled within a reasonable time in the same manner as the initial appointment, but only for the unexpired term. The appointing officer or board or council shall have the authority to remove any appointive member for cause stated in writing and after public hearing. 
Sec. 2. - Planning commission—Rules, staff, finances. 
The commission shall elect one of its appointive members as chairman who shall serve for one year or until re-elected or his successor is elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the municipality or county. The commission may employ the service of a city planner and such other employees or consultants as are necessary. 
The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amount appropriated by the board of commissioners and the mayor and council. The members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation, except for expenses incurred. The commission shall meet at least once a month, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
Sec. 3. - Planning commission—Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the community which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. In particular, the commission shall have the power and duty to: 
1.  Study the resources, possibilities, and needs of Cleveland and White County with due regard for the surrounding areas, to make, adopt, amend, detail, extend and to add to the master plan for the physical development of the city and county as defined in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
2.  Prepare and recommend to the mayor and council and board of commissioners for adoption regulations to govern the subdivision of land, and, upon adoption, to administer said regulations. 
3.  Make and recommend to the mayor and council and the board of commissioners for adoption a zoning ordinance and map. 
4.  In response to requests from officials and departments of the city and county, to furnish information and plans relating to the development of the area. 
The commission shall have the power to: 
1.  Require information which shall be furnished within a reasonable time from other departments of the city or county in relation to its work. 
2.  In performance of its functions, at reasonable times enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
3.  Contact other agencies and officials of local, State and Federal governments and private citizens, organizations and civic groups for the purpose of obtaining information and assistance, and cooperating in the making and carrying out of plans. 
4.  Appoint advisory committees and other groups to secure community participation in and support for the making and carrying out of plans. 
5.  Prepare and recommend to the mayor and council and board of commissioners for adoption an official map together with regulations for the protection of proposed street rights of way, parks, playgrounds, and school sites and other public grounds shown on said map. 
6.  Promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan, planning and zoning. 
7.  Study and recommend, with consideration for need, timing and finances, a program for accomplishing the master plan. 
8.  Make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and the development of the city and the county to officials, citizens, agencies and organizations. 
Sec. 4. - Master plan. 
The commission shall make a master plan consisting of maps, plats, charts, and descriptive and explanatory matter, showing the commission's recommendations for the physical development of Cleveland and White County, and may include: 
1.  The general location, character, and extent of roads, streets, bridges, tunnels, viaducts, parks, parkways, waterways, waterfront developments, playgrounds, airports, forests, reservations and other public ways, grounds, places and spaces. 
2.  The general location of public buildings and other public property. 
3.  The general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, for water, light, power, heat, sanitation, transportation, communication, and other purposes. 
4.  The acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, or change of use of any of the foregoing public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, property, utilities, or terminals. 
5.  The general location, character, layout, and extent of community centers, town sites, housing developments, service areas, and areas for residence, industry, business, recreation, agriculture and forestry, and limited-development areas for purposes of conservation, food and water supply, sanitation, drainage and protection from urban development; and the classification of land as required by these uses and purposes. 
6.  The general character, extent, and layout of the replanning of blighted and other residential areas. 
Sec. 5. - Adoption of the master plan. 
The commission may adopt the master plan as a whole by single resolution, or may by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, said parts corresponding to major geographical sections of the city or county or to functional divisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. The adoption of the plan, or of any such part, amendment, extension or addition, shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than the majority of the commission, but before the adoption of the plan or any such part or any modification, extension or addition, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing on proposed action. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the mayor and council and the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 6. - Legal effect of plan. 
No street, park or public way, ground or space, no public building or structure and no public utility whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or authorized in White County or the City of Cleveland, nor shall any real property be acquired by the county or city, until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to the commission for consideration and approval; provided in case of disapproval the commission shall communicate its reasons to the board of commissioners or the mayor and council which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval. Upon such overruling the board of commissioners or the council or the appropriate office, department, or agency shall have the power to proceed. The widening, narrowing, relocation, vacation or change in the use of any street or public way or ground or the sale of any public building or real property shall be subject to similar submission and approval, and failure to approve may be similarly accepted or rejected by the board of commissioners or the council. The failure of the commission to act within thirty days after date of official submission to the commission shall be deemed approval, unless a longer period be granted by the board of commissioners, the council or other submitting authority. 
Sec. 7. - Zoning. 
The governing bodies of the county and city are authorized to regulate in their respective jurisdictions the location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot which may be occupied, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, the uses of buildings and structures for trade, industry, commerce, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes, and the uses of land for trade, industry, commerce, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, soil conservation, water-supply conservation, or other purposes. 
By means of a map various zones or districts may be established and different regulations prescribed for each zone or district, but the regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of building or use throughout any zone or district. The ordinance establishing these zones, including both map and text must be based on the master plan. However, it may be adopted separately and at different times for various communities in the county. 
Sec. 8. - Purposes of zoning regulation. 
Such regulations shall be designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the State of Georgia, including amongst other things, lessening congestion in the streets or roads, of reducing the wastes of excessive amounts of road; securing safety from fire and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing, on the one hand, excessive concentration of population and, on the other hand, excessive and wasteful scattering of population or settlement; promoting such distribution of population and such classification of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate and conserve adequate provisions for transportation, water flowage, water supply, drainage, sanitation, educational opportunity, recreation, soil fertility, food supply, and the protection of both urban and non-urban development. 
Sec. 9. - Official map. 
From and after the time when the commission shall have adopted a master plan which includes at least a major road or street plan or shall have progressed in its master planning to the stage of making and adoption of a major road or street plan, the commission shall have the power to make or cause to be made, surveys for the exact location of the lines of new, extended, widened or narrowed roads or streets in the whole or in any portion of the county or city and to make and certify to the appropriate governing body a map or maps showing such lines, together with recommended regulations for the protection of such existing or future streets from encroachment detrimental to their public use. 
Upon receiving from the commission a certified copy of said map and recommendations the governing body may, in accordance with the procedure specified herein, establish by ordinance official map of the city or county or portion thereof showing public streets and roads theretofore existing and established by law, or accepted in subdivision plats approved as prescribed in Section 14, or new, extended, widened or narrowed streets as certified above, and including the recommended regulations for the protection of such streets from encroachment detrimental to their public use. Said official map and regulations shall not become effective until recorded in the courthouse of White County in a manner open to public inspection. 
The making, certifying and establishment of such maps shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street, or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. 
Whenever the commission shall have prepared, adopted and certified to the governing body a master plan for parks, playgrounds, school sites or other public grounds, or for one of these types of grounds, the governing body may, within the conditions and procedure prescribed herein for streets and roads, in the same manner establish an official map for that type or types of grounds. 
Sec. 10. - Zoning and official map—Procedure. 
The official map and zoning ordinances, maps and texts, may be amended, extended or modified by the governing bodies in accordance with the conditions and procedure prescribed herein for the original enactment of these ordinances. This procedure shall include a public hearing, the time and place of which must be given at least fifteen days notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The notice shall designate the place where the proposed amendments, extensions and modifications may be inspected. Before any map or text other than that recommended by the commission is approved by a governing body, the proposed change shall be referred to the commission for its recommendation, which recommendation shall be advisory only and shall in no way bind the governing body. 
Sec. 11. - Zoning and official map—Manner of regulation. 
For the purpose of giving effect to the official map and zoning ordinances the governing body of the city or county may provide in these ordinances, or amendments thereto, for the issuance of building permits by specifying the conditions whereby permits shall be issued or withheld, and designating a building officer or inspector for this purpose. The governing body may provide that no permit shall be issued for (1) any building or structure or part thereof on any land located within the lines of any street, road, park, playground, school site or other public ground shown on the official map; (2) any building on property to which there is not access by means of a street or road on the official map; or (3) any building not in accordance with the regulations prescribed for the zone or district in which the proposed building would be built. Any such ordinance shall provide for a board of appeals as specified herein. 
Excepting in streets existing and established by law as public streets at the date of establishment of the official map, no public water facilities, sewer, or other public utility or improvement shall be constructed after said date in any street until such street is duly placed on the official map. 
Sec. 12. - Zoning and official map—Board of appeals. 
Any zoning or official map ordinance enacted by the board of commissioners or the mayor and council shall provide for a board of appeals, consisting of three members, one of whom shall be selected by the planning commission from among its own members, one by the board of commissioners, and one by the mayor and council. The rules governing the board of appeals shall be the same as those set forth for the planning commission in Section 2 of this Act. 
The ordinance first establishing the board of appeals, and any official map or zoning ordinance enacted subsequently, shall provide the board with the following duties and powers: 
1.  To hear and decide appeals wherein it is alleged that there has been error in an order or decision of the building officer or other official in administering the ordinance. 
2.  To hear and decide requests for special exceptions, interpretations of the map, and variations of the regulations where they impose practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, and said decisions being within appropriate principles, conditions and safeguards set forth in the ordinance. 
Sec. 13. - Subdivision regulation. 
The board of commissioners or the mayor and council may adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for public safety, economy and convenience in the development of land, for the coordination of streets and other ways within the subdivided land with other existing or planned streets and ways or for conformance to the master plan or official map, for adequate open spaces, for spaces for traffic, utilities, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population. Such regulations may include requirements as to the extent to which and the manner in which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and water, sewer and other utility mains, piping, connections, or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision. 
Such regulations shall provide for a preliminary approval by the planning commission of the plat of a proposed subdivision previous to such improvements and installation and for a final approval by the planning commission, commissioner of roads or other officials. 
Sec. 14. - Enforcement and remedies. 
The governing bodies of the city and county may provide for the enforcement of any ordinance enacted under this Act, and a violation of any such ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by fine or imprisonment or both. In addition, the building officer, city or county attorney or other appropriate official, or affected property owner may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or correct such violation. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - COMPILED ORDINANCES OF 1970 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Compiled Ordinances of 1970 that are included herein. Sections of the compilation not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the local acts of the Georgia General Assembly within Appendix A, Article I, Charter, that the city has elected to include, as well as any amendments to those acts. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the Compiled Ordinances of 1970, updated through October 19, 1983, that are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the Compiled Ordinances of 1970. This table may contain some ordinances that precede the date of the compilation but that were never included in the Compiled Ordinances of 1970, updated through October 19, 1983, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since the compilation of the Compiled Ordinances of 1970, updated through October 19, 1983, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia law. 

 