THE CODE OF THE CITY OF STONE MOUNTAIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1990 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
STONE MOUNTAIN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jane D. Rhodes 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ralph Dunham 
Denise Glenn 
Robert Smith 
Tom Smith 
Bill Taylor 
Patricia Wheeler 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert W. Booth 
City Manager 
____________ 
F. Jackson Rhodes 
City Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
STONE MOUNTAIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Patricia G. Wheeler 
Mayor 
____________ 
Susan Coletti 
Steve Higgins 
Chakira Johnson 
Richard Mailman 
Andrea Redmond 
Steve Wells 
City Council 
____________ 
ChaQuias Thornton 
City Manager 
____________ 
Joe Fowler 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Stone Mountain. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Bob Booth, City Manager, Mr. Jack Rhodes, City Attorney and Ms. Carla Tuck, Assistant City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Stone Mountain; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The Council of the City of Stone Mountain Hereby Ordains: 
Section 1.  The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 27, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 7, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment, or forced labor on the city streets and property, not to exceed ninety (90) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5.  Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  Ordinances adopted after August 7, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7.  This ordinance shall become effective immediately. 
Passed and adopted by the council this 4th day of December, 1990. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter is derived from Act No. 293 of the 2009 session of the General Assembly. It became effective on May 11, 2009, and replaces the former Charter. For derivation of the former Charter, see the Charter Comparative Tables for acts and ordinances. Amendments will be indicated by history notes in parentheses ( ) following new or amended sections. A uniform system of capitalization has been used. Any material in brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for clarity. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected. Section catchlines have been added where necessary. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Name. 
The City of Stone Mountain, in DeKalb County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Stone Mountain, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map of the corporate limits of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, public grounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, other public utilities, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. to provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into exception all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. 
Section 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
The mayor and city council shall be elected at large pursuant to Section 5.11 of this charter. The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he or she shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers; each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person has filed a written notice with the city clerk that he or she desires his or her name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for mayor or councilmember. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless such person has filed the notice within the time provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies—The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon such person's failing or ceasing to reside in the city or upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies—A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in Section 5.14 of this charter and Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Suspension—Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest—No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure—Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property—No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable—Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official—Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that person was elected. No former councilmember and no former mayor shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that person was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees—No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation— 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit that person's office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Stone Mountain and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Section 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of the City of Stone Mountain during my term of office; that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due the State of Georgia or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I may, by the laws of the State of Georgia, be prohibited from holding; that I am otherwise qualified to hold the office to which I have been elected according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia; that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; that I am a resident of the City of Stone Mountain; and that I will enforce the charter and ordinances of the City of Stone Mountain to the best of my skill and ability." 
Section 2.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
Three members of the city council and the mayor or mayor pro tempore shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by show of hands and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of four members of the city council shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Section 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Stone Mountain..." and every ordinance shall so begin. Prior to the submission of any ordinance for consideration by the mayor and city council, the same shall be submitted to the city attorney and be approved by him or her as to form and to ensure such ordinance is not covered by, or in conflict with, any law of general application or other city ordinance. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the city council and be read at a regular meeting, work session, or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.23 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the city clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the city clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(c)  The reading of the preamble to an ordinance shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of a "read" or "reading." By an affirmative vote of a majority of the city council, a reading of the ordinance in its entirety shall be required. 
Section 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.23. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
Section 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by the city clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city manager. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city manager. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 2.26. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. 
Section 2.27. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which states the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, the city manager may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The city manager may continue to receive a salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Section 2.28. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Section 2.29. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings, except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager may not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Section 2.30. - Council's interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Section 2.31. - Selection of mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote of all its members, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a councilmember. 
Section 2.32. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the mayor and city council and have the right to take part in the deliberations of the city council, but shall not vote on any question except in the case of a tie; 
(2)  Serve as the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Be clothed with veto power as pursuant to Section 2.34 of this charter; 
(6)  Sign, along with an individual so designated by majority vote of the city council, all checks for the payment of money; and 
(7)  Call the city council together at any time when deemed necessary by him or her. 
Section 2.33. - Mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore of the city council, or in such person's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore or selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this charter. 
Section 2.34. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented by the city clerk to the mayor within three days after its adoption. 
(b)  The mayor shall within four days of receipt of an ordinance return it to the city clerk with or without his or her approval or with his or her disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law on the fifteenth day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next meeting when a quorum shall be present, and should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum then present, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the city council as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointed officers and directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointed officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of boards, commissions, or authorities of the city serve at will and may be removed at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the councilmembers, city manager, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Section 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Stone Mountain. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $100.00 or 15 days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, Pt. I, 10-6-15) 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of DeKalb County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers elected in the general municipal elections in 2007 and 2009, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office, shall serve until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office. Regular general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year for the election of successors to the mayor and councilmembers. The terms of office shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in Section 2.17 of this charter. 
(b)  In elections held on or after the effective date of this section, each candidate shall designate the council post for which he or she is offering for election. The members of the city council from each council post shall be elected at large by the electors of the entire city. The candidate receiving the most votes for each such council post shall be elected. 
(Act 103 of 2011, § 1) 
Section 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Section 5.13. - Election by plurality vote. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Section 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  A councilmember, the mayor, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business in this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.24. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and auditing provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 6.25. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget provided for in Section 6.29 of this charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The councilmembers may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the ensuing fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.27. - Levy of taxes. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.29. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.23 of this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the ensuing fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Section 6.30. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.31. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Section 6.32. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.33. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilities the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of this city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 60 days before or during which time the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Section 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.14. - Construction and definitions. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, the term: 
(1)  "City council" means the members of the city council. 
(2)  "Councilmember" means a member of the city council. 
Section 7.15. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Stone Mountain, approved March 28, 1990 (Ga. L. 1990, P. 4790), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Section 7.16. - Referendum. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of the City of Stone Mountain shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Stone Mountain for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the general election in November, 2009, and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of DeKalb County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES Shall the Act which provides a new charter for the City of Stone Mountain 
( ) NO be approved?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2010. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, the remaining sections of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on January 1, 2010. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Stone Mountain. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Section 7.17. - Effective date. 
Section 7.16 and this section shall become effective upon signature of the Governor. The remaining sections of this charter shall become effective as provided in Section 7.16. 
Section 7.18. - Preclearance. 
The governing authority of the City of Stone Mountain shall through its legal counsel cause this Act to be submitted for preclearance under the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended; and such submission shall be made to the United States Department of Justice or filed with the appropriate court no later than 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the Governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
Section 7.19. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE (ACTS) 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE (ORDINANCES) 
 This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter by ordinance. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Incorporation and powers, Art. I; ordinances, § 3.16 et seq.; general provisions, Art. VII. 
State Law reference— Ordinances generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1008) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 3.20. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and city council: 
City. The words "city", "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Stone Mountain" followed them. 
Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day or the last; except, that if the last day shall fall on a Sunday or a legal holiday, another day shall be added in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, or to a quorum. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and co-partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Land and real estate. "Land" and "real estate" includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
Mayor and city council. The words "mayor" and "city council" shall mean the mayor and city council of the City of Stone Mountain. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. The singular or plural shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The letters "O.C.G.A." mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, etc. References to officials, departments, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Stone Mountain." 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
Property. "Property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
Real property. "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean sidewalk as defined in the general traffic laws of the state. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean street as defined in the general traffic laws of the state. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone, or with others. 
Written, in writing. "Written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include a representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1009) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; definitions relating to motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1011) 
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances, etc., not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the council to any person. 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(5)  The annual appropriation ordinance. 
(6)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code levying or imposing taxes. 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing charges therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)  Any ordinance extending the limits of the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance relating to personnel policy and procedures. 
(12)  All traffic and parking regulations applicable to specific locations. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(b)  The ordinance adopting this Code shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1003) 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1004) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1005) 
State Law reference— Operation of laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-5. 
Sec. 1-7. - Official copy of Code. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or someone authorized thereby to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the mayor and city council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the mayor and city council. This copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it; it shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances of the city; and shall be so certified by the clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1006) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into this Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  In case of the amendment of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-11 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1007) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or other invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances, since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or application. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment, or forced labor on the city streets and property, not to exceed ninety (90) days. Each day during which an offense is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1012) 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; powers of municipal court, § 5.13. 
State Law reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-30-8, 36-35-6. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Incorporation and powers, Art. I; government structure, elections, and removal, Art. II; organization of government, general authority, and ordinances, Art. III; administrative affairs, Art. IV; judicial branch, Art. V; finance, Art. VI. 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; cemeteries, Ch. 6; elections, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; municipal court, Ch. 14; parks and recreation, Ch. 19; personnel policy and procedures, Ch. 20; police, Ch. 21; sewers, Ch. 22; solid waste, Ch. 24; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 25; taxation, Ch. 27; administration of occupation tax, § 12-58; administration on merchandise-display ordinance, § 12-108; administration of noise control ordinance, § 15-4; inspections relating to sewage, § 22-4; administration of sign ordinance, § 23-13; enforcement of zoning ordinance, App. A, Art. IX; board of zoning appeals, App. A, Art. X. 
State Law reference— Public and legal holidays, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1; local government, O.C.G.A. Title 36; emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; emergency interim successors to officials, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50; joint municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. Title 45; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-02, § I, adopted February 5, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former § 2-1. Former § 2-1 pertained to employee benefits, and derived from ordinance of March 20, 1990. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § 2.10 et seq. 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meetings; time and place; meetings which fall on holidays. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the mayor and city council shall be held at city hall on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:30 PM. 
(b)  If the day for a regular meeting falls upon a day which is a legal holiday in the state, or upon a day which is an election day called by the authority of the county, the state or the city, then the mayor and city council shall by resolution set the regular meeting date and time, provided that such time and date shall be within one (1) week from the first Tuesday of the month. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1001; Ord. No. 01-11, Pt. I, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 2016-16, Pt. I, 9-6-16) 
Charter reference— Meetings of city council, § 3.13. 
Sec. 2-27. - Adjourned meetings. 
Any session of the mayor and city council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one (1) day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1002) 
Sec. 2-28. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business for each regular or specially called meeting of the mayor and city council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Determination of a quorum. 
(3)  Invocation. 
(4)  Citizen comments. 
(5)  Reading and approval of the journal. 
(6)  Reading of communications. 
(7)  Adoption of the agenda of the day. 
(8)  Consideration of any legislation vetoed by the mayor. 
(9)  Unfinished business. 
(10)  New business. 
(11)  New ordinances and resolutions. 
(12)  Reports of committees. 
(13)  Remarks of personal privilege. 
(14)  Announcements by the mayor. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1003; Ord. No. 98-5, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 99-2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 08-15, Pt. I, 12-2-08) 
Sec. 2-29. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  At the request of the mayor or any councilman, all motions shall be reduced to writing. 
(b)  A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the mayor and city council shall not be entertained unless it be made by a member who previously voted in the majority. 
(c)  No motion shall be debated or put until it be seconded and stated by the mayor. It is then and not until then in possession of the mayor and city council and cannot be withdrawn but by leave of mayor and city council. 
(d)  A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as follows: 
(1)  When repeated without intervening business or discussion; 
(2)  When made as an interruption of a member while speaking; 
(3)  When the previous question has been ordered; or 
(4)  While a vote is being taken. 
A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is adjourned. 
(e)  When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received, but: 
(1)  To adjourn; 
(2)  To lay on the table; 
(3)  For the previous question; 
(4)  To postpone to a day certain; 
(5)  To commit; 
(6)  To amend; or 
(7)  To postpone indefinitely, 
which several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand arranged. 
(f)  When a proper motion is made, but information is wanted, the motion is to postpone to a day certain. 
(g)  Matters claiming present attention for which it is desired to reserve for more suitable occasion, the order is a motion to lay on the table; the matter may then be called for at any time. If the proposition may need further consideration at the hands of a committee, the motion is to refer to a committee, but if it need but a few and simple amendments, the mayor and city council shall proceed to consider and amend at once. 
(h)  On an amendment's being moved, a member who has spoken on the main question may speak again to the amendment. 
(i)  The question is to be put first on the affirmative and then on the negative side. After the affirmative part of the question has been put, any member who has not spoken before to the question may arise and speak before the negative be put. 
(j)  When a question has been moved and seconded and has been put by the presiding officer in the affirmative and negative, it cannot be debated unless under motion for reconsideration. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1004) 
Sec. 2-30. - Retention of public records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to administer the records management system for the city, to maintain the retention schedule approved by the mayor and city council, and provide for the security and preservation of public records. 
(b)  The retention schedule for the city shall be the Retention Schedules for Local Government Records as published by the state department of archives and history in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(f). 
(Ord. No. 03-09, Pt. I, 11-4-03) 
Sec. 2-31. - Compensation of mayor and members of city council. 
Subject to compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4, the monthly compensation of the members of the city council shall be as follows. 
Members of the city council, per month\$300.00 
Mayor, per month\1,000.00 
The aforesaid monthly compensation shall not be effective until after the taking of office of those elected at the next municipal election held immediately following the date on which the ordinance from which this section derived is duly passed and adopted. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, pt. I, 4-4-06) 
Editor's note— The provisions of § 2-31 become effective January, 2008. 
Secs. 2-32—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PURCHASING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-14, adopted November 4, 2008, amended the Code by repealing former art. III, §§ 2-51—2-61, and adding a new art. III. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of February 6, 1990; April 6, 1993; March 1, 1994. 
Charter reference— Procurement, property management, § 6.27; purchasing, § 6.28. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; purchases through the state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100. 

Sec. 2-51. - Introduction. 
(a)  Purchasing is the procurement of supplies, equipment and services at the lowest prices consistent with the quality needed for the effective operations of the departments of the city. This procurement is an important function of the city, and for any purchasing department to be truly effective, there must be full cooperation between all departments. Serving the needs of each department will be the foremost consideration of the purchasing department. However, to obtain the greatest value for every dollar spent it is necessary to follow a set of procedures when purchases are made. 
(b)  The procedures outlined are to be used by all city employees in requesting and purchasing equipment and supplies. 
(c)  Changes will be issued as new procedures are approved. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-52. - Office of purchasing agent. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of purchasing agent, who shall be the city's principal public purchasing official. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall be the city manager or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-53. - Objectives. 
(a)  To conduct city business in such an open manner that potential vendors will be impressed by the fairness of the system and thus be encouraged to furnish competition which will ensure that the city will secure the best product at the lowest price at all times. 
(b)  To encourage competitive purchasing. 
(c)  To develop and maintain an adequate supply of materials, services and supplies as required. 
(d)  To give due consideration to ethical and quality standards and also to real value rather than price alone. 
(e)  To establish and build good relations with suppliers and departments. 
(f)  To discourage, as far as possible, any procedure other than that of competitive purchasing. 
(g)  To purchase the highest quality in supplies, equipment and contractual services at the least expense. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-54. - Powers and duties of the purchasing agent. 
(a)  Observe and enforce the procedures outlined in this manual. 
(b)  Procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and services at the least expense. 
(c)  Supervise and be held responsible for a decentralized purchasing system, whereas department heads have purchasing authority. 
(d)  Encourage competitive bidding at all possible times. 
(e)  Explore the possibilities of buying in bulk to take full advantage of discounts. 
(f)  Prepare written specifications for supplies, equipment and services as required. Specifications shall be developed with information available through governmental and private sources and in cooperation with city departments. 
(g)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the operation of the purchasing department. 
(h)  Maintain such files as necessary to the operation of the purchasing department in an organized manner. 
(i)  Authority to declare vendors who default on their quotations irresponsible and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the city for a specified period of time. 
(j)  Authority to remove a bidder from bid list under certain conditions. 
(k)  Obtain all federal and state tax exemptions to which the city is entitled. 
(l)  Investigate and report any possibilities of collusion. 
(m)  Join with other governmental agencies in cooperative purchasing when it is for the best interest of the city. 
(n)  Keep abreast of current developments in the field of purchasing. 
(o)  Advise and assist in formulation of policies concerning purchasing. 
(p)  Responsible for the disposal of city property declared surplus. No city employee shall dispose of city property by trade-in or otherwise without first consulting with the purchasing agent. Departments having property that is no longer needed should submit a description of such to purchasing. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-55. - Functions of the departments. 
(a)  Departments should plan their work so that "rush orders" and emergencies will be held to a minimum. Requests should be forwarded to the purchasing department far enough in advance to allow sufficient time for delivery. 
(b)  Departments should assist the purchasing department by suggesting the names of vendors that have access to particular items being requested, especially items of a technical nature. However, the purchasing department is in no way confined to the vendors suggested. The purchasing department maintains a list of vendors and any responsible firm may be added to that list upon application by telephone or mail. 
(c)  The city is not obligated to purchase equipment or accessories that are delivered for use on a "trial" basis. 
(d)  No department has the authority to order directly from a vendor or negotiate purchases in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  No city employee shall purchase supplies, material or equipment of any kind for personal use. 
(f)  Department heads will be called upon to assist in writing specifications for bids. Specifications should not be written which are considered "closed" (written around one (1) specific brand). Brand names, model numbers, etc., may be submitted as a guideline as to the type and quality of merchandise desired. However, the wording "or approved equal" will always be added so as not to discriminate against any vendor's merchandise. Competition must be kept in mind throughout the writing of specifications. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-56. - Purchasing procedures. 
(a)  Based on dollar amount. The purchasing procedures to be followed by the City based on the dollar amount of the purchase are as follows, unless under state contract (note: these procedures apply on a per item basis); state contract bidding should be used if available. 
(1)  Up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and line item budgeted —direct purchase by the purchasing agent. 
(2)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) up to two thousand dollars ($2,000) and line item budgeted —minimum of three (3) email or fax quotations. Results of quotations and award to be recorded and filed. 
(3)  Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) up to three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) and line item budgeted —minimum of three (3) written quotations and submitted to the city manager. Results of quotations and award to be recorded and filed. 
(4)  Three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and budgeted —minimum of three (3) written quotations. Purchasing agent and city manager make recommendation to city council and they award the bid. Results of written quotations and award to be recorded and filed. 
(5)  Above ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and budgeted —requires solicitation of advertised formal sealed bids. Purchasing agent and city manager make recommendation to city council and they award the bid. Results of bids and award to be recorded and filed. 
(6)  Nonbudgeted items —approved by city manager and purchasing agent in amounts up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Amounts above two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) require approval of the mayor and council. Once approval has been granted, comply with the procedures of subsections (1)—(5) above (whichever applies). 
(7)  Budgeted vehicles —direct purchase from state contract, by department heads with city manager and financial officer approval. 
(8)  Professional services —mayor and city council may appoint vendors for professional services annually based upon qualifications and experience of the respective vendors. These professional services shall include, but not be limited to, auditor, attorney, solicitor, judge, judge pro tem, engineers, architects, and surveyors. 
(9)  Council review —Items over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) not otherwise required to be awarded by council, the city manager or purchasing agent shall bring those items forward for discussion at council committee/work session meetings. 
(b)  Bond and insurance requirements. 
(1)  Public road project contracts over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) require performance bond and payment bond as well as public liability and property damage insurance bonds or policies, and bonds to maintain in good condition; such completed construction for a period of not less than five (5) years, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-4-119. The amount of insurance depends on the size of the project. 
(2)  Public works contracts over forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) must provide a bid bond, performance bond, and payment bond in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 13-10-1 and 13-10-2. 
(3)  Any contractor entering a contract with the city must carry a worker's compensation policy at the minimum statutory limit, unless he is exempt under O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
(4)  Licensed professionals contracting with the city for services in the amount of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) or more must provide professional liability coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-57. - Formal bids. 
(a)  Bid requirements. 
(1)  Public roads. All contracts for public roads exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00 shall be let by competitive sealed bids after advertising same once a week for two (2) weeks prior to the opening of sealed bids, all in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-90 through 32-4-123. Provided, however, that contracts listed in O.C.G.A. § 32-4-113 may be let without advertising and without competitive sealed bids. 
(2)  Public works. All contracts exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for public works other than public roads shall be let by competitive sealed bids after advertising same for a minimum of three weeks utilizing newspaper, plan room and transmitting invitation to bid directly to potential bidders, prior to the opening of sealed bids and posting a written notice at city hall for the same length of time. 
(3)  Utility system contracts. Contracts for utility system work, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-14-2(17), for which costs exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) must be performed by a state licensed utility contractor. Bidders for utility contracting must have a valid license pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8.2 or intend to have the work performed by a state licensed contractor. 
(4)  Other contracts. All other contracts not hereinbefore provided for shall be let by competitive sealed bids after advertising same once a week for two (2) weeks prior to the opening of the sealed bids. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-58. - Purchasing orders required. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the city shall request any merchant, dealer or other vendor to deliver goods to the city or any department or officer or employee thereof, except on a regular purchase order approved by the city manager or his designee except as provided hereinafter for emergencies. 
(b)  All purchase orders must be executed by the city manager or his designee 
(c)  Any purchases made without obtaining a purchase order in advance shall be disallowed and payment refused. No purchase order will be issued after the fact. Vendors, merchants and dealers will be deemed to have dealt with any employee or officer who does not have a purchase order at their own risk. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-59. - Emergency purchases. 
In all cases where there is immediate need for any materials, supplies, goods, wares or merchandise by any department, such department must advise the city manager, and if he cannot be located, the officer or employee must immediately notify the mayor or chairman of the finance committee or chairman of the committee having jurisdiction over that subject matter for action pursuant to section 2-54. In the event none of the above can be reached and an emergency purchase of the item is absolutely necessary, such purchase must be reported to the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours of such purchase. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-60. - Discretion on purchases. 
In all purchases where quality as well as price and service is involved, the city manager or finance clerk at his direction shall exercise discretion in making the purchase. In all cases where patented items or special purpose items are requested, the city manager or finance clerk at his direction has the discretionary authority to decide whether similar products of equal quality and at a lower price shall be ordered in lieu of items requested. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 2-61. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  No property belonging to the city shall be sold except after approval of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  When any property owned by the city has become surplus, unserviceable or useless, the head of the department in charge of the property shall certify to mayor and city council that such property is no longer useful and should be disposed of. Any property to be sold shall be sold at public sale either by sealed bid or public outcry to the highest bidder for cash. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from donating or exchanging such surplus property with other governmental units or quasi-governmental units. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, 11-4-08) 
Charter reference— Sale of property, § 6.29. 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOCIAL SECURITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Social security coverage for employees of political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-81. - System extended to city. 
It is the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal security administrator, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this article, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of the 81st Congress, and as provided for in Act No. 295, Georgia Laws 1951, approved February 21, 1951. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5001) 
Sec. 2-82. - Execution of agreements. 
The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, hereinafter to be known as the state agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided for in section 2-81. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5002) 
Sec. 2-83. - Withholdings from salaries or wages. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-81 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5003) 
Sec. 2-84. - Appropriations. 
There shall be appropriated from funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 2-82. Such funds shall be paid over to the state agency in accordance with regulations established by the state agency. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5004) 
Sec. 2-85. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5005) 
Sec. 2-86. - Exclusions. 
There is hereby excluded from this chapter any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5006) 
Sec. 2-87. - Escrow deposits. 
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement amending the original plan and agreement with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, providing for the release of social security escrow deposits. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5007) 
Sec. 2-88. - Rules of state agency. 
The city agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the state agency in regard to collections from city employees and in making reports and payments to the state agency. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5008) 
Sec. 2-89. - Pledge of funds. 
The city hereby pledges an amount which it would receive in state grant funds as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports, and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. The city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, then the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city's state grant funds, would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5009) 
Secs. 2-90—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RETIREMENT PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The city's retirement plan was originally adopted Dec. 1, 1980, and was amended by an ordinance June 13, 1990. This was superseded by a new plan adopted Nov. 13, 1990, which has been included in this article, §§ 2-101—2-115. 

Sec. 2-101. - Purpose. 
This article shall constitute the Retirement Plan of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia, for the exclusive benefit of the city employees according to the terms and conditions hereinafter contained; and when accepted and executed by the authorized officer of GMEBS, shall also constitute the contract between the city and the GMEBS, as authorized and provided by O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq.; and this article and contract shall be subject to amendment from time to time by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. I) 
Sec. 2-102. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this article, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context, shall have the following meanings: 
Accrued benefit means, as of any date, the normal retirement benefit payable to a participant at his normal retirement date computed in accordance with the provisions of section 2-106, based upon the participant's total credited service and his final average earnings as of the date the participant's accrued benefit is being determined. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit of approximately equal value when computed on the basis of the actuarial assumptions contained in section 2-109. 
Actuary means an individual, or firm, appointed or approved by the board of trustees to perform actuarial calculations necessary in the funding of the plan. 
Annual earnings means the earnings which have been paid to a participant for service rendered during any consecutive twelve (12) calendar month period preceding the most recent termination. It shall be limited to such maximum amount as prescribed in section 2-106(a)(2)d. 
Beneficiary means the person designated by a participant, in writing and on prescribed forms, to receive any death benefit provided for a beneficiary in section 2-107(b) or section 2-108(a) or (b). 
Board of trustees, board means the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
City, town, member, municipality, or employer means the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
Contract means the entire contents of this article, plan, and joint trust agreement, and any amendments made hereafter. 
Contributions means payments made to GMEBS to provide the benefits specified in the plan. 
Cost-of-living base figure means the current average cost-of-living index figure of a participant as of his actual retirement date or any subsequent annual adjustment date. The cost-of-living base figure for beneficiaries receiving pensions shall be the current average cost-of-living index figure beginning on the annual adjustment date following such beneficiary's entitlement to a pension or any subsequent annual adjustment date. 
Credited future service means the amount of future service of a participant, except for a participant who has a break in service, in which case credited future service shall be limited to service subsequent to the most recent employment date, unless during such period of service subsequent to his most recent employment date, the employee performs the lesser of service and leave of absence equal to the break in service, or service and leave of absence equal to five (5) years. 
Credited past service means the number of years and complete months of past service: 
(a)  Of an eligible employee employed on the effective date of the Plan. 
(b)  Of an eligible employee not employed on the effective date of the plan who had service prior to such effective date, provided that subsequent to such effective date, the employee performs the lesser of service and leave of absence equal to the break in service, or service and leave of absence equal to five (5) years. 
(c)  Of an eligible employee whose initial employment date is subsequent to the effective date of the plan; however, the employee's credited past service shall only be the number of years and complete months of continuous service from his latest employment date to his enrollment date. 
Current average cost-of-living index figure means the Consumer Price Index figure relative to the United States as a whole for the month of November most recently issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor. 
Delayed retirement date means the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the day a participant qualifies for retirement as provided in section 2-105(a) and (d). 
Disability means a physical or mental disability of a participant who because of such disability becomes entitled to receive disability insurance benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, as amended; provided: 
(1)  Such disability commenced on a specified date during the period of the participant's employment with the employer; and 
(2)  Such disability was not self-inflicted, incurred in military service, incurred in the commission of a felonious enterprise, or the result of the use of narcotics or drugs or habitual use of alcohol; and 
(3)  Such disability will be permanent and continuous during the remainder of the participant's life; or 
A participant who is not disabled in accordance with the above definition of disability solely because he lacks the quarters of social security coverage required to receive a disability insurance benefit under the Federal Social Security Act, as amended, shall qualify for disability if the pension committee shall determine that he is permanently incapacitated on the basis of a certificate signed by a physician selected and paid by the disabled Participant and stating that: 
(1)  Such participant is permanently and totally physically or mentally disabled by anatomical, physiological or psychological abnormalities that are demonstrable by medically acceptable clinical and laboratory diagnostic techniques, so as to be prevented from engaging in any occupation or employment whatsoever for remuneration or profit; and 
(2)  Such disability commenced on a specified date during the period of the participant's employment with the employer; and 
(3)  Such disability will be permanent and continuous during the remainder of the participant's life; and 
(4)  Such disability was not self-inflicted, incurred in military service, incurred in the commission of a felonious enterprise, or the result of the use of narcotics or drugs or habitual alcoholism. 
The Pension Committee shall have the right to require the participant who is under disability to be examined by a physician chosen by the pension committee to confirm the continuation of a disability. 
Disability retirement date means the first day of the first calendar month in which a participant becomes entitled to receive a disability benefit, as provided in section 2-105(a) and (e). However, in no event shall the disability retirement date be earlier than one (1) calendar month following the participant's termination of employment as a result of a disability. 
Early retirement age means age fifty-five (55), except as otherwise provided in section 2-105(c). 
Early retirement date means the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date a participant qualifies for retirement as provided in section 2-105(a) and (c). 
Earnings means the total normal compensation paid to an employee but shall exclude compensation for reimbursed expenses and other unusual compensation. Earnings shall also include overtime, holiday, sick, and vacation pay, and compensation deferred and redirected pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
Effective date of the plan means December 1, 1980. 
Eligible employee means any full-time employee who comes within the provisions of section 2-104(b), and who is not an ineligible employee as defined in this section. 
Employee means any person who is regularly employed in the services of the employer. 
Enrollment date means the date that an employee first becomes a participant under this plan. That date shall be established by the pension committee on a form provided for that purpose. 
Final average earnings means the average of the annual earnings paid to a participant during any consecutive five-year period preceding his actual date of retirement in which his earnings were highest; or if he had less than five (5) years of total credited service, then his final average earnings shall be his average earnings for his total credited service. 
Full-time employee means an employee who works at least twenty (20) hours per week. 
Future service means the number of years and complete months of service of a participant from his enrollment date to his effective date of termination. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council. 
Ineligible employee means any employee in the class or classes enumerated in section 2-104(a). 
Interest shall mean a pro rata share of any and all interest, dividends, and capital gains or losses earned on the invested or reinvested funds of the GMEBS investment fund. 
Investment fund shall mean the total amounts of all contributions plus interest, invested or uninvested, held by the board of trustees for all GMEBS member employers and their employees where applicable. 
Monthly retirement benefit means the monthly benefit as provided in section 2-106 or any optional benefit payable in lieu thereof as provided in section 2-107. 
New employee means any employee hired after the effective date of the plan, except as otherwise provided for in section 2-104(c). 
Normal retirement age means age sixty-five (65), except as otherwise provided in section 2-105(b). 
Normal retirement date means the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the day a participant qualifies for retirement as provided in section 2-105(a) and (b). 
Participant or participating employee means any eligible employee who complies with the requirements of section 2-104(d). 
Past service means the number of years and complete months of service of a participant prior to his enrollment date. 
Pension committee means the committee created in this article to represent the employer in the administration of the plan established in this article. 
Plan means the provisions of this article setting forth the employees to be covered, the benefits to be provided, and the conditions of retirement and all amendments thereto which may hereafter be made, to be known as the Retirement Plan for the Employees of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
Plan year means each twelve-month period ending on the day immediately preceding each December 1. 
Retired participant means any participant who has terminated service with the employer and who is receiving a benefit provided under the plan. 
Retirement means withdrawal from service with a retirement allowance granted under the provisions of the plan. The employer may engage as an ineligible employee any person receiving benefits hereunder, and such engagement shall not terminate or suspend such benefits. 
Retirement system, system, or GMEBS means the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System created by O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq. 
Service means regular service rendered as an employee of the employer. Service includes absence from active employment with the employer under conditions which are not treated by it as a termination of employment. 
Spouse or spouse beneficiary shall mean a person who is lawfully joined with a terminated participant in a marriage which is recognized under the laws of the state as of the date of the terminated participant's death. 
Terminated participant means any participant terminated from service with a vested benefit under any provision of the plan. 
Termination means a severance of employment with the employer, including retirement, resignation or discharge, lapse of recall rights after layoff, failure to return to service as an eligible employee after an approved leave of absence, or death. 
Total credited service means the sum of credited past service and credited future service of a participant, but shall be limited to such maximum number of years, if any, as may be prescribed in section 2-106 (a)(2) c. 
Trust fund means the total amounts, invested or uninvested, held at any time by GMEBS in trust for the employer under the joint trust agreement. 
Vesting, vested right, vested benefit means the rights of a terminated participant as specified in section 2-108. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. II, §§ 1—48; Ord. No. 01-6, § 1, 5-1-01) 
Sec. 2-103. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  In the construction of the plan, all masculine terms shall include the feminine and the singular the plural in all cases where such meanings would be appropriate. 
(2)  The plan shall be construed in accordance with state law. 
(3)  In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the previously existing provisions or the other section or sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The governing authority hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this article or retained the previously existing provisions if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional. 
(b)  Nonalienation of Benefits. None of the benefits, payments, proceeds or distributions payable under the plan shall be subject to the claim of any creditor of any participant or to the claim of any creditor of any beneficiary hereunder, or to any legal process of levy or attachment by any creditor of any such participant or beneficiary; and no such benefits shall be in any manner liable for or subject to the debts, liabilities, engagements, or torts of any participant or beneficiary; and neither any such participant or beneficiary shall have any right to alienate, commute, anticipate, transfer, encumber, pledge or assign any of the benefits, payments, proceeds or distributions under the plan. 
(c)  Legally Incompetent. Any participant or beneficiary receiving or claiming benefits under the plan shall be conclusively presumed to be mentally competent and of age until the pension committee receives a written notice, in a form and manner acceptable to it, that such person is incompetent or a minor, and that a guardian or other person legally vested with the care of his estate has been appointed. In the event a guardian of the estate of any person receiving or claiming benefits under the plan shall be appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction, payments shall be made to such guardian provided that proper proof of appointment is furnished in a form and manner suitable to the pension committee. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of liability therefor under the plan. 
(d)  Benefits Supported Only by Trust Fund. Any person having any claim under the plan shall look solely to the assets of the trust fund for satisfaction. In no event shall the employer, or any of its employees or agents, be liable in their individual capacities to any person whomsoever, under the provisions of the plan or of the joint trust agreement. 
(e)  Discrimination. The employer, through the pension committee, shall administer the plan in a uniform and consistent manner with respect to all participants. 
(f)  Limitation of Liability; Legal Actions. 
(1)  It is expressly understood and agreed by each employee who becomes a participant hereunder that, except for willful neglect or fraud, neither the employer, the pension committee, nor the board of trustees shall be in any way subject to any suit or litigation, or to any legal liability, for any cause or reason or thing whatsoever, in connection with the plan or its operation; and each such participant hereby releases the employer, all its employees and agents, the pension committee, and the board of trustees from any and all liability or obligation. 
(2)  The pertinent employer and the pension committee shall be the only necessary parties to any action or proceeding involving any rights under the plan or the proper administration thereof, and no participant, beneficiary, or other persons having or claiming to have an interest in the plan shall be entitled to any notice of process. Any final judgment which is not appealed or appealable that may be entered in any such action or proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on the parties hereto and all persons having or claiming to have an interest in the plan. 
(g)  Claims. Any payment to a participant or beneficiary, or to their legal representatives, in accordance with the provisions of the plan, shall to the extent thereof be in full satisfaction of all claims hereunder against the pension committee or the employer, either of which may require such participant, benficiary or legal representative, as a condition precedent to such payment, to execute a receipt and release therefor in such form as shall be determined by the pension committee or the employer. 
(h)  Intent. The employer hereby agrees to abide by the bylaws and the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of GMEBS in all matters pertaining to the operation and administration of the contract. It is intended that the act creating the Board of Trustees of GMEBS, the bylaws of the board, the rules and regulations of the board, and this contract are to be construed in harmony with each other. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of any of the foregoing, they shall govern in the following order: 
(1)  The act creating the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq.; 
(2)  The bylaws of the board; 
(3)  The rules and regulations of the board; 
(4)  This article and contract. 
(i)  Fraud, embezzlement, theft and dismissal for cause. In the event the employer shall receive, prior to a participant's actual retirement date, written confession by such participant, or proof satisfactory to the governing authority that such participant has committed or has been convicted of having committed an act of fraud, embezzlement or theft in connection with his duties or in the course of his employment with the employer, or in connection with the plan, his participation in the plan shall be forthwith terminated; and any vested interest other than his own accumulated contributions, if any, that such participant may have in the fund shall be forfeited. 
(j)  Errors in computation of benefits. Any overpayments or underpayments from the trust fund to a retired participant or to a beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be corrected with interest compounded annually from the date of the miscalculation. The rate applied shall be the actuarial assumption rate utilized by the plan actuary for estimating future plan investment earnings as of the date of the correction. Overpayments shall be charged against retirement payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the trust fund. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. XV, §§ 1-10) 
Sec. 2-104. - Eligibility, qualification and participation. 
(a)  Ineligible Classes of Employees. The following classes of employees shall not become eligible for participation in the Plan: 
(1)  Class 1: Employees who regularly work less than twenty (20) hours per week in the service of the employer, or who are regularly employed for less than five (5) months in any year. 
(2)  Class 2: Any person employed by the employer to perform scientific, technical, engineering, accounting, legal or similar expert services in a consulting capacity on a retainer or fee basis. 
(b)  Eligible Classes of Employees. All employees not excluded by subsection (a) shall qualify for participation by meeting the pertinent requirements set forth in subsection (c). 
(c)  Qualifications for Participation. 
(1)  Each full-time employee employed on the effective date of the plan shall be qualified to apply for participation in the plan: 
a.  If he has completed one (1) year of continuous service on or prior to the effective date of the plan; or 
b.  On the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date subsequent to the effective date of the plan that he completes one (1) year of continuous service, provided that the period of service between the effective date of the plan and his enrollment date was continuous and uninterrupted. 
(2)  Each full-time employee hired after the effective date of the plan shall be eligible to participate in the plan on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date he completes one (1) year of continuous service. Each employee who, as of December 1, 1988, was previously excluded from participation in the plan because he was over the plan's maximum entry age shall be eligible to participate in the plan on the later of December 1, 1988, or the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date he completes one (1) year of continuous service. An employee who was previously excluded from participation because of age shall receive credit for all service, including service prior to December 1, 1988. 
(3)  Any full-time employee hired after the effective date of the plan whose immediate prior employment was with another employer in the GMEBS and who was a participant in that employer's plan shall be allowed to become a participant on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the month in which he is employed, regardless of any other requirements in this subsection. 
(4)  Any full-time employee whose employment terminates and who later resumes employment in an eligible employee class shall be considered a new employee as of his date of reemployment unless he meets one of the following conditions: 
a.  A former participant who is reemployed in an eligible employee class within one (1) year after termination of his employment with the employer shall not be deemed to have broken continuity of service and may resume participation on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with his reemployment, but the time he was absent shall not be taken into account for the purpose of calculating benefits under the plan; or 
b.  A former participant who is reemployed in an eligible employee class more than one (1) year after his date of termination and who spent the interim period in the continuous employment of another employer in the GMEBS shall not be deemed to have broken continuity of service and may resume participation on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the month in which he is reemployed, but the time he was absent shall not be taken into account for the purpose of calculating benefits under the plan; or 
c.  A former participant who is reemployed in an eligible employee class after being on an authorized leave of absence and who meets the provisions of subsection (e)(1) shall not be deemed to have broken continuity of service and may resume participation on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the month in which he is reemployed in accordance with the terms of the leave as approved by the governing authority; or 
d.  A former participant who is reemployed in an eligible employee class after a period of service in the armed forces of the United States, and who meets the provisions of subsection (e)(2), shall not be deemed to have broken continuity of service and may resume participation on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the month in which he is reemployed, and the time he was absent shall be taken into account for the purpose of calculating benefits under the Plan. 
(d)  Participation. 
(1)  Each eligible employee who meets the qualifications for participation in the Plan as set forth in subsection (c) shall become a participant in the plan by filing with the pension committee, on a prescribed from, such information as shall be required by the pension committee, which shall include the employee's acceptance of the terms and conditions of the plan. 
(2)  Participation in the plan shall not give any eligible employee the right to be retained in the employ of the employer nor, upon dismissal, to have any right or interest in the trust fund other than is herein provided. 
(e)  Leaves of Absence. 
(1)  General leaves of absence. The governing authority shall determine the date of expiration of a leave of absence granted to a participant. Such periods of absence shall not be counted as credited future service for the purpose of computing a benefit hereunder unless the leave, as authorized by the governing authority, specifically permits such participant to continue accumulating credited future service during the authorized leave of absence. Such participant shall, for the purposes of the plan, not be deemed to have broken continuity of credited future service, provided: 
a.  He was regularly employed by the employer immediately prior to his leave of absence; and 
b.  He makes application for reemployment on or before the date of expiration of a leave of absence; and 
c.  He is reemployed as an eligible employee within ninety (90) days after such application. 
(2)  Military leaves of absence. A former employee who is reemployed in an eligible employee class after service in the armed forces of the United States shall, for the purposes of the plan, not be deemed to have broken continuity of service; and all military service shall be counted for the purpose of computing a benefit, provided: 
a.  He was regularly employed by the employer immediately prior to his military service; and 
b.  The Plan was in effect on the date he left employment for such military service; and 
c.  He makes application for reemployment within ninety (90) days after he first becomes entitled to his discharge or release from service in the armed forces of the United States; and 
d.  He is reemployed as an eligible employee within ninety (90) days after such application. 
(3)  Interest if participant does not return. If a participant or employee has not returned to his regular employment as an eligible employee in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) in this subsection, his interest, if any, under the plan shall be only such as existed at the commencement of such leave of absence. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. III, §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 2-105. - Retirement eligibility and dates. 
(a)  Retirement Eligibility. 
(1)  The retirement prerequisites of a participant under this plan are contingent upon the method of retirement selected by such participant; that is, normal retirement, early retirement, delayed retirement, or disability retirement. The prerequisites associated with each retirement method or employment status shall be as specified below in pertinent provisions of subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e), respectively, of this section. 
(2)  Retirement under the plan is contingent upon the satisfactory completion of a prescribed form provided for such purpose and the acceptance of the retirement application by the pension committee. 
(3)  Retirement applications shall be prepared and submitted at such time as to reach the office of GMEBS no earlier than ninety (90) days and no later than thirty (30) days prior to a participant's effective retirement date. 
(b)  Normal retirement date. The normal retirement date of a participant shall be the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date he has attained: 
(1)  Age sixty-five (65) and has completed five (5) years of total credited service; or 
(2)  Age fifty-five (55) and has completed twenty-five (25) years of total credited service. 
(c)  Early Retirement Date. A participant may retire from the service of the employer on the first day of any month prior to his normal retirement date, provided he has attained age fifty-five (55) and has a minimum of ten (10) years of total credited service. 
(d)  Delayed Retirement Date. A participant may retire from the service of the employer on the first day of any month subsequent to his normal retirement date. 
(e)  Disability Retirement Date. A participant may retire under the provisions of the plan on the first day of the first calendar month in which a participant becomes entitled to receive disability benefits regardless of any age or service restrictions otherwise contained herein. Upon actual retirement, such participant shall receive the disability retirement benefit provided in section 2-106(d) or any other retirement benefit granted under the plan for which he is eligible if such benefit is greater than the aforesaid disability retirement benefit. However, under no circumstances shall any retired participant be entitled at one (1) time to more than one (1) type of retirement benefit granted under the plan. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. IV, §§ 1—5; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 7-3-95) 
Sec. 2-106. - Retirement benefits. 
(a)  Normal Retirement Benefit. 
(1)  A participant, upon retirement on his normal retirement date, shall receive a monthly retirement benefit under which payments shall commence on the first day of month following his normal retirement date and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter during his lifetime. The amount of the monthly retirement benefit for service as a full-time employee of the employer shall be determined as one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) the product of: one and one-half (1½) percent of the participant's final average earnings, multiplied by years of total credited service. 
(2)  The following provisions shall apply to the calculation of paragraph (1) above: 
a.  Credited past service shall be as defined in section 2-102; except, however, that any eligible employee who does not elect to become a participant as of the date he is first qualified to do so may elect to become a participant on the first day of any succeeding month; however, the credited past service of such participant shall not include the period of service from the date he was first qualified to become a participant to the date he elects to become a participant, or any creditable past service due him on the date he was first qualified to become a participant under the plan. 
b.  Credited future service shall be as defined in section 2-102 and limited to time spent in the service of the employer, except as provided in 2-104(e) and in subsection 2-106(a)(2)g. below. 
c.  Total credited service, both past and future, shall be the sum of credited past service and credited future service. The amount of total credited service for any participant shall be unlimited. Total credited service shall not exceed the total calendar years and complete months during which a participant was an eligible employee, except as herein otherwise provided. 
d.  Maximum annual earnings to be used for computing final average earnings for benefit accrual shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). 
e.  Final average earnings shall be used for computing the monthly retirement benefit, except as otherwise provided herein. 
f.  Full months of credited past and future service shall be treated as fractions of one (1) year. Partial months shall not be included in the calculation. 
g.  Accumulated days of unused sick and/or vacation leave for which a terminated participant who is a full-time employee is not paid shall constitute additional credited future service as prescribed herein. At the time of such participant's termination of employment, the pension committee shall certify to GMEBS the total amount of the participant's unused sick and/or vacation leave which qualifies as credited future service pursuant to this subparagraph. For purposes of this subparagraph, each twenty (20) days of unused sick and/or vacation leave shall constitute one (1) complete month of credited future service. Partial months shall not be credited. Notwithstanding any other provision in the plan to the contrary, unused sick and/or vacation leave which is counted as additional credited future service under this subparagraph shall not be used to fulfill any age or service requirements for participation, vesting, or retirement eligibility under the plan. 
(b)  Early Retirement benefit. A participant, upon retirement on his early retirement date, shall receive a monthly retirement benefit under which payment shall commence on the last day of the month in which the participant's early retirement date occurs and shall be payable on the last day of each month thereafter during the lifetime of the participant. The amount of such monthly retirement benefit shall be computed in the same manner as for a normal retirement benefit, but reduced on an actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with the actuarial table contained in section 2-109(a). 
(c)  Delayed Retirement Benefit. A participant may retire from the service of the employer on the first day of any month subsequent to his normal retirement date. 
(d)  Disability Retirement Benefits. The amount of the disability retirement benefit shall be calculated in the same manner as the normal retirement benefit with no actuarial reduction for age imposed. In no event, however, will a participant's disability retirement benefit be less than twenty (20) percent of his average monthly earnings for the twelve (12) calendar month period immediately preceding his termination as result of a disability. 
(e)  Suspension of Benefits. 
(1)  Any retirement benefits payable under this plan to any participant shall be suspended, except as otherwise provided herein, as of the date he is reemployed as an eligible employee, and shall be resumed as of the first day of the month following his subsequent retirement. In any case where the payment of a participant's retirement benefits shall have been so suspended, the retirement benefits payable on his subsequent retirement (whether before or after his normal retirement date) shall be the benefit computed in accordance with this section on the basis of his aggregate total credited service and on the basis of his final average earnings at the time of his subsequent retirement, but reduced on an actuarial basis by the value of any retirement benefits received by him prior to being reemployed as an eligible employee and by any actuarial factors used in calculating the benefit payable at the time of his previous retirement. In no event shall the resulting benefit be less than the benefit payable at the time of his previous retirement. A retired participant who is reemployed as an eligible employee shall not be authorized to change his beneficiary on his subsequent retirement or to name a beneficiary in retirement if one had not been previously named. For the purposes of this subsection, any such participant's total credited service subsequent to his reemployment by the employer shall commence as of the date of his reemployment as an eligible employee. 
(2)  Any disability retirement benefit payable under this plan to any participant who shall have retired or been retired pursuant to the provisions of section 2-105(e) shall be suspended as of the date his disability ceases. In any case where the payment of a participant's disability retirement benefit shall have been so suspended, the period of absence from employment due to such disability shall be treated as a leave of absence without pay and the provisions of section 2-104(e) shall apply; except that such period of absence shall not be counted as credited future service. Any participant who shall have retired or been retired pursuant to the provisions of section 2-105(e) and who dies or who has been or shall be subsequently declared ineligible for a disability retirement benefit because of a cessation of the disability shall have a right to any benefit afforded him under any other provision of this plan to which he or his beneficiary might otherwise be entitled. Any disability which ceases or is declared to no longer exist shall be retained by the retiree and disregarded in computing any other benefit payable under this Plan. 
(f)  Cost-of-Living Adjustment. 
(1)  The amount of the benefits payable under this plan to a participant or his beneficiary shall be adjusted by the current average cost-of-living index figure as provided herein. 
(2)  The current average cost-of-living index figure shall be ascertained as of January 1 in each year. 
(3)  Each monthly retirement benefit then being received shall thereupon be adjusted as follows: 
a.  Each monthly retirement benefit shall be increased by the percentage the current average cost-of-living index figure increased over each recipient's cost-of-living base figure. If the current average cost-of-living index figure is less than the average cost-of-living index figure determined on January 1, of the previous calendar year, no reduction in the monthly retirement benefit shall be effected. Increased benefits are payable at the end of the month in which the adjustment is made. 
b.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no increase in the amount of a monthly retirement benefit due to changes in the current average cost-of-living index figure effective at any annual adjustment date (January 1) shall be in excess of five (5) percent of the amount of the monthly retirement benefit payable immediately prior to each participant's or beneficiary's applicable adjustment date. 
(g)  Limitation on annual benefit. A participant's annual benefit shall not exceed the lesser of: one hundred (100) percent of the participant's high three (3) years' average compensation, or a dollar amount which is adjusted for inflation based on section 215(i)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act. If a participant's total annual benefits are not in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), this section will not apply. Furthermore, if the Participant retires before age sixty-two (62), the limit shall be actuarially reduced in accordance with internal revenue code section 415(b)(2)(C) and (F). 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. V, §§ 1—7; Ord. No. 01-6, §§ 2—4, 5-1-01) 
Sec. 2-107. - Optional forms of retirement income. 
(a)  Election of Optional Retirement Benefits. A participant may elect, or may revoke a previous election and make a new election, at any time prior to his actual retirement date, to have his retirement benefit payable under one of the options hereinafter set forth in lieu of the retirement benefit he is otherwise entitled to receive. The benefit shall be paid in accordance with the terms of such option elected. Election of any option shall be made by the participant in writing and shall be subject to approval by GMEBS. 
(b)  Description of Options. The amount of any optional retirement benefit set forth below shall be the actuarial equivalent of the amount of benefit that would otherwise be payable to the participant under section 2-106. 
(1)  Option A, joint and survivor option. A decreased retirement benefit which shall be payable during the lifetime of the participant and, if his beneficiary should survive him, shall continue after his death during the lifetime of his beneficiary in the same amount or in such smaller amount as the participant may designate. If the beneficiary does not survive the participant, all payments shall cease at the death of the participant; and no further benefits will accrue to his estate or to other persons except as provided in section 2-108(b). This option shall be known as option A. The retirement benefit under option A shall be calculated in accordance with section 2-109(b)(1) or (2), whichever is applicable. 
(2)  Option B, period certain and life option. A decreased retirement benefit payable monthly to the participant during his lifetime and, in the event of his death within a period of five (5), ten (10), fifteen (15), or twenty (20) years after his retirement, the same monthly amount shall be payable for the balance of such period to a beneficiary designated by him. If the beneficiary does not survive the participant, all payments shall cease at the death of the participant; and no further benefits will accrue to his estate or to other persons except as provided in section 2-1086(b). This option shall be known as option B. The retirement benefit under option B shall be calculated in accordance with section 2-109(c). 
(3)  Option C, social security option. An increased retirement benefit, determined as of the participant's early retirement date, payable to him during his lifetime until his retirement benefits commence under the Federal Social Security Act at age sixty-two (62), and a decreased retirement benefit payable thereafter for life in order to have a more level retirement income when such decreased retirement benefit is added to his primary benefits under the federal Social Security Act. At the death of the participant, all payments will cease; and no further benefits will accrue to the estate of the Participant or to other persons except as provided in section 2-106(b). This option shall be known as option C. The actuarial equivalent factors to be applied in calculating benefits under option C shall be those contained in section 2-109(d)(1) or (2), whichever is applicable. 
(c)  Cancellation of Election. The election by a participant of any option in subsection (b) shall be null and void if either the participant or his designated beneficiary shall die before the participant's effective retirement date. 
(d)  Restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, a participant's election of the form of benefit payment will be restricted to assure compliance with the minimum distribution incidental death benefit requirements of Internal Revenue Code section 401(a)(9). 
(e)  Rule for Small Annuities. The present value of a retirement fund benefit shall be distributed to the participant or terminated participant or the terminated participant's beneficiary if the benefit does not exceed Internal Revenue Code Section 411(a)(11)(a) limit on the date of termination. The value of a participant's or terminated participant's benefit shall be determined in accordance with section 2-109(g) on the date of the participant's termination. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. VI, §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 2-108. - Death or termination of employment. 
(a)  Death Prior to Retirement. 
(1)  Upon becoming eligible for participation in accordance with section 2-104, a participant may designate one (1) and only one (1) beneficiary on a form provided for that purpose. In so doing, he specifically provides thereby that in the event the participant's employment is terminated by reason of his death prior to his retirement, there shall be paid to his designated beneficiary a monthly death benefit actuarially equivalent to the reserve required for the participant's anticipated normal retirement benefit. In calculating the normal retirement benefit under the provisions of this section, the following assumptions shall be used: 
a.  The participant's age at the time of his death is sixty-five (65), or his attained age if his attained age is greater than sixty-five (65); and 
b.  The total credited service shall include the amount of credited service accrued prior to the date of the participant's death plus half of the service between such date of death and what would otherwise have been the participant's normal retirement date. In no event shall the amount of total credited service exceed the sum of the actual service performed plus ten (10) calendar years. The death benefit under this section shall be calculated in accordance with section 2-109(e). 
(2)  Terminated vested death benefit. If a terminated participant dies prior to retirement, his designated and surviving beneficiary may apply to receive a lifetime monthly terminated vested death benefit, subject to the provisions of this section. The beneficiary for this purpose shall be the beneficiary designated under paragraph (a)(1) of this section. Said designation may be changed in accordance with paragraph (3) below. If the terminated participant's designated and surviving beneficiary is the terminated participant's spouse as of the date of the terminated participant's death, then the lifetime monthly death benefit payable to the spouse beneficiary prior to retirement ("spouse beneficiary" or "spouse") under this paragraph shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the terminated participant's death. Alternatively, the spouse beneficiary may elect to defer benefit payment commencement until the first day of any month up to and including the date the terminated participant would have attained normal retirement age. If the spouse beneficiary does not apply for payment of monthly death benefits within one (1) year after the terminated participant's death, the spouse beneficiary shall be considered to have deferred benefit payment commencement until the first day of the month following the date the spouse makes such application. If the designated and surviving beneficiary is not the spouse of the terminated participant, then the lifetime monthly death benefit payable to the beneficiary under this paragraph shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the terminated participant's death. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "spouse beneficiary prior to retirement," "spouse beneficiary," or "spouse" shall be as defined in section 2-102. Benefits under this paragraph shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Terminated participant death before early retirement age; payment before early retirement age. If a terminated participant dies before attaining early retirement age, and if benefit payments commence to a spouse beneficiary prior to retirement or non-spouse beneficiary prior to retirement before the terminated participant would have attained early retirement age, then the monthly death benefit payable to said beneficiary shall be the actuarial equivalent of the monthly retirement benefit amount that would have otherwise been payable to the terminated participant, assuming: (i) the terminated participant survived until normal retirement age; and (ii) the terminated participant retired on the date he reached normal retirement age, and elected the optional form of retirement payment designated herein as option A at one hundred (100) percent, and then died. Said benefit shall be calculated in accordance with the actuarial assumptions specified in section 2-109(f). 
b.  Terminated participant death before early retirement age; deferred payment by spouse until after early retirement age. If the terminated participant dies before attaining early retirement age and a spouse beneficiary defers payment until a date which is on or after the date the terminated participant would have attained early retirement age, then the monthly death benefit payable to the spouse beneficiary shall be the monthly retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the terminated participant, assuming that: (i) the terminated participant survived until the date upon which the deferred benefit payments commence in accordance with the spouse beneficiary's selected benefit commencement date; and, (ii) the terminated participant elected on such date to retire with the optional form of retirement payment designated herein as option A at one hundred (100) percent, and then died. 
c.  Terminated participant death after early retirement age; payment upon death. If the terminated participant dies after attaining early retirement age, and if benefit payments commence to a spouse beneficiary prior to retirement or a non-spouse beneficiary prior to retirement on the first day of the month coinciding with or immediately following the date of the terminated participant's death, then the monthly death benefit payable to said beneficiary shall be the monthly benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the terminated participant, assuming: (i) the terminated participant retired on the date of death, and (ii) the terminated participant elected the optional form of retirement payment designated herein as option A at one hundred (100) percent, and then died. 
d.  Terminated participant death after early retirement age; deferred payment by spouse. If the terminated participant dies after attaining early retirement age, and if a spouse beneficiary defers payment in accordance with this paragraph, then the monthly benefit payable to the spouse beneficiary shall be the monthly retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the terminated participant, assuming that: (i) the terminated participant survived until the date upon which the deferred benefit payments commence in accordance with the spouse beneficiary's selected commencement date, and (ii) the terminated participant elected to retire on such date with the optional form of retirement payment designated herein as option A at one hundred (100) percent, and then died. 
Benefits under this paragraph (2) shall be calculated taking into account only the participant's total credited service and final average earnings as of the date of his termination of employment with employer, and the applicable benefit formula in effect on the date of said termination. Notwithstanding any other provision in this paragraph, if a beneficiary dies before applying for payment of a monthly death benefit hereunder, or if a spouse beneficiary dies before payment of a deferred benefit is due to commence, then no benefits shall be payable under this paragraph. 
(3)  The present value of a monthly lifetime death benefit otherwise payable under this section shall be distributed in a lump sum if it does not exceed the dollar limit established under Internal Revenue Code section 411(a)(11)(A) as of the date of distribution. The present value of said benefit shall be determined in accordance with section 2-109(g). 
(4)  Designation of a beneficiary may be changed by the participant in writing on a form provided for that purpose at any time prior to actual retirement. Only the last such designation of a beneficiary prior to retirement shall have effect; and any new designation of a beneficiary invalidates, supersedes and revokes any prior designation. 
(5)  Any failure by a participant to designate a beneficiary prior to retirement under the provisions of this subsection, or any failure of a designated beneficiary to survive the participant, shall preclude the payment of any benefit authorized herein. 
(b)  Death After Retirement. Upon the death of a participant subsequent to his retirement, there shall be payable to the participant's designated beneficiary a benefit to be determined as follows: 
(1)  If the participant has not elected an optional form of payment, as provided in section 2-107, or if he has elected an optional form of payment and his designated beneficiary does not survive him, no further payment of any kind whatsoever shall be made at the death of the participant. 
(2)  If the participant has elected an optional form of payment, as provided in § 2-107, and his designated beneficiary survives him, benefits shall be payable to the beneficiary as provided by the option elected. 
(c)  Termination of Employment Before Retirement. 
(1)  A participant whose employment is terminated for any reason other than death or retirement shall be entitled to a vested right in his accrued benefit if he has completed a minimum of five (5) years of total credited service in the plan. Payment of such vested retirement benefit shall commence on the first day of the month following his normal or early retirement date at the option of the participant and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter during the life of the participant. The amount of such monthly retirement benefit shall be computed in the manner prescribed for normal or early retirement in section 2-106 but based upon his final average earnings and total credited service up to the participant's date of termination of employment with the employer. 
(2)  A participant whose employment is terminated because he is disabled shall be entitled to a vested benefit provided his period of disability begain on or before the participant's date of termination of employment as a result of a disability. No disability benefit shall be payable unless application for such benefit is made within one (1) year after employment is terminated as a result of such disability, except when a delay is caused by a pendency of a disability determination by the Social Security Administration. 
(d)  Termination of Employment Before Retirement; Portability. 
(1)  A participant whose employment is terminated either voluntarily or involuntarily for any reason other than death, disability or retirement, after participation in the plan, shall have a right to a vested retirement benefit under the conditions set forth below. The amount of the monthly retirement benefit shall be computed in the manner prescribed for normal or early retirement in section 2-106, but based on his final average earnings and total credited service up to the participant's date of termination of employment with the employer. Payment of such benefit shall commence, at the option of the participant, on the first day of the month following his normal or early retirement date as prescribed in the plan and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter, provided that: 
a.  Any future employer be a GMEBS employer which maintains a GMEBS retirement plan with a provision on portability that is the same or substantially similar to this subsection; and 
b.  To be entitled to any benefits under the provisions of this plan, the participant must meet, through his total credited service with all GMEBS employers, the service requirements for vesting as provided for herein; 
c.  Each break in employment between GMEBS employers shall not exceed five (5) years. 
(2)  In the event the participant's immediately preceding employment was with a GMEBS employer or employers, the service performed for such former employer or employers shall be used for the purpose of qualifying the participant for vesting or retirement under this plan. In no event shall service with another GMEBS employer be used to calculate the benefit amount due the participant from this employer. 
(3)  In the event the employer is his final GMEBS employer, the benefit under this subsection shall begin when the participant retires and shall be computed as prescribed in article 2-106. 
(Ord. No. 01-6, § 5, 5-1-01) 
Sec. 2-109. - Actuarial equivalent conversion tables. 
(a)  Early Retirement Reduction Table. 

 
*Interpolate for whole months. 
_____
(b)  Option A Tables. 
(1)  The following table is to be used for a participant who is the same age as or older than his beneficiary: 

 
*Factor for 20-year age difference minus extrapolation factor below times number of years in excess of 20 that the participant's age exceeds his beneficiary's age. 

 
(2)  The following table is to be used for a participant who is younger than his beneficiary: 

 
.....
(c)  Option B Table. 

 
(d)  Option C Tables. 
(1)  The following table is to be used when the benefits under the social security option are payable for life: 

 
(2)  The following table is to be used when the benefits under the social security option cease at age 62: 

 
(e)  Life Annuity Factors To Be Used for Computing Benefits in the Event of Death Prior to Retirement. 

 
(f)  Other Annuity Forms. Conversion factors for other annuity forms shall be computed by an enrolled actuary on an actuarially equivalent basis assuming that the participant is retiring at age sixty-five (65) and using the UP-1984 Mortality Table without age setback with interest at eight (8) percent, regardless of the actual age and sex of any participant or beneficiary. If appropriate, such factors may vary by the difference between the participant's age and the beneficiary's age. 
(g)  Other Forms of Payment. Other forms of benefit payment made under section 2-107(e), or upon plan termination, or if required for compliance with section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be computed on the basis of the actual age of the participant and/or beneficiary at the time of distribution and under the following actuarial assumptions: 
(1)  Interest: Rates that would be used to value the benefits for a Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation trusteed single-employer plan which terminates on the first day of the calendar year in which the distribution is made. 
(2)  Mortality: The mortality basis in use at the time of payment by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation for male retirees regardless of the actual sex of any participant or beneficiary. 
(3)  Age at which payments begin: The greater of normal retirement date or the age at time of distribution of the participant and/or beneficiary. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. VIII, §§ 1—7; Ord. No. 01-6, § 6, 5-1-01) 
Sec. 2-110. - Contributions. 
(a)  Employer Contributions. The employer shall make the necessary contributions to fund this retirement plan. The amount of these contributions shall be based upon the actuarial assumptions adopted by the board of trustees, the benefits provided in this plan, and the number of participants and their respective ages, earnings, lengths of creditable service, and such other factors as the board of trustees shall deem appropriate to assure proper funding of this plan. Contributions by the employer shall be applied as necessary to assure the payment of accrued benefits to participants and beneficiaries. Contributions received by GMEBS by the last day of any month shall accrue interest from the first day of the following month. 
(b)  Participant Contributions. The participants shall not be required to make any contributions to the cost of this plan. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. IX, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-111. - Pension committee. 
(a)  Creation and Composition. There is hereby created a pension committee which shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  City attorney or other attorney appointed by the governing authority. 
(2)  City clerk and city manager. 
(3)  Two (2) employee representatives elected annually by the participants. 
(4)  Two (2) appointed members of the governing authority. 
(b)  Responsibilities. The pension committee shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  In its dealings with GMEBS or its duly appointed representatives, the pension committee shall: 
a.  Furnish all information with respect to enrollment of employees. 
b.  Assure the collection and remittance to GMEBS of all required contributions. 
c.  Furnish GMEBS, in accordance with its rules and regulations, all reports and other records required to administer this plan. 
d.  Notify GMEBS, in accordance with its rules and regulations, of all benefit elections made by participants under this plan and all matters regarding payment of benefits. 
c.  Notify GMEBS of the termination of participating employees. 
(2)  In dealing with those persons participating or eligible to participate in the plan, the pension committee shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for the enrollment of eligible employees. 
(2)  Handle distribution of all reports to participants. 
(3)  Handle arbitration between the employer and participants in all matters regarding the plan. 
(4)  Handle any notices of eligibility, benefits, available options, and any other notices required by this plan, contract, or rules and regulations of GMEBS. 
(c)  Secretary. The pension committee shall designate, in writing, a secretary or other representative who shall have full authority to represent the committee in all communications with GMEBS and the employer's employees. A copy of such written designation shall be forwarded to GMEBS. 
(d)  Legal Assistance. The city attorney or other attorney appointed by the governing authority shall furnish legal advice to the pension committee with respect to the plan and the committee's assigned responsibilities hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. X, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 2-112. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  Powers. The powers of the Board of Trustees of GMEBS as fixed by the act of the General Assembly creating that board (O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq.), as amended, are hereby incorporated as part of the contract. The employer agrees that, in the administration of the plan, it will comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the board of trustees under its authority as granted by that act. 
(b)  Composition and Election. The composition of the board of trustees and the election of its members shall be as provided by an act creating the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System (O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq.) and as may be provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(c)  Officers. The election of officers by the board of trustees shall be conducted as may be prescribed by an act creating the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System (O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq.) and as may be provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(d)  Notice of Elections. The board of trustees shall provide through its bylaws for the giving of notice of elections, notice of any vacancy on the board, the method or manner in which votes may be cast, and any other matter necessary or incident to the election of members of the board. The board may also provide for a proxy vote, and may determine how, when and in what manner voting by proxy may be had in accordance with an act creating the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System (O.C.G.A. section 47-5-1 et seq.) and as may be provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(e)  Voting. Each GMEBS member employer shall be entitled to vote in any election or other matter placed before the membership as provided in the bylaws of the Board of Trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(f)  Voting Representative for the Employer. The secretary or other designated representative of the pension committee shall be the official representative of the employer insofar as matters pertaining to GMEBS are concerned and is hereby designated as such official representative to cast the employer's vote in any election of members of the GMEBS Board of Trustees and in any other matters which the membership has the authority and responsibility for resolving, unless the employer notifies GMEBS to the contrary in writing. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. XI, §§ 1—6) 
Sec. 2-113. - Joint trust agreement. 
The mayor is hereby designated and authorized to enter into, and execute on behalf of the employer, the joint trust agreement (attached hereto as appendix A) with the board of trustees. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. XII) 
Editor's note— The joint trust agreement has not been printed in this article. 
Sec. 2-114. - Claims and litigation. 
(a)  Disputes. In the event of disagreement between a participant and the employer with respect to any rights, claims or responsibilities under the plan which cannot be resolved by the pension committee as provided under section 2-111, the participant may make an appeal regarding such rights, claims or responsibilities to the governing authority. In the event that any such rights, claims or responsibilities result in a suit or other legal action by a participant or beneficiary, such action shall be defended in the same manner as other suits against the employer. Any legal action on behalf of the city in regard to the plan shall be first authorized by the governing authority and shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the governing authority. GMEBS shall have no responsibility to defend or pursue legal action arising under the plan. 
(b)  Failure To Act. GMEBS shall not be responsible for the failure of the employer to perform any of their obligations under the plan, including the duty to remit payments to GMEBS, to provide necessary records concerning participants and their earnings to GMEBS, or any other functions required of the employer by the plan, contract, or by the rules and regulations of GMEBS. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. XIII, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-115. - Amendment and termination. 
(a)  Amendment of the Plan. The governing authority shall have the right at any time, and from time to time, to amend, in whole or in part, any or all of the provisions of the plan; however, no such amendment shall: 
(1)  Reduce the benefits of any participant or beneficiary; or 
(2)  Authorize or permit any part of the trust fund held by the board to be diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants and their beneficiaries; or 
(3)  Operate to deprive any participant or beneficiary of any rights or benefits irrevocably vested in him under the plan prior to such amendment, except that the governing authority may make any and all changes or modifications necessary to qualify the plan or to keep the plan qualified under the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder, or any amendment thereto; or 
(4)  Become effective until approved by the board. In order to be approved by the board, any amendment must comply with all applicable state and federal laws. If the board does not approve an amendment, the board shall continue to administer the plan as if such amendment had not been made. 
(b)  Amendment of the plan To Transfer Assets; Termination of Trust Agreement. 
(1)  The city may amend the plan and contract so as to provide for the transfer of assets to successor trustees and to terminate the existing trust agreement between the city and the board. Any such ordinance shall comply with subsection (a) and with the requirements of the Rules and regulations of the board of trustees regarding amendment and transfer of plan assets. 
(2)  In addition to other requirements, such ordinance shall: 
a.  Designate a new trustee or trustees to replace the board of trustees. 
b.  Establish a termination date, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees, which shall be used for purposes of the final audit. 
c.  State that the existing retirement rights of employees, participants and beneficiaries shall not be impaired. 
(3)  The board, in accordance with its current rules and regulations, shall cause to be prepared an audit of the GMEBS investment fund in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices to determine the value of the city's trust fund as of the termination date. The board shall then deduct from the trust fund the total expenses incurred or to be incurred by GMEBS in terminating the plan. Distribution of assets to the successor trustees shall then occur within the time limits specified in article XII of the joint trust agreement. 
(c)  Termination of the Plan and Distribution of Assets to Retired Participants, Beneficiaries and Other Participants. 
(1)  The employer expects the plan to be continued indefinitely but, of necessity, reserves the right to terminate the plan and contributions thereunder at any time by action of the governing authority. Such termination shall be accomplished by the adoption of an ordinance by the governing authority terminating the plan. Such ordinance shall conform to the rules and regulations of the board of trustees governing plan termination. 
(2)  Upon termination, all eligible employees shall be deemed to be participants, and the accrued benefits of such participants shall be vested. The pension committee shall notify participants, terminated participants, retired participants, and beneficiaries of the termination of the plan, and shall provide a copy of such notice and the names and addresses of the persons notified to the board. 
(3)  Upon termination, the employer shall provide to GMEBS current participant information necessary to calculate accrued benefits. Upon receipt of such information, GMEBS shall prepare a list of all participants and beneficiaries, showing for each the present value of his accrued benefit as determined by the GMEBS actuary as of the date of termination. 
(4)  The board, in accordance with its current rules and regulations, shall cause to be prepared an audit of the GMEBS investment fund in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices to determine the value of the city's trust fund as of the termination date. All mandatory participant contributions, if any, plus interest, shall be paid from the trust fund to the participants. The board shall then deduct from the trust fund the total expenses incurred or to be incurred by GMEBS in terminating the plan. The board, pursuant to its rules and regulations, shall then allocate the remaining assets to the city for distribution of the present value of accrued benefits in lump sums to the classes listed below. The benefits of each class shall be satisfied before proceeding to the next class. If at any time the remaining plan assets would be insufficient to provide the present value of accrued benefits for the class in question, the remaining assets shall be applied on a pro rata basis within that class, and all subsequent classes shall receive no benefit. 
a.  Class 1: Retired participants or beneficiaries who are receiving payments as of the termination date. 
b.  Class 2: Participants delaying retirement beyond the normal retirement date. 
c.  Class 3: Participants eligible for early retirement. 
d.  Class 4: Other participants, terminated or active, who have met the requirements for vesting as of the termination date. 
e.  Class 5: All other participants on a pro rata basis. 
Payment of benefits to retired participants, beneficiaries and participants by GMEBS as a result of a plan termination shall be limited solely to the assets available in the trust fund. 
(5)  In its termination ordinance, the governing authority shall instruct GMEBS as to the distribution of excess assets, if any, remaining after the satisfaction of accrued benefits for the classes enumerated herein. In the absence of such instructions, any excess assets shall be distributed to the Employer. 
(6)  Upon distribution of the assets as specified above, the plan and contract shall be regarded as terminated; and no participant or beneficiary shall have any further rights or claim therein. 
(d)  Involuntary Termination. 
(1)  GMEBS may discontinue administration of the plan and terminate its trusteeship in the event of any of the following occurrences: 
a.  Failure of the employer to comply with the terms of the contract, including but not limited to failure to pay required contributions; or 
b.  Insistence by the employer on enforcing an amendment to the plan which the Board has disapproved; or 
c.  Failure of the employer to adopt within six (6) months any plan amendment which the board has deemed necessary to keep the plan in compliance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(2)  In the event of an involuntary termination, the members of the governing authority shall become successor trustees for the plan. 
(3)  The board shall notify the governing authority, participants and beneficiaries in writing of an involuntary termination and the reasons therefor. The notice shall also fix a termination date. Payment of benefits to retired participants and beneficiaries shall become the responsibility of the governing authority, as successor trustees, as of the termination date. 
(4)  The board, in accordance with its current rules and regulations, shall cause to be prepared an audit of the GMEBS investment fund in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices to determine the value of the city's trust fund as of the termination date. The board shall then deduct from the trust fund the total expenses incurred or to be incurred by GMEBS in terminating the plan. Distribution of assets to the governing authority, as successor trustees, shall then occur within the time limits specified in article XII of the joint trust agreement. 
(Ord. of 11-13-90, Art. XIV, §§ 1—4) 
Secs. 2-116—2-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUDGETARY POLICIES AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-130. - Departmental responsibilities. 
Prior to the end of each fiscal year, each department head shall submit to the mayor and city manager that department's requested budget to be submitted on a line item budget method of budgeting. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-131. - Review by the mayor and city manager. 
Upon receipt of the proposed budget for each department, the mayor as chief executive of the city shall review the requested departmental budget with the city manager, shall review the goals and objectives, both short term and long term, of each department, and shall make recommendations regarding the departmental budgets to the city council. The mayor's recommended budget as established in this section shall be the proposed budget which is reviewed and acted upon by the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-132. - Public hearings and council review. 
The city council shall hold a public hearing on the mayor's recommended budget. The city council shall have the right to accept the mayor's recommended budget or to accept the mayor's recommended budget with certain amendments and changes thereto as the city council may deem appropriate in its judgment. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-133. - Budget set by ordinance. 
Prior to the commencement of the fiscal year, the city council, by ordinance, shall adopt and approve a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. This ordinance shall be subject to veto by the mayor in the same manner as any other ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-134. - Capital projects and cemetery funds. 
The mayor and city council shall have the right to establish one or more capital projects funds for capital projects that may not be funded within a single budget year. They may also establish a fund for the maintenance of the historic cemeteries within the city to be funded from cemetery lot sales and to provide that monies not utilized for maintenance and operating expenses in the city cemetery in any given year shall be carried forward to the ensuing fiscal year. No funds may be appropriated from the cemetery fund except for maintenance or other use within the city cemetery. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-135. - Requirement of a balanced budget. 
In preparing the budget, the mayor, city manager and city council must provide for a balanced budget in that anticipated revenues plus that portion of the beginning fund balance in excess of the required fund balance reserve as established under section 2-137 must equal the total estimated expenditures from the general fund. In any capital projects fund, total anticipated revenues must equal total estimated expenditures. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-136. - Contingency fund. 
To the extent fiscally possible, the city shall, as part of its annual budget, establish an unreserved fund balance equal to no less than three (3) and no more the five (5) percent of the general fund budget to pay expenditures caused by unforeseen emergencies, cash short falls caused by revenue declines, and to eliminate any need for short term borrowing. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-137. - Appropriations to be annual. 
All unencumbered appropriations lapse at the end of the fiscal year. Any encumbered appropriations at year end automatically carry forward to the subsequent year, but are reserved for the purposes for which they were encumbered and are charged as an expenditure to the budget appropriation in the year initially encumbered. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-138. - Accounting standards. 
(a)  The city shall maintain a system of financial monitoring, control, and reporting for all operations and funds in order to provide an effective means of ensuring that financial integrity is not compromised. In addition, such practices shall provide city officials with the necessary resources in order to make sound financial decisions. This system of control shall be in accordance with the prescribed accounting policies of the city. These policies should be available in written form to any employee who may perform duties within the financial administration, control, monitoring, reporting, and operational functions of the city. 
(b)  The budget adopted shall be based upon generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis. Revenues shall be budgeted when they become measurable and available and expenditures shall be charged against the budget when they become measurable, a fund liability has been incurred, and the liability will be liquidated with current resources. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93; Ord. No. 2017-03, pt. I, §§ 1, 2, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 2-139. - Departmental budgets. 
Each department's budget, as approved by the city council, shall be deemed to be its appropriation for the fiscal year. Within each department's budget, there shall be such line items as may be established by the mayor, city manager and department head. The total of such line items shall equal the department's annual appropriation. The city manager, upon request of the department head, may adjust and amend amounts budgeted for any line item within that department by transferring funds among budgeted line items subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No transfers to or from a capital acquisition account shall be made without the prior consent of the city council; 
(2)  Any amendments to the line item budget of any department shall be reported by the city manager to the city council no less than quarterly; 
(3)  There may be no change in the total amount of funds appropriated to any department of the city without an amendment to the budget ordinance made by the city council at any regular or special meeting thereof as provided in section 2-140. 
(4)  No transfer or change in any budgeted line item dealing with salaries shall be made without the prior written consent of the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-140. - Amended appropriations. 
A department's appropriation for the fiscal year may be changed by an amendment to the budget ordinance by the city council at a regular meeting or special meeting thereof. It shall be the responsibility of the city manager and the finance officer of the city to insure that no department or department head exceeds the amount of funds appropriated for that department in any fiscal year. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-141. - Violations. 
A violation of these provisions shall subject the person responsible to disciplinary action as described in section 2-52 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. of 9-7-93) 
Sec. 2-142. - Adoption of current budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year shall be January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2018. 
(b)  The budget of revenues and appropriations for the year 2018, a copy of which is attached to this Appropriations Ordinance as Exhibit 1, is hereby adopted and the city clerk is directed to publish and print such budget in accordance with those provisions set forth in section 3.20 of the Charter of the City of Stone Mountain. The aforesaid copy of the budget of revenues and appropriations for the year 2017, labeled Exhibit 1, is incorporated by reference into this ordinance and expressly made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 99-1, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2016-20, Pt. I, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2017-10, Pt. I, 12-5-17) 
Editor's note— The budget of revenues and appropriations for the year 2017 are hereby adoptd by reference in their entirety. A complete copy of the Appropriations Ordinance is available at the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public. 
Secs. 2-143—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-151. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the Stone Mountain governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Board of ethics means the entity created by section 2-158 of this article. 
Business means a corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
City means the City of Stone Mountain. 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the city and the board of ethics containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member or members of the governing authority; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six (6) months after the complaining party knew or should have reasonably known of the alleged misconduct. 
Confidential information means any information which by law or practice is not available to the public. 
Consultant means any person not a member of the governing authority and who is not an employee of the city who is retained to render personal services of a technical or professional nature, whether paid or unpaid, and who has other personal or private employment. The term "consultant" includes, but is not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors, accountants, brokers, financial advisers, and title abstractors. 
Contract means any claim or demand against or any lease, account, or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, verbal or in writing. 
Emergency situation means any circumstance or condition giving rise to an immediate necessity for the execution of a contract by and between the city and a member of the governing authority or between the city and a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest and where: 
(1)  It is shown that there is no one other than such person with whom the contract could have been made; and, 
(2)  The necessity was not brought about by the fault or neglect or the person contracting with the city. 
Immediate family means an individual and the individual's spouse and their parents, children, brothers, and sisters. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest, held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority or to a member of the board of ethics as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority or a member of the board of ethics shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefit unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or service in the normal course of business for which the member had paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, prospective employee, or shareholder except as other wise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any council member of the city, any member of a board or commission or committee appointed by the mayor or mayor and council. 
Official act or action means any legislative, administrative; appointive, or discretionary act of the governing authority. 
Paid means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary, a commission, a dividend, or percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee. 
Participate means to take part in official acts, actions, or proceedings personally as a member of the governing authority through approval, disapproval, decision, recommendation, investigation, the rendering of advice, or the failure to act or perform a duty. 
Person means any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust, or association, whether paid or unpaid, and includes any member of the governing authority. 
Property means any property, whether real or personal, or tangible or intangible, and includes currency and commercial paper. 
Remote interest means the interest of: 
(1)  A non salaried director, officer, or employee of a nonprofit corporation exempt from federal income tax pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States; 
(2)  A holder of less than five (5) percent of the legal or beneficial ownership of the total shares of a business; or 
(3)  Action of a member in which the member receives a benefit common to residents of the municipality, generally including but not limited to, the adoption of the general budget, and adoption or substantial revision of the land use plan or zoning ordinance of the city. 
Transaction means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of the governing authority of Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 2, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-153. - Prohibitions; exceptions. 
No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence or unduly enjoy favor in the performance of official acts or actions or that such member is affected unduly by the rank or position of or kinship or association with any person; 
(2)  a.  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if: 
1.  It could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; or 
2.  The member recently has been, or is now, or within one (1) year in the future, is involved in any official act or action directly regarding the donor or lender. 
b.  Subparagraph (2)a. of this paragraph shall not apply in the case of: 
1.  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value for example, items received while at a convention, receipt of trinkets or gifts (such as a calendar, memento, or pen) received in the normal course of business with a value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and admission to and or consumption of food at a breakfast, lunch, dinner, function or event. 
2.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
3.  A transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 16-10-6; 
4.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
5.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Attempt to use his or her official position to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. For the purposes of this paragraph, the employment of a consultant by any business involving matters unrelated to any contract or transaction by or with the city shall not be deemed incompatible with such consultant's official duties; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority. 
(7)  Use his or her position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church, or fraternal interest; 
b.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
c.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation. 
(8)  Draw a per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention or conference without refunding any unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 3, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-154. - Disclosure of conflict of interest. 
(a)  A member of the governing authority who has an interest shall disclose the precise nature and value of such interest by sworn written statement to the city and the board of ethics prior to the governing authority taking official action on a matter affecting such interest. The information disclosed by such sworn statements shall be made a matter of public record by the board of ethics. 
(b)  A member who has an ongoing relationship with a business or individual arising out of the normal course of commerce for which such member receives compensation at a commercially reasonable rate shall disclose such relationship if the city has or is planning to purchase goods or services from such business or individual. A disclosure of such relationship shall be made once each year during the month of January on a disclosure form provided by the city clerk. Such disclosure forms shall describe the nature of the relationship, the member and other parties in the relationship and the financial interest of the member in such relationship. Such disclosure forms shall be kept on file in city hall by the city clerk and shall be made available upon request to any member of the public. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 4, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-155. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify him/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city directly affecting a business or activity in which he/she has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 5, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-156. - Prohibited contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest for such loan; 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A section 16-10-6; 
(4)  Contracts for services which are awarded pursuant to sealed competitive bid process in accordance with the purchasing ordinance of the city; 
(5)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation, provided that a written record explaining the emergency is prepared by the mayor and submitted to the board of ethics at its next regular meeting and thereafter kept on file. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 6, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-157. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governmental authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with, or take any official act or action favorably affecting any person, or business represented by such person, when such person has been a member of the governing authority within the twelve-month period preceding such action, except when the city had a contract with such person or business prior to the member leaving office. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 7, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-158. - Board of ethics created. 
(a)  There is created the board of ethics of the city to be composed of eight (8) residents of the city to be appointed as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the immediately preceding two-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(b)  Two (2) members of the board of ethics shall be appointed by the mayor and one (1) member shall be appointed by each member of the city council. One (1) member appointed by the mayor shall be appointed for an initial term of one (1) year and the other shall be appointed for an initial term of three (3) years. Of the six (6) members appointed by the city council, each shall be for terms of two (2) years. Successors to the first members of the board of ethics and future successors shall be appointed by the respective appointing authorities for terms of two (2) years upon the expiration of the respective terms of office. All members of the board of ethics shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
The first members of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed to take office on ____________ 1, 1997. 
(c)  If a member of the board of ethics ceases to be a resident of the city, that members' position on the board, by operation of law, shall become vacant upon the establishment of the fact of such nonresidency, if contested, by a court of competent jurisdiction. A member of the board of ethics challenged on the basis of nonresidency in the city shall file an affidavit with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of receiving the challenge, setting forth the facts supporting the residency of such member. A vacancy in the board of ethics shall exist by reason of death, resignation, or loss of residency as described in this paragraph. A member of the board of ethics may also be removed from office during a term if the member becomes ineligible to hold civil office within the meaning of O.C.G.A. section 45-2-1 and that ineligibility is established by decision of a court of competent jurisdiction which declares the office vacant because of such ineligibility. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the respective appointing authority. 
(d)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation and shall elect from their own membership a chairman and otherwise provide for their own internal organization. The governing authority of the city shall provide adequate office and meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city: (1) The board of ethics shall be authorized to employ its own staff and clerical personnel; and, (2) The city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to carry out its duties and responsibilities. The board of ethics shall be subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city; provided, however, in exercising its power and duties pursuant to section 2-159 of this article, the board of ethics shall be independent and shall not be subject to control or supervision by the mayor, the city council, or any other officer, department, or agency of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 8, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-159. - Board of ethics—Duties and powers. 
The board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules, and regulations governing its internal organization and the conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To render advisory opinions with respect to the interpretation and application of this section to any city resident who seeks, in writing, advice as to whether a particular course of conduct would constitute a violation of the standards imposed in this section or other applicable ethical standards. Such opinions shall be binding on the board of ethics in any subsequent complaint concerning the person who sought the opinion and acted in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion. If no such advisory opinion is rendered within sixty (60) days of the request for such opinion, the board may not consider any complaint which is filed as a result of the action for which the advisory opinion was sought. 
(3)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of a complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint and shall prevent refiling of a complaint on the same grounds for at least six (6) months. 
(4)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosures required in this article and to make available to the public the information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(5)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(6)  To make such investigations in response to written complaints as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated or is about to violate any provisions of this article; 
(7)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as it deems necessary for it to carry out properly its functions and powers; 
(8)  To issue a public oral reprimand or a written censure, as appropriate, after the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the board of ethics approving such action. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 9, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-160. - Service of complaints; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
(a)  The board of ethics shall cause a written copy of any complaint of violation of the standards required by this article to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable, but not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the hearing. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after the date of the filing of the complaint of violation. 
(b)  At any hearing, the board of ethics may administer oaths and examine witnesses. All testimony taken by the board of ethics shall be under oath. At any hearing held under this article, the member of the governing authority against whom the complaint is brought shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel, to hear and examine the witnesses against such member and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(c)  The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and city council within five (5) days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 10, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 06-04, pt. I, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 2-161. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or other person adversely affected by any final decision of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Dekalb County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics becomes final. 
(c)  The effective date of the final decision of the board of ethics shall be postponed pending judicial review provided for in this section. 
(d)  The record on review, unless otherwise stipulated by the parties, shall include the original or certified copies of all pleadings, testimony, evidence, exhibits, and other papers presented to or considered by the board of ethics and the findings and decision of the board of ethics. As to alleged procedural irregularities, evidence may be taken independently by the court. 
(e)  If the court finds no error, it shall affirm the decision of the board of ethics. If it finds that such action was: 
(1)  Arbitrary or capricious; 
(2)  A denial of a statutory right; 
(3)  Contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity; 
(4)  In excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, purposes, or limitation; 
(5)  Not in accord with the procedures or procedural limitations of this section or otherwise required by law; 
(6)  An abuse or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion, unsupported by substantial evidence when the record is considered as a whole; or 
(7)  Otherwise contrary to law, 
then the court shall hold unlawful and set aside the decision of the board of ethics. 
(f)  The decision of the trial court shall be subject to appellate review in the same manner and with the same effect as in appeals from a final judgment or decree in any other civil action. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 11, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 06-04, pt. II, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 2-162. - Prior acts. 
The propriety of any official act or action taken by or transaction involving any member of the governing authority prior to the effective date of this article shall not be affected by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, § 12, 5-6-97) 
Secs. 2-163—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MAIN STREET COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-201. - Purpose. 
As a result of the designation of Stone Mountain, Georgia as a Georgia Main Street City by the Georgia Department of Industry, Trade and Tourism, this article is created by the city council of Stone Mountain (hereinafter referred to as "council") to provide an organizational structure for the joint participation of private and public interests in the economic development of the business district of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 9-1-98) 
Sec. 2-202. - Definitions (Reserved). 
Sec. 2-203. - Creation, appointment and compensation. 
A commission is hereby created whose title shall be "City of Stone Mountain Main Street Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the "Main Street commission"). 
(1)  Membership, qualifications and terms of office. 
a.  The Main Street commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall serve a maximum of three (3) consecutive two-year terms, except as provided in subsection b hereinbelow. A period of two (2) years shall elapse before any member serving the maximum three (3) consecutive terms shall be eligible to serve again on the commission. At least three (3) members shall be residents of the city for at least one (1) year prior to taking office or owners of a business operating under a valid occupation license issued by the city and in force for one (1) year. 
b.  In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be determined by lottery as follows: Two (2) members shall serve an initial term ending January 31, 2000, and three (3) members shall serve initial terms ending January 31, 2001. Initial appointees serving until January 31, 2000, may serve an additional three (3) consecutive two-year terms. 
(2)  Appointment and vacancies. 
a.  When appointing Main Street commission members, the city clerk shall take action as may reasonably be required to inform city residents and business owners that an opening exists on the Main Street commission, including the publication of a notice in the principal newspaper of general circulation in Stone Mountain for a period no less than three (3) days or more than ten (10) days. The city clerk shall accept applications from interested individuals. Acting as a committee of the whole, the council, chaired by the mayor, shall review the applications, interview applicants, and recommend a short list of potential candidates to the mayor. The mayor shall nominate individuals for confirmation within thirty (30) days of receipt of recommendations from the council. Confirmation shall be by a majority vote of the council. In the event of a tie vote, the mayor shall cast the deciding vote. 
b.  If a member is unable to complete a term of office, then an appointment to fill the unexpired term shall be made in the same manner as making an initial appointment. A member appointed to serve the remainder of an unexpired term shall be eligible to be reappointed for a maximum of two (2) consecutive two-year terms. 
(3)  Members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 9-1-98) 
Sec. 2-204. - Powers and duties. 
The Main Street commission shall: 
(1)  Make an annual report to the mayor and council on the economic condition of the city's business district; 
(2)  Make recommendations to the mayor and council on economic and development issues concerning the city's business district; 
(3)  Coordinate efforts of the Main Street commission with the city historic preservation commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5, Article II of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(4)  Search for local, state, federal, and private funds for the economic development of the city's business district; 
(5)  Create and maintain a plan for the city's business district incorporating the Georgia Main Street Association's four-point approach of organization, promotion, economic restructuring, and design; 
(6)  Review and make recommendations to the mayor on all applicants for the position of Main Street program manager. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 9-1-98) 
Sec. 2-205. - Assistance by the city. 
The governing authority shall provide technical and clerical assistance as the Main Street commission may require and shall maintain permanent and complete records of the activities of the Main Street commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 9-1-98) 
Sec. 2-206. - Bylaws, officers and quorum. 
(a)  The Main Street commission shall adopt rules and procedures, such as bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Main Street commission shall have the prerogative to adopt reasonable rules and bylaws without amendment to this article or the vote of the mayor and city council. The Main Street commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The Main Street commission shall meet at least monthly. Meeting notices shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Records Act, Title 50-18-70. 
(b)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(c)  The Main Street commission shall elect a chair and such other officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. Officers shall serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for reelection. The Main Street commission shall elect its initial officers at the first meeting following their appointment and thereafter in February of each year. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 9-1-98) 
Secs. 2-207—2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STONE MOUNTAIN ENERGY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-301. - City energy commission created. 
There is hereby created the city energy commission to be composed of seven (7) persons to be appointed as set forth hereinbelow. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, Pt. 1, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 2-302. - Purpose. 
By virtue of the city's contractual arrangements with Peachtree Natural Gas, LLC and Optimum Energy Sources, Inc. for the marketing and sale of natural gas service to consumers this article is created by the city council to provide for review by both residential and commercial consumers of the organization, administration, oversight of operations, use of funds and other related activities of the city's involvement in the sale and marketing of natural gas service pursuant to the aforesaid contractual arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, Pt. 1, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 2-303. - Appointment, qualifications and terms of office. 
(a)  The energy commission shall be composed of seven (7) members. The mayor and each councilmember shall appoint one (1) person each to the commission. Each person appointed shall serve a term on the commission equivalent to the term of office held by the member of the governing authority who appointed such commission member. The failure of any member of the governing authority to appoint a member to the commission shall not dilute nor diminish the function of the commission. The members of the commission shall elect from their number a chairman who shall serve for a term of one (1) year. Upon the expiration of the term of the chairman, the membership shall elect a new chairman for a term of one (1) year. 
(b)  If a member of the commission fails to attend two (2) meetings in any twelve-month period then that member's seat on the commission shall be automatically vacated. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, Pt. 1, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 2-304. - Powers and duties. 
The energy commission shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Meet at least quarterly, being January, April, July and October of each year. The notice of each quarterly meeting shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance; 
(2)  Appoint a secretary of each meeting who shall take written minutes of the business conducted at the meeting and which minutes shall become a part of the records of the city and said minutes shall be read at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting; 
(3)  The Commission is to analyze income and expenditure of funds derived from the marketing and sale of natural gas; 
(4)  The commission shall have the full cooperation of city employees and agents with respect to carrying out its duties herein, including, but not limited to, access to any and all relevant records pertaining to the marketing and sale of natural gas; 
(5)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council concerning the activities and organization of the energy commission; 
(6)  Report to the full council at least two (2) times each year to inform the mayor and council of the activities of the commission; 
(7)  The commission shall have the authority to utilize the city newsletter to convey information to the citizens. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, Pt. 1, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 2-305. - Qualification for membership, compensation. 
(a)  To be a member of the energy commission a person must be a subscriber to natural gas service from Peachtree Natural Gas, and, in addition, a person must meet at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
(1)  Be a resident of the city; 
(2)  Be a property owner within the jurisdictional limits of the city; 
(3)  Be the proprietor and operator of a business within the jurisdictional limits of the city for a period of not less than three (3) years prior to the date of appointment. 
(b)  If any member ceases to be a subscriber to gas service from Peachtree Natural Gas or fails to meet at least one (1) of the criteria as set forth in paragraph (a) next above, then such member's position on the commission shall become vacant and the member of the governing authority who appointed such vacating member shall appoint a new member to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, Pt. 1, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 2-306. - Rules of procedure and quorum for conduct of business. 
(a)  The energy commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures for the conduct of business, for example: Robert's Rules of Order. Notices of quarterly meetings as set forth herein shall be in accordance the Georgia Open Meetings Act and the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(b)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, Pt. 1, 4-6-99) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-14, adopted December 7, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 3, §§ 3-26, 3-41, 3-51—3-56, 3-71—3-73, 3-96—3-115, 3-201—3-218, and 3-231—3-234, and adding a new ch. 3. Former ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 4-4005 and 10-1012(a); Ord. of July 12, 1988; Ord. of December 3, 1991; Ord. of February 4, 1992; Ord. of September 6, 1994; Ord. No. 96-1, adopted January 2, 1996; Ord. No. 97-1, adopted February 4, 1997; Ord. No. 00-3, adopted November 14, 2000; Ord. No. 01-7, adopted June 5, 2001; and Ord. No. 07-03, adopted March 6, 2007. 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; signs, ch. 23; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. Title 3; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq.; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; ordinances on drinking, O.C.G.A. §§ 37-8-11, 37-8-53. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Purpose and authority to regulate alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(a)  This chapter has been enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the city and in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages, to protection and preservation of schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhood and property values, and to protect against the evils of concentration of ownership or control of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages or to prevent undesirable persons from controlling the retail alcoholic beverage industry. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are ordained under and by virtue of the authority granted by the laws of the state, O.C.G.A. title 3, regulation of alcoholic beverages generally. To adopt all reasonable rules and regulations as may fall within the police powers of the municipality to regulate any such business; O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110, granting such municipality the full power to adopt all reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of any such licensee including, but not limited to, the regulation of hours of business, types of employees, and other matters which may fall within the police powers of such municipality; O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 and 3-5-42, authorizing municipal licenses for the business of manufacturing, distributing and selling malt beverages at wholesale and retail; and O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40, authorizing municipal licenses for the manufacturing, distributing and selling wine at wholesale and retail. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and nudity on the premises are ordained by virtue of the authority granted by the constitution and laws of the United States and State of Georgia, as most recently delineated by the Supreme Court of Georgia in its decisions of Gravely vs. Bacon and S.J.T., Inc. vs. Richmond County in order to avoid the effects of criminal interests and negative effects on the community by the decreased safety and welfare of the city's citizens, the hindering of commercial growth in the city, and the deterioration of the city's economic base. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Alcoholic: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage: All alcoholic, distilled spirits, beer, spirituous liquors, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Brew pub: Any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and packaged sales for consumption off the premises. As used in this chapter, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Brewer: A manufacturer of malt beverages. 
Close corporation: A domestic corporation that does not: 
(1)  Have more than five (5) stockholders; 
(2)  Have a corporation as a shareholder; or 
(3)  Have more than one (1) class of stock. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume. 
Family includes any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to civil law. 
Food caterer shall mean any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Hotel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential. To meet the definition of "hotel" under this chapter the facility must have fifty (50) or more rooms used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and one (1) or more public dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least twenty-five (25) persons, where meals are regularly served to such guests. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two (2) individuals. All sleeping accommodations and dining rooms must be contained in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a restaurant in their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be eligible for a license under the "hotel" classification. At least fifty (50) percent of the receipts of the dining room or rooms shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring in the dining room, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called in the dining room from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 3-74. Receipts for room rentals shall not be included in the calculations. 
Individual: A natural person not a corporation or a partnership. 
Interest in license: An individual is deemed to have an interest in a license if: 
(1)  He is the owner of the license. 
(2)  He is the co-owner of the license. 
(3)  He is a partner in any partnership that owns an interest in a license. 
(4)  He is a stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in any corporation and/or is a stockholder in any corporation that has fewer than twenty-five (25) stockholders, which owns an interest in a license. 
(5)  He shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund having any interest in a license to sell at retail. 
Licensee: The licensee for all businesses shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The licensee shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the licensee shall be that individual. 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the licensee shall be an individual who is a partner; or, if all partners are non-individuals, then the licensee shall be an individual who is an officer of any corporation which is a partner, or, an individual who is an officer, manager or agent of any unincorporated entity which is a partner. 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation, the licensee shall be an officer of the corporation. 
(5)  If the licensee is a resident of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Fulton, Cobb, Rockdale, or Clayton County and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis, the licensee may also be the license representative of the business. If not, a license representative shall be named in accordance with this chapter. 
License representative: If a license representative is required, the license representative shall be a resident of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Fulton, Cobb, Rockdale, or Clayton County and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis. 
Lounge/bar means a separate room connected with, a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or a room located in hotels as defined herein, and which serves no food. 
Malt beverages means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer: Any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; and 
(2)  In the case of any malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Meal, regular meal means a meal which is prepared on the premises according to the order of the patron or customer given to a waiter or waitress at the table, booth or counter area where the customer is seated and served by the waiter or waitress at said table, booth or counter area. 
Microbrewery means an establishment in which not more than ten thousand (10,000) barrels of beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured or brewed beer or malt beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off the premises, subject to the limitations presented in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-24.1. As used in this definition, the term "barrel" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5.1. 
Minor: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
Package: A bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Premises/outlet: A definite enclosed area or other outside area with controlled ingress and egress wherein spirituous liquors, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine is sold and consumed, or sold therein by the package to be consumed elsewhere. 
Private club means a corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least fifty (50) members regularly paying dues, for at least three (3) years prior to application for license, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profitable purpose, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable sanitary kitchen and dining room seating of at least twenty-five (25) persons and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits, wines, champagnes or malt beverages beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting, or by its governing body, out of the general revenue of the club. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two (2) individuals. For the purpose of this subsection, tips that are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. In addition, at least fifty (50) percent of the receipts from the operation of the kitchen and dining room and serving of meals shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 3-74. A private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall not be licensed under this chapter, nor permitted to sell or serve such beverages at all. All distance requirements as set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
Private residence means a house, dwelling or structure wherein not less than one (1), nor more than two (2) families reside and shall not include a mobile home court, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two (2) families, nor a boarding or rooming house where there are five (5) or more boarders or roomers. Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for business shall not be construed as a private residence. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, but not including short order or quick or fast food shops, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room seating of at least twenty-five (25) persons, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. Meals shall be served during the normal business hours when the establishment is open to the public and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wines to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two (2) individuals. As used in this section, "principal business" shall mean that at least fifty (50) percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 3-74. 
Retail consumption dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail. 
Retail package dealer: Any person who sells malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises at retail. Such sales must be in connection with sales of other products. 
Sales by the drink means any person who sells, distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail package dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, like products and combinations of such beverages. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in the Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2016-10, Pt. I(§§ 1—6), 4-5-16; Ord. No. 2018-03, Pt. I, 3-6-18) 
Sec. 3-3. - Sale, possession, etc., of alcoholic beverages on which state tax or license fee not paid prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city, possess, conceal, store or convey any wine, malt beverage, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverages on which any tax or license fee imposed by the laws of the state or this chapter has not been paid, and any such beverages as above described that are found without a state tax stamp shall be seized as contraband and immediately delivered to the state revenue commissioner as provided by law. Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2018-03, Pt. I, 3-6-18) 
Sec. 3-4. - Purchase, possession, etc., by underage persons. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  No person shall fail to check the identification of any patron or other person, which failure results in the furnishing or sale of alcoholic beverages to any person under twenty-one (21) year of age. 
(3)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(5)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(6)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent his identity to use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) (1), (2) and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(d)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under twenty-one (21) years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in [any licensed establishment.] 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (d) above, no person shall allow or require a person under eighteen (18) years of age nor shall a person under eighteen (18) years of age take an order for alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption or accept alcoholic beverages for checkout for off-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-5. - Consumption prohibited—Open containers. 
(a)  As used in this section, "open container" means any container, containing alcoholic beverages, which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle in this city or while occupying a motor vehicle as a passenger. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger. This provision shall not apply if the alcoholic beverage is located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle. This provision is intended to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages by the operator and passengers in motor vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in his or her possession an open container of alcoholic beverage on any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park or picnic area except for the following conditions: 
(1)  Patrons in the area occupied by an outdoor café if such establishment is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under the applicable ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Patrons of functions sponsored by a non-profit organization and approved by resolution of the mayor and city council. For purposes of this section, "non-profit organization" is defined as any organization that holds a valid determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service stating that contributions to the organization are deductible for income tax purposes. Such resolution shall contain the following: 
a.  A defined area where patrons may consume or have in his or her possession an open container holding an alcoholic beverage. For purposes of the subsection an open container may not be glass. 
b.  The dates and times when open containers are allowed. 
c.  The participating businesses that are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises and have signed agreements to follow the guidelines of the sponsoring organization. 
d.  Any other conditions necessary to safeguard patrons and the general public. 
(d)  Except as provided in section 3-47 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises except as provided herein section 3-47 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2015-03, Pt. I, 5-5-15; Ord. No. 2018-03, Pt. II(§§ 1, 2), 3-6-18) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13. 
Sec. 3-6. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to be in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, when such condition of intoxication is made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 3-7. - Sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises. 
No person shall be allowed to sell, distribute, or give away alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises except as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-8. - Establishments to be kept in orderly manner. 
It shall be the duty of all persons or employees of persons granted a license under this article to keep the premises clear at all times of all persons who are intoxicated, or who are becoming intoxicated, who cause a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-9. - Times for sales. 
(a)  Retailers shall not engage in the sale of beer and wine in original packages for off-premises consumption except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, beer, wine and distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
(c)  Retailers who have Sunday sales permit may sell beer, wine, and distilled spirits for consumption on the premises from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on election days is permitted within the city in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2011-12, pt. I, 12-6-11) 
Sec. 3-10. - Signs to be posted. 
(a)  Each outlet for the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wines shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet a sign with letters at least two (2) inches high reading: "Sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited." 
(b)  Each outlet for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet a sign with letters at least two (2) inches high reading: "Sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited." 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 23. 
Sec. 3-11. - Deliveries prohibited off premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler or distributor to make deliveries of alcoholic beverages except to a location licensed for the retail sale of such beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any retail package dealer or person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only to make deliveries of any malt beverages and/or wine or distilled spirits to any location off the licensed premises. 
(c)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (b) shall not apply to hotel in-room service that shall be regulated as set forth in section 3-75. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-12. - Sales on licensed premises. 
Only those individuals who are agents, clerks, or employees of the licensee shall handle, sell or serve alcoholic beverages on a licensed premise. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-13. - Sale to intoxicated person forbidden. 
Alcoholic beverage licensees and their agents, clerks and employees are prohibited from selling, bartering, exchanging, giving, providing, or furnishing any alcoholic beverage to any person who is in a noticeable state of intoxication. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-14. - Alcoholic beverage sales for cash only. 
All sales of alcoholic beverages shall be for cash upon sale. Sales on credit are specifically prohibited except that the use of a credit card for the purchase of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine shall not be prohibited provided such retail credit card represents an unqualified obligation to pay without recourse on the part of the person, institution or agency issuing such card. The running of a "tab" at a licensed consumption premises shall not be prohibited provided the consumer pays all charges prior to departing the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-15. - Sale of alcoholic beverage without city license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, or possess, for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage where such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale such alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Secs. 3-16—3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 3-21. - License required to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the city clerk. The fees for such licenses shall be an amount set by resolution of city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. The following licenses are available: 
(1)  Retail dealers occupying 4,000 square feet or less for the sale of malt beverages and wine by the package. 
(2)  Retail dealers occupying 4,000 square feet or more for the sale of malt beverages and wine by the package. 
(3)  Wholesale dealers of malt beverages and wine. 
(4)  Retail sales by restaurants or private clubs of malt beverages and wine for consumption only. 
(5)  Retail sales by restaurants or private clubs of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine for consumption only. 
(6)  Brew pub. 
(7)  Temporary license pursuant to section 3-43. 
(8)  Retail establishments pursuant to section 3-86. 
(9)  Microbreweries pursuant to section 3-47. 
(b)  All licenses issued herein shall constitute a mere grant of a privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter, the charter, related ordinances, of the Code of the City of Stone Mountain and the Constitution, laws and regulations of the state and the United States of America applicable to such business. 
(c)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the face the following words: 
"THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE AND IS SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF STONE MOUNTAIN AND IS SUBJECT TO LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS HEREAFTER ADOPTED." 
(d)  Both the licensee or license representative shall be the authorized and duly constituted agent for service of all notices and processes required to be served on or given hereunder for any action or proceeding or uses of any nature whatsoever permitted under the provisions of this chapter or under any other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2016-10, Pt. I(§ 9), 4-5-16; Ord. No. 2018-03, Pt. II(§ 3), 3-6-18) 
Sec. 3-22. - Contents of application for license. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages, except for a temporary license, shall apply to the city council upon forms to be prepared and provided by the city clerk and applications shall be considered only at the regular monthly meeting of the city council. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The location of the proposed business; 
(2)  The nature and character of the proposed business; 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the name and address of that individual; 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the names and addresses of all general partners, the licensee and the license representative; 
(5)  If the business is to be operated by a close corporation, the names and addresses of all officers, directors, stockholders, licensee and license representative; 
(6)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation, other than a close corporation, the name of the corporation, the address of the corporate office, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process for the corporation, and the name and address of the licensee and license representative; and 
(7)  Such other appropriate information as may be required by the governing body. 
(b)  The truth of the contents of an application for a license shall be sworn to by the licensee and the license representative. 
(c)  The licensee shall file with the city clerk a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue within thirty (30) days of the date the city license is issued. Failure to obtain a State of Georgia license shall be grounds for revocation of the city license. 
(d)  The application, when filed with the city clerk, shall be accompanied by a processing and investigation fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). Such fee shall cover costs of investigating the license applicant and shall be credited against the first annual license fee upon grant of a license. Said processing fee will not be refunded if the requested license is not granted. 
(e)  When the license is approved, the license fee must be paid by certified check or cash within thirty (30) days and prior to the issuance of the license. 
(f)  If the person applying fails to receive a license from the state, any license fees in excess of the processing and investigative fees paid to the city shall be refunded. 
(g)  Only one application form and accompanying documents must be filed for each business premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2016-10, Pt. I(§§ 10, 11), 4-5-16) 
Sec. 3-23. - Supporting documents to be filed with application. 
Those applying for a license shall submit in support of the application for license the following documents; 
(a)  A certificate from a Georgia-registered land surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the most direct route of travel on the ground from the closest point of the licensed premises to the nearest property line of any residence, church building, alcoholic treatment center building, school building, educational building, school, college building, college campus, or other establishments engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages located within a radius of six hundred (600) feet of the premises. 
(b)  The affidavit of each person whose name appears on an application for a license, pursuant to section 3-22 of this ordinance, swearing that said person has not, within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of nor entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs including the offense of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or drugs; has not entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. 
(c)  A copy of a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the premises for which the license is sought. 
(d)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such initial permit or license only, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instance of criminal activity during the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the application. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(e)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any renewal of permit or license, a certificate of the chief of police of the city certifying that each person, named in an application pursuant to section 3-22 of this chapter, has been investigated and found not to have been convicted of nor to have entered a plea of nolo contendre to any felony, misdemeanor or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs within five (5) years prior to the date of the application for license; has not entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. For those applicants, who, within the last five-year period, have resided or do reside in a state other than Georgia, the applicant must furnish a certified copy of a driver history and criminal background history from the state or states in which he/she has resided or resides to the chief of police of the city. 
(f)  If the same person is serving as the licensee and the license representative, he/she shall submit an affidavit certifying that he/she is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, a resident of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Fulton, Cobb, Rockdale, or Clayton County and a manager of the business. 
(g)  If the licensee is not the license representative, an affidavit from the license representative certifying that he/she is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, a resident of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Fulton, Cobb, Rockdale, or Clayton County and a manager of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2018-03, Pt. III, 3-6-18) 
Sec. 3-24. - Required citizenship. 
No license under this article shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-25. - Required residency, license representative. 
If the licensee is not a resident of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Fulton, Cobb, Rockdale, or Clayton County, the licensee must designate a license representative who shall be a resident of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Fulton, Cobb, Rockdale, or Clayton County and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-26. - Misleading or omitted information. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original application for a license under this article shall be cause for the denial thereof. If any license has been granted under these circumstances, there shall be cause for revocation of same. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-27. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
(a)  No license under this chapter shall be issued unless the location meets currently applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city as amended; further, no license shall be issued unless the location is within the commercial or mixed-use zoning districts. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid retail package license for the sale of malt beverages and /or wine on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that such license remains current. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-28. - Payment of taxes and other debts to city. 
The city clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes, special assessments, unpaid utilities or any other monies owed to the city. No license shall be issued, renewed or considered for issuance to an applicant that has any outstanding obligations to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-29. - No licenses issued within prohibited distances. 
(a)  No alcohol license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter to sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school ground, or college campus. 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subparagraph shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application. 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or any municipal government therein. 
(4)  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages for consumption on the premises within one hundred (100) yards of any housing authority property. 
(5)  Licenses for the retail sale of alcohol beverages for consumption on the premises only shall not be subject to regulations as to distances from churches, schools, and colleges. 
(b)  Schools applicable. The schools or colleges referred to herein shall include only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and which are public or private schools. 
(c)  Method of measuring. The distances set out in subsections (a)(1), (2), (3) and (4) shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid retail package license for the sale of alcoholic beverages on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that such license remains current and does not become and remain inactive for a period exceeding twelve (12) months from the date last issued. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid pouring or on-premises consumption license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that such license remains current. The provisions of this section shall apply to such business establishments seeking a license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-30. - Notice of application advertisement. 
(a)  All persons applying for a license under the terms of this chapter shall give notice of that application by placing a notice in the city legal organ for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the week when the application shall be heard by the city council. An affidavit from the publisher of said legal organ shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the hearing. 
Said notice shall contain the location of the proposed business, names of all persons as they appear on the application as required by section 3-22 of this chapter, and the date and time the city council will hear the application. The advertisement shall be the type used for legal ads in the legal organ of the city, and the notice referred to shall be in the following form: 
NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR RETAIL  LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
____________ , has/have made application to the Council of the City of Stone Mountain for a retail license to sell alcoholic beverages at the following location ____________ . The application will be heard by City Council at a public hearing to be held at ____________ o'clock ____________ a.m./p.m. on the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
Signed ____________ 
Licensee 
Note: Names of the individual, general partners, corporation, licensee and license representative must be shown. 
(b)  Those applying for a license shall place signs upon the location of the proposed business. Said signs shall read as follows: 
"Alcohol beverage license applied for. Hearing before City Council of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ ." 
The applicant shall post the signs described above on the location of the proposed business for two (2) weeks prior to the week of the hearing. Each sign shall be obtained from the city, and the applicant shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per sign. Each sign shall face toward all public or private property adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public or private property adjoining the proposed location. An affidavit from the applicant certifying posting shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the hearing. 
This subsection does not apply when application is made for a license transfer pursuant to section 3-34 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-31. - Issuance of license by city clerk. 
Upon approval of the application for license and the timely payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue the appropriate license for the year in which said approval was granted. 
If issued to a corporation, said license shall be issued in the name of said corporation, the licensee and the license representative. 
If issued to a partnership, said license shall be issued in the name of all general partners, the licensee and the license representative. 
If issued to an individual, said license shall be issued to that individual as licensee and the license representative. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-32. - Payment of license fee, pro-rated. 
(a)  For any new license granted hereunder prior to June 30 of each year, the licensee shall pay the full annual license fee. 
(b)  For any new license granted hereunder subsequent to July 1 of each year, the license fee shall be reduced by one-half. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-33. - Renewal of licenses by city clerk. 
All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue. The sale of alcohol without a valid license issued for the year in which the sale is offered is prohibited. Licenses may be renewed as herein set forth: 
(1)  The city clerk shall send a letter to all license holders on or before the first day of October of each year to remind said license holders of renewal deadline for the subsequent year. 
(2)  The licensee shall file a renewal application form with the city clerk on or before November 1, of each year. 
(3)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(4)  If the chief reports any activity that constitutes due cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made by the city clerk. "due cause" shall consist of any violation as set forth in section 3-100 of this chapter. 
(5)  Written notice of the reason or reasons for such non-renewal shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee at the licensed premises or mailed to the address shown on the renewal application. Licensee shall have ten (10) days from the date of the written notice to request a public hearing before the city council, as provided for in section 3-100 of this chapter. 
(6)  Provided that "due cause" does not exist for not renewing the license, the city clerk shall issue the renewal license upon payment of the annual license fee by the licensee on or before the last business day in November preceding the year for which the license is sought. 
(7)  If an alcoholic beverage license renewal application and license fee have not been filed with the city clerk by the last business day in December of each year, the license shall be declared to be abandoned and any relicensing shall require a new application as set forth in sections 3-22—3-30. 
(8)  Any change in the name of the licensee or license representative shall require the filing of the application and payment of the fee set forth in section 3-22(d) herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-34. - Completion of proposed licensed premises; additions to licensed premises. 
(a)  Prior to the construction, renovation or completion of a licensed premises, the applicant may obtain a license only if plans for the proposed premises comply with applicable provisions of this chapter; however, no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed upon said premises until they are completed according to the plans submitted and unless all other provisions of this chapter are compiled with. 
(b)  Prior to the beginning of construction of any addition to a licensed premise, the licensee shall submit to the city clerk a new survey and plans showing the location and dimensions of the addition to the licensed premises. Following completion of the addition, the licensee shall furnish a certificate from the surveyor stating that the completed addition to the licensed premises is as shown on the plat of survey previously submitted. If any addition to the licensed premises violates any provisions of this chapter, the license granted hereunder shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-35. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses hereunder must, within six (6) months after the issuance of said license, open the establishment referred to in said license. If said license holder fails to open the licensed establishment or receive a time extension from the city council within said six-month period the license shall be canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(b)  Any holder of a license who, after beginning operation, ceases to operate the business for a three-month period automatically forfeits his license, and said license shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-36. - Personal interests; restrictions on number of licenses. 
No person, or member of his family, shall own, hold or control any interest in more than: 
(1)  One (1) license to sell wine at retail in the city; 
(2)  Two (2) licenses to sell malt beverages at retail in the city; 
(3)  Two (2) combined licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the city; 
(4)  One (1) license to operate as a retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer if said person also has an interest in a license to operate as a wholesale dealer in the city; 
Provided that no more than a total of two (2) licenses shall be issued for the sale of any type of alcoholic beverages to any one (1) person or member of his or her family. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-37. - Combining retail and retail consumption licenses. 
No premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall hold a license for or allow the retail consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-38. - Annexed areas; continuance of business. 
Where a retail alcoholic beverage license exists in an area outside the city limits, upon annexation of such area, the same may be continued, subject to all restrictions and requirements of this chapter except section 3-28. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-39. - License transfers, change licensee, or license representative or relocation of business. 
(a)  Retail alcoholic beverage licenses may be transferred from one owner to another with the approval of the city clerk provided: 
(1)  The business has existed at the same location and licenses have not been transferred for more than one year. 
(2)  All existing alcoholic beverage licenses issued to the existing owner for that location shall be transferred; 
(3)  The new owner shall comply with all provisions of section 3-22 of this chapter except for subparagraph (a) provided such information was previously supplied by the existing owner or previous owners and has not changed. 
(4)  A transfer fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is paid to the city clerk upon filing of the request. 
(b)  (1)  All requests for a change in licensee or license representative must be approved by the city clerk and shall provide all appropriate information or supporting documents required under sections 3-22 and 3-23 of this chapter as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by the city clerk for that purpose. 
(2)  A fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is to be paid to the city clerk upon the filing of the request. 
(c)  So long as there is no change in ownership, a temporary license representative may be appointed by the licensee for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  That temporary license representative makes application by providing all appropriate information or supporting documents required under sections 3-22 and 3-23 of this chapter as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose; 
(2)  That application is approved by the city clerk prior to the issuance of an amended license; 
(3)  There shall be no residence requirement for a temporary license representative; and 
(4)  There shall be no extension of the thirty-day period of operation for any temporary license representative, without approval of the city clerk. 
(5)  No fee shall be required at the time of filing the application for a temporary license representative provided that within ten (10) calendar days a request for a change in the license representative is filed in accordance with section 3-39(b) herein. 
(d)  All business relocations must be approved by the city clerk and the licensee and license representative shall provide all appropriate information and supporting documents as required under sections 3-22 and 3-23 of this chapter. Requirements of section 3-30 relating to advertising must be met. Additional license fees shall not be required provided there is no change in the named licensee or license representative. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause for probation, suspension or revocation of the license or licenses granted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-40. - Standards to be applied by city clerk in granting licenses; withdrawal of application. 
(a)  The standards to be applied by the city clerk, acting in his or her discretion to grant or deny a license, shall include whether, in the best judgment of the clerk, the applicant, based on all information obtained in the application process, possesses the qualities of sound judgment and discretion necessary for one who dispenses alcoholic beverages to the public generally. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing standards, should any applicant fail to attend a public hearing before the mayor and council regarding a new license, a request to transfer a license, a request to change a license on a license representative, or a request to relocate the business of a license, the mayor and council may consider such application or request to have been withdrawn by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-41. - Applicants meeting standards will be granted license; reason for denial to be given in writing. 
(a)  All applicants for a license meeting the ascertainable standards of this chapter will be granted a decision on the license or licenses requested upon the hearing; and the mayor and city council in applying the facts to the licensing criteria will act in a judicial capacity. 
(b)  Whenever an application for license is denied by the mayor and city council the reasons for such denial shall be stated in writing and entered upon the minutes. Appeals from the denial of a license application shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-42. - Persons who are not entitled to a license. 
It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(2)  A person who has entered a plea of nolo contendre within a five-year period prior to the date of application for a license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality; or who has entered a plea of nolo contendre within a five-year period prior to the date of application for a license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the city relating to the use, sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability or possession of beer, wine or liquor or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation, use, or sale of beer, wine or intoxicating liquors, or taxability thereof. 
(3)  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this chapter revoked for cause. 
(4)  A person whose place or business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent qualifies as the license representative. 
(5)  Any person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) years or a person who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(6)  Any person who is not eligible for a state alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-43. - Temporary license. 
The city clerk may issue a temporary license authorizing a bona fide nonprofit charitable organization to sell or serve malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises only upon the filing of an application as required by the city clerk and payment of the appropriate fee provided that: 
(1)  The application includes an Internal Revenue Service determination letter of its tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Service code. 
(2)  Temporary licenses shall be valid only for the place specified in the license and the zoning restrictions and distance restrictions contained in section 3-29 shall apply. 
(3)  The licensee shall file with the city clerk a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue prior to the sale of alcoholic beverages under the temporary license. Failure to obtain a State of Georgia license shall be grounds for revocation of the city license. 
(4)  The temporary license shall be valid for a time period and frequency equal to the time period and frequency allowed by the license issued by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2016-10, Pt. I(§ 12), 4-5-16) 
Sec. 3-44. - Legitimate theater or other entertainment establishments. 
Legitimate theater or other entertainment establishments not prohibited from serving alcoholic beverages by chapter 12, article VIII, Code of Ordinances and meeting all provisions of this chapter with the exception of food sales are eligible for an alcohol privilege license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-45. - Caters/catered event or function. 
In addition to the general occupational tax certificate requirements of this Code, the following section shall apply to the licensing and operation of all establishments selling alcoholic beverages for consumption off-premises in connection with an authorized catered event or function and should any section of this article conflict with other provisions in this chapter then this section shall control. 
Any alcoholic beverage caterer who possesses a valid license from the city or another city or county in the state and possesses a valid license from the state to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink and/or by the package at a fixed location within the city may be issued by the city an event permit authorizing such sales off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered event or function. 
A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may only sell that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may only sell malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
An alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city clerk. The license may be applied for at the same time as the alcoholic beverages license(s). 
Exclusive of the license required herein, each alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to sell or distribute distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at an authorized catered event or function within the city must also apply for an event permit. The application for the event permit shall include the name of the caterer; the date, address, time and name of the event; and the quantity of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. 
The event permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per event for those caterers located outside the city; the event permit fee shall be waived for those caterers located inside the city. 
The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function, and shall be available for inspection at the catered event or function during the duration of such event or function. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a permit as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-46. - Bed and breakfast. 
In addition to the general occupational tax certificate requirements of this Code, the following section shall apply to the licensing and operation of all bed and breakfast establishments furnishing alcoholic beverages for consumption by their guest. Should any provision of this section conflict with other provisions in this chapter, then this section shall control. 
All bed and breakfast establishments not prohibited from serving alcoholic beverages by chapter 12, article VIII, Code of Ordinances and meeting all provisions of this chapter with the exception of food sales are eligible for an alcohol privilege license. A licensed bed and breakfast may only provide that which is authorized by the alcoholic beverage license. No alcohol shall be provided to any person unless that person is a valid registered guest occupying a room within that facility and such alcohol is furnished as part of or in conjunction with their stay. All other provisions of this chapter not in conflict with this section shall apply to bed and breakfast establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-47. - Microbreweries. 
The city clerk may issue license to establishments in which not more than ten thousand (10,000) barrels of beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured or brewed beer or malt beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off the premises, subject to the limitations presented in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-24.1. For the purposes of this code section and as defined in Chapter 3 of The Code of the City of Stone Mountain, such establishments shall be licensed as microbreweries. As the term "barrel", for the purposes of this code section, shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5.1. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, Pt. II(§ 4), 3-6-18) 
Sec. 3-48—3-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 3-50. - Sale of package distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine conducted in conjunction with other business. 
Except as provided in section 3-47 of this chapter, no person shall be allowed to sell at retail packaged malt beverages or foreign and domestic wines unless the same is sold in conjunction with some other kind of business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2018-03, Pt. IV, 3-6-18) 
Sec. 3-51. - Physical requirements of applicant's premises. 
(a)  No license shall be granted to a retailer under the provision of this chapter, unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee has a location in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(b)  Where a building in which a retailer intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  No sales shall be made from such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-52. - Sanitary regulations, immoral conduct, etc.; inspection and report by fire department. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or public indecency on the premises. 
(b)  The fire department shall, upon request of the city clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-53. - Interior visibility required. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing that prevents a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or opening of any door of any retail package alcoholic beverage store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-54. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments. 
No licensee operating premises wherein package wine or malt beverages are sold shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 23. 
Sec. 3-55. - Slot machines, etc., prohibited on premises. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, no retail licensee shall permit on such licensee's premises any slot machines, video games, mechanical music boxes, pinball machines or coin-operated amusement machines of any kind or character. 
(b)  Convenience stores, the primary purpose of which is the sale of food items, may utilize coin-operated amusement devices as provided by chapter 12 of this Code regarding the regulation and licensing of coin-operated amusement machines. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-56. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to sell package beer, malt beverages and wine in poolrooms or billiard parlors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Secs. 3-57—3-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF SALES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 3-70. - Licenses. 
Except as authorized in section 3-86, a license for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages may be granted only to a restaurant, private club, legitimate theater or hotel/motel as defined in section 3-2. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2016-10, Pt. I(§ 7), 4-5-16) 
Sec. 3-71. - Sale of food. 
In order for an establishment to qualify for a pouring license for distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises, only, as a restaurant, private club or restaurant in a hotel, such establishment must have at least fifty (50) percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-72. - Standards to determine sleeping or seating capacity; inspections; compliance with fire requirements. 
Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed in this chapter, the same shall be judged by existing ordinances of the city, county or state regulations or by reasonable standards. The fire department, shall, upon request of the city clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times to all fire regulations of the city, county, and state. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-73. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any sale of alcoholic beverages to be made outside of the premises licensed for such sale. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-74. - Pricing. 
(a)  Each license shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed at each licensed establishment or in any room or part thereof. The schedule of prices shall be posted or published in a conspicuous manner as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one (1) day. 
(b)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two (2) or more persons at any one (1) time without serving an entre listed on the establishment's regular menu. 
(5)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day. 
(6)  Encourage or permit at the licensed establishment any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(7)  Issue to any customer any coupon, receipt, ticket or other item purporting to authorize the receipt of any free or reduced-price alcoholic beverage. 
(8)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any patron any alcoholic beverage if said patron has in such patron's possession or control any unconsumed alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed establishment, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (b). 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time provided all patrons or customers are allowed equal access to such free food or entertainment. No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one (1) person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. 
No provision of this section shall prohibit a licensee from offering packages in which alcoholic beverages and food or lodging are offered as a unit; provided the value of the alcoholic beverage is established at a uniform level for each package so offered, and the alcoholic beverage delivered as part of the package does not exceed the package allowance, and the tax due on the package allowance is remitted in full to the city for each package sold. 
No hotel or motel maintaining more than (1) licensed establishment upon its premises shall allow the promotion of one (1) of its licensed establishments over another on the basis of prices for alcoholic beverages. 
For the purposes of this section, "business day" shall mean that period running from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-75. - Hotel in-room service. 
Licenses obtained by hotels shall include the right to serve alcoholic beverages by the drink to registered guests in their hotel rooms as well as to deliver alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to registered guests' rooms when such beverages have been ordered by such guests and/or to provide a cabinet or other facility in a hotel guest's room which contains alcoholic beverages for which licensed, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused and unopened portion. All alcoholic beverages sold or distributed under this section shall be obtained by the hotel directly from a licensed wholesaler or distributor and shall be stored on the premises of the hotel until sold or served. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-76. - Maintenance of premises; improper conduct; nudity prohibited. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with provisions and regulations of the city, county and state governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(1)  For purposes of this section: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage establishment shall mean any restaurant holding a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
b.  Substantially nude shall mean dressed or undressed in a manner so as to plainly expose to view any portion of a male's or female's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals, or any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola. 
c.  Simulate shall mean to counterfeit, feign, imitate, or pretend in such a manner that a reasonable observer could be led to believe that the actual act is or may be occurring. 
(2)  a.  No person shall appear substantially nude in any alcoholic beverage establishment, and no owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to appear substantially nude on the licensed premises. 
b.  No owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to perform acts of, or acts that, constitute or simulate: 
1.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
2.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; provided that random acts of patrons or employees, whose actions do not constitute actions taken pursuant to encouragement or acquiescence of the management of the establishment and are not for the purposes of entertainment, promotion, publicity, or notoriety shall not constitute violations of this section. 
3.  The restrictions of subsection (b) shall apply only to persons physically present on the licensed premises, and shall apply regardless of whether such persons are categorized as owners, agents, employees, patrons, and independent contractors or otherwise. 
4.  In addition to prosecution of any person for violation of this section, the alcoholic beverage license of any premises upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation. Any such revocation or suspension action shall follow the procedures outlined in section 3-100 of this chapter. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendre in the municipal court to a charge of violation of this section shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
5.  Should any phrase, clause, or sentence of this section be found to be unconstitutional or otherwise illegal and unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of this section, which provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-77. - Reports of sales to be made quarterly, suspension, revocation. 
(a)  Licensees shall, within thirty (30) days following the end of each quarter, file with the city clerk a report sworn to by the licensee, setting forth gross sales of licensee for the quarter, sales of food and non-alcoholic beverages, and sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Should the total sales from food and non-alcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for consumption on the premises not exceed those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages as required by this chapter for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and council after a hearing as provided for in section 3-100. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-78. - Additional certification. 
In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in section 3-77, the city clerk may require that licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises in the licensee's most recent reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-79. - Areas of sales. 
All restaurants and private club eating areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that those inside the premises may view them. The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties that have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a property licensed restaurant or supper club is located on the premises; and 
(3)  Private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-80. - Employment. 
No licensee shall knowingly employ on any licensed premises, in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, dancers, entertainers, and musicians, any person who has been convicted within the preceding ten (10) years of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-81. - Dancing on the premises. 
Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; and 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the chief of fire department has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-82. - Consumption on the premises, only. 
(a)  Except for those conditions in section 3-5(c), all distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine sold by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person knowingly removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Each consumption on the premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: "It is a violation of city ordinance to take any type alcoholic beverage from this outlet." Such sign shall be uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2015-03, Pt. I, 5-5-15) 
Sec. 3-83. - Exterior advertisement of alcoholic beverages. 
No advertising of alcoholic beverages shall be published or disseminated in the city which: 
(1)  Contains any statement, design, or partial representation that falsely implies that the product has been endorsed, made, or used by, or provided for, or under the supervision of or in association with the specifications of any religious organization, the city, or any other local governmental entity. 
(2)  Contains any reference, directly or indirectly, which falsely implies an endorsement by, or relationship with, any school, college or university. 
(3)  Is directed to, or promotes in any way, the sale of alcoholic beverages to, persons under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-84. - Lighted electric advertising signs on distilled spirits, wine or malt beverage establishments. 
No licensee operating premises wherein distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages are sold by the drink shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 23. 
Sec. 3-85. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors; minors prohibited if sold. 
It shall be lawful to sell beer, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises, only, in poolrooms or billiard parlors provided such poolrooms or billiard parlors also meet the requirements of a restaurant as defined in this chapter; however, in any poolroom or billiard parlor where beer, wine or malt beverages are sold it shall be unlawful for the proprietor or operator to allow anyone under the age of eighteen (18) to patronize such business establishment unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-86. - When bringing your own alcoholic beverages allowed. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring his own alcoholic beverage into any retail establishment without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages except for the following specific exceptions: 
(1)  This section shall not prohibit any person dining at a restaurant licensed to sell wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises from bringing an unopened bottle of wine or malt beverage into said establishment for consumption where the establishment has a policy permitting same. 
(2)  This section shall not prohibit any person who is a patron of a retail establishment from bringing an unopened bottle of wine or malt beverage into the establishment where: (a) the owners or their agents have a policy permitting a patron to bring an unopened bottle of wine or malt beverage into the retail establishment for consumption on the premises by the patron; and (b) the retail establishment is licensed as required hereinafter. 
(3)  This section shall not prohibit any person who is a patron of a non-profit organization licensed under section 3-43 from bringing an unopened bottle of wine or malt beverage onto the licensed premises where the licensee has a policy permitting a patron to bring an unopened bottle of wine or malt beverage for consumption on the premises by the patron. 
(4)  Any wine not consumed at a restaurant as described in subsection (1) shall be disposed of at the premises and not carried out in an open container, unless the retail establishment is able to reseal and repackage the opened bottle of wine as required by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(5)  A retail establishment shall be required to be licensed by the city, meet all application requirements and be governed by the ordinance provisions as set forth in Article II of this chapter. 
(6)  Licensed retail establishments and non-profit organizations shall have no employees under the age of 18. 
(7)  Retail establishments and non-profit temporary licensees shall establish a closing time no later than 10:00 p.m. 
(8)  All applicable state laws and city ordinances which address the use and serving of alcoholic beverages shall apply to this section. 
(9)  For purposes of this section, the term retail establishment shall not include a private hotel room, guestroom or a private club. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2016-10, Pt. I(§ 8), 4-5-16) 
Sec. 3-87. - Lounges, bars prohibited. 
"Lounges" or "bars" as defined in this chapter shall be prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-88. - Alcoholic beverage handling. 
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee or license representative to acquaint all employees engaged in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages with the requirements of this chapter and state law regulating the handling, selling, serving, delivering, dispensing or taking orders for alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Secs. 3-89—3-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND PROBATION LICENSES; DUE PROCESS; HEARING 

Sec. 3-100. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearing; bond for reinstatement. 
(a)  Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city may be suspended, revoked, or placed on probation for due cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause," for purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Arrest or conviction (to include a plea of nolo contendre) by local, state or federal authorities of the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for any felony, or any misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or any law, regulation or chapter involving alcohol beverages, gambling, or tax law violations; 
(2)  Citations issued by local, state or federal authorities to the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for violations of any part of this chapter or any regulation pertaining to state or federal licensing of the possession, sale or distribution of alcohol beverages; 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as condition for the possession, sale or distribution of beverage alcohol; 
(4)  Material falsification of any fact given in application for a license issued under this article or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this article shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented; 
(5)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit or pay any renewal license fee imposed, sales taxes, or excise taxes required under the city ordinances; 
(6)  Any other factors known to the licensing authority whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, by reason of business experience, financial standing, trade association, personal association, record of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
With respect to this section, it shall be reputably presumed that the act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aide in such occurrence, or in the exercise of due diligence could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(b)  Action to suspend, revoke, or place a license on probation shall be commenced by the city clerk making written recommendation to the mayor and city council and giving written notice to the licensee, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon licensee or his agent at the licensed location, stating the grounds therefore, and the date, time and place such matter will be heard by the mayor and city council. Notice shall be served at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Included in the notice shall be an advisement of the licensee's right to be heard before the council. Any licensee requiring subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses or documents at the hearing shall file a written request with the city clerk at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued for good cause only. 
(c)  All final decisions to suspend, revoke, or place a license on probation shall be made by the mayor and city council, in writing with the reasons therefore stated. Notice of a final decision shall be given the licensee within three (3) business days following the date of the hearing. 
(d)  Hearings shall only be as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney or his designee shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. The licensee may be represented by legal counsel, may confront and cross-examine witnesses, and shall have the right to call witnesses and present evidence in his behalf. A hearing record shall be maintained by the city; however, either party may arrange for transcription by a court reporter at his sole expense. Hearings shall be presided over by the mayor who shall preserve order and rule upon all matters of evidence. Irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(e)  Upon the second suspension, revocation, or probation of a license within any five-year period, as a prerequisite to reinstatement or re-issuance of the license, the licensee, in addition to the requisite fees assessed under this article, shall post a surety bond payable to the city in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the licensee maintaining the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Upon any subsequent act giving due cause for suspension, revocation, or probation of the license, the bond shall be forfeited and license revoked. 
Appeals from an action by the mayor and city council to deny a license or to revoke or suspend a license pursuant to this article shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-101—3-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXATION OF PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 3-110. - Excise tax report; penalty for failure to file; payment. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail license fee required for the sale of alcoholic beverages, there is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.004166 per ounce on malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer except when malt beverages are sold in individual containers with a capacity of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons or more, the excise tax shall be $6.00 per fifteen and one-half (15½) gallon container, or if the container if larger than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons, the tax shall be proportioned at the rate of $0.387 per each additional gallon or portion of a gallon capacity of the container. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on wine sold within the limits of the city at the rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the corporate limits shall file a report by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold within the corporate limits. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day for the month succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with the section. 
(d)  No decal, stamp or other identifying marking shall be required on malt beverages sold within the corporate limits. 
(e)  The excise tax provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, occupation tax or other charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages or wines at retail or wholesale, within the city. 
(f)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty of ten (10) percent of the total amount due during the first thirty-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive thirty-day period, or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to fifty (50) percent of the amount of the remittance that would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-111—3-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAXATION OF BEVERAGES BY THE DRINK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-02, adopted March 4, 2014, amended the Code by repealing §§ 3-120—3-127 and adopting § a new 3-120. Former §§ 3-120—3-127 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-14, adopted on December 7, 2010. 

Sec. 3-120. - Per drink excise tax. 
(a)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent (3%) of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee licensed under this chapter, and such licensee shall remit such taxes to the city on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month after the month in which they are collected along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, excluding gross sales of wine and malt beverages. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales. The report of gross sales shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction of three percent (3%) of the monthly tax collected to defray licensee's administrative expenses incurred in reporting and remitting the taxes levied pursuant to this section, provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. If the monthly taxes collected and remitted by the licensee are less than three hundred thirty-three dollars ($333.00), the licensee shall be allowed a deduction of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  Excise taxes received by the city clerk after the twentieth day of the month shall be charged a ten percent (10%) penalty. 
(c)  The city clerk will notify the licensee in writing if it is deemed necessary by the city clerk to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee. Notice shall include the date, time and place of the audit. 
(d)  Any licensee who violates any provision of article VII may, upon conviction, be punished according to the general penalty found in § 1-11 of this Code, and the alcoholic beverage license may also be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2014-02, pt. I, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 3-121—3-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 3-140. - Violations prohibited. 
No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or assist another in evading or avoiding the licensing requirements or in the payment of the taxes and fees imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 3-141. - Penalties. 
Any person knowingly violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable upon citation before the municipal court a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-7-10) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 12; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; noise control, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 16; parades, demonstrations and picketing, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A; noise caused by animals, § 15-10; nuisances enumerated, § 16-1. 
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. Title 4; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; game and fish, O.C.G.A. Title 27; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; civil liability for injury or damage by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context, shall have the following meanings: 
Kennel means any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof is carried on, including, but not limited to the raising, breeding, caring for or boarding of dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
Kennel, noncommercial means any location where the owning, boarding, caring for and keeping of more than three (3) but not more than ten (10) dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof is carried on, not for commercial purposes, but as a hobby such as the raising of show and hunting dogs. 
Livestock means horses, mules, cows, goats and all other animals used or fit for food or labor. 
(Code 1976, § 10-6001; Ord. No. 99-13, Pt. 1, 8-3-99) 
Sec. 4-2. - Pastures; keeping of hogs. 
There shall be no pastures erected within one hundred (100) feet of any residence. All pastures must be kept in a sanitary condition. The keeping of hogs in the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 10-6004) 
Sec. 4-3. - Keeping of livestock. 
Any person who keeps horses, mules, cattle, or other livestock within the corporate limits of the city shall keep all stalls and stables at least one hundred (100) feet from any dwelling house or business. All stalls and lots must be kept clean and sprayed at least once per day with insecticide. All stalls and lots must be sprayed at least once per day with a strong disinfectant in a sufficient quantity to keep down odor. 
(Code 1976, § 10-6005) 
Sec. 4-4. - County ordinance adopted. 
(a)  Chapter 5, Animals, of the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia, as amended, is adopted in its entirety as a part of this section. 
(b)  Any person violating the terms of this section or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 4-7-87(4)) 
Editor's note— The ordinance adopted in the above section is on file in the city hall. 
Sec. 4-5. - Location of kennels, structures or property used as boarding or breeding kennels. 
(a)  All structures or property used as boarding or breeding kennels shall be located and activities conducted at least one hundred (100) feet from the property line of any property zoned or used for residential purposes; provided, however, this subparagraph shall not apply to boarding or breeding kennels located on lands which are zoned C-1 (central business), C-2 (neighborhood and highway business) or M (industrial). 
(b)  All noncommercial kennels shall be located on a site of not less than one (1) acre. All structures or property used as a noncommercial kennel shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from the property line of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 99-13, Pt. 1, 8-3-99) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; codes of technical regulations, § 3.19. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; environment and land development, ch. 8; plan submission under environment and land development ordinance, § 8-8; erosion and sediment control, ch. 9; fire prevention and protection, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; moving of houses, etc., § 13-31; noise control, ch. 15; construction noise, § 15-9; nuisances, ch. 16; sewers, ch. 22; signs, ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25; taxation, ch. 27; zoning, app. A; number of buildings on a lot under zoning ordinance, app. A, § 6-5; enforcement of zoning ordinance, app. A, art. IX. 
State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. Title 8; contracts for public works, O.C.G.A. § 13-10-1 et seq.; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. Title 25; bonds for public contractors, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq.; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors and low-voltage contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; registration of nonresident contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-30 et seq.; application of building and fire-related codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, repealed the former Art. I., §§ 5-1—5-5, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to general subject matter and derived from Ord. of 4-5-88; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 06-03, pt. I, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 08-09, 8-5-08. 

Sec. 5-1. - Title. 
The title of Chapter 5 shall be: BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 1, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-2—5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 5-31. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of Stone Mountain is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protections, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Stone Mountain hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 1) 
Sec. 5-32. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:] 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic commission of an application to make material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Designation means a decision by the governing authority of Stone Mountain to designate a property or district as a "historic property" or as a "historic district" and thereafter prohibit all material change in appearance of such property or within such district prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the preservation commission of Stone Mountain. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements, excluding signs, relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Stone Mountain. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the governing authority as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in this article. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the governing authority as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in this article. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature, work of art, excluding signs, within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement or excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features, excluding signs. 
Person includes any natural person or corporation. 
Preservation commission means the City of Stone Mountain Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 2; Ord. No. 2011-05, 6-7-11) 
Sec. 5-33. - Creation and appointment. 
(a)  There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "City of Stone Mountain Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter referred to as "preservation commission"). The preservation commission shall consist of no less than three (3) and no more than seven (7) members. Members of the preservation commission shall be residents of the city for at least one (1) year prior to taking office and a majority of members shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in the preservation of historic resources, history or architecture. 
(b)  The governing authority shall take action as may reasonably be required to inform city residents that an opening exists on the preservation commission. The governing authority shall accept applications from interested individuals, review the applications and recommend a short list of potential candidates to the mayor. The mayor shall nominate individuals from the short list for confirmation by the council no later than the work session next following receipt of the short list. 
(c)  (1)  The term of office for members appointed to the preservation commission shall be three (3) years except for the initial appointments. The term of office for initial appointments shall be set by the governing authority as follows: 
a.  Three (3) appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years beginning on March 1, 2016. 
b.  Two (2) appointments shall be for a term of two years beginning on March 1, 2016. 
c.  Two (2) appointments shall be for a term of one year beginning on March 1, 2016. 
(2)  Should a member of the preservation commission be unable to complete their term of office the governing authority shall fill the remainder of the term of office in the same manner as provided in section 5-33. 
(d)  Members of the preservation commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses subject to the purchasing policies and procedures of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 3; Ord. No. 01-8, Pt. I, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 04-02, Pt. I, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 05-19, 10-4-05; Ord. No. 08-08, Pt. I, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2015-02, Pt. I, 2-3-15; Ord. No. 2016-09, Pt. I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-34. - Powers and duties. 
The preservation commission shall: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all properties within its jurisdiction which have previously been placed in the National Register of Historic Place or the Georgia Register of Historic Places or which otherwise have the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the governing authority specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties of historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; 
(4)  Recommend to the governing authority that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, object or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be amended, revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city, with the approval of the governing authority; 
(6)  Recommend to the governing authority the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of state and federal law; 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation topics; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts or other persons, as the governing authority or the preservation commission may itself, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purpose of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal, and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the governing authority concerning the most appropriate uses of any federal funds acquired. 
(10)  Submit to the Office of Historic Preservation of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources a list of designated historic properties and historic districts; 
(11)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and, with the consent of the governing authority, enter into agreements to do the same; 
(12)  Review and make comments to the state office of historic preservation concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places or the Georgia Register of Historic Places. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 4) 
Sec. 5-35. - Assistance by city. 
The governing authority shall provide technical and clerical assistance as the preservation commission may require and shall maintain permanent and complete records of the activities of the preservation commission. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 5) 
Sec. 5-36. - Bylaws. 
The preservation commission shall adopt rules and procedures, such as bylaws and design guidelines, for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness. The preservation commission shall have the prerogative to adopt reasonable rules and standards without amendment to this article or the vote of the governing authority. The preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The preservation commission will meet at least monthly unless the chair determines that insufficient business warrants holding a meeting, in which case the preservation commission shall meet the following month. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the appointed members. 
The preservation commission shall elect a chair and such other officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. Officers shall serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for reelection. The preservation commission shall elect its initial officers at the first meeting following their appointment and thereafter in January of each year. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 6; Ord. No. 04-02, Pt. I, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 5-37. - Designations. 
Designations of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art or historic properties or districts shall be by ordinance adopted by the governing authority, which shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Studies. The governing authority, an historical society, neighborhood organization, property owner(s) or resident(s), may request that the preservation commission initiate studies of individual properties or districts to determine whether they meet the criteria specified in this section of designation as historic properties or historic districts. The preservation commission may also initiate such a study or studies on its own initiative based on a review of the city's historic resources. Upon determining that such recommended properties of districts meet the criteria for designation, the preservation commission may submit an ordinance for designation to the governing authority in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Reports. The preservation commission shall prepare a report prior to submitting an ordinance for designation to the governing authority. The report shall contain, as a minimum: 
a.  A physical description of the property(ies) and/or district(s) proposed for designation; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance of the same; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (e.g., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive and other significant categories) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
These reports shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designation. 
(3)  Criteria. The preservation commission shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria when considering recommendations to the governing authority for designation of historic properties or historic districts. 
a.  Historic properties whether they: 
1.  Are of an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
2.  Are one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
3.  Are a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Stone Mountain, DeKalb County, the State of Georgia, or the nation; 
4.  Are a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county state or nation; or 
5.  Are currently on or have been declared eligible by the appropriate authorities for listing on the National Register of Historic Places or Georgia Register of Historic Places. 
b.  Historic districts whether they: 
1.  Have special character or special historic or aesthetic value or interest; 
2.  Represent one (1) or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one (1) or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or nation; 
3.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city; or 
4.  Are currently on or have been declared eligible by the appropriate authorities for listing on the National Register of Historic Places or Georgia Register of Historic Places. 
(4)  Notice to state. At least thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic and at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing for such designation, the preservation commission must submit a report to the Office of Historic Preservation of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or its successor for review and comment, as required by O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26(b). 
(5)  Ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property as historic property or any district as a historic district shall: 
a.  Require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and be kept by the city as a public record to provide notice of such designation in addition to other notice requirements specified by this section; 
b.  Describe each property to be designated, set forth the name or names of the owner or owners of the property and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
c.  Include a description of the boundaries of such district, list each property located therein, set forth the name of the owner or owners of each property and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of any structure, site or work of art located within the designated historic district. 
(6)  Notice and hearing. The preservation commission and the governing authority shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district of property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three (3) issues of the principle newspaper of general circulation within the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice mailed to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax records and a notice mailed to the address of the property on which residences of businesses are located to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
This published notice shall state the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing. This published notice shall also include the location or boundaries of the property or properties, the existing zoning classification and historic designation, if any, and a statement that the property could be proposed for historic designation during the proposal process. 
The preservation commission shall give notification of the proposal by mail to all abutting property owners as shown by the city tax records. Such notification shall be mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing and shall include a description of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
The commission shall cause to be erected a sign or signs giving notification of the date, time, and place of a public hearing to consider the proposed historic designation. In the case of an historic property, one (1) sign shall be placed on the property visible from a public street. In the case of an historic property, one (1) sign shall be placed on the property visible from a public street. In the case of a historic district, signs shall be placed at each point where the district boundary intersects a public street. 
(7)  Recommendations to governing authority. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the preservation commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the governing authority. 
Following receipt of the preservation commission's recommendation, the governing authority may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(8)  Final notice. Within thirty (30) days following a designation by the governing authority, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the governing authority. The notice shall apprise owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(9)  Moratorium. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the preservation commission shall notify the city manager and no permit of any kind shall be issued for work which would constitute a material change in the appearance of a structure, site, landscape or piece of art within the designated area until the proposed ordinance in enacted or rejected by the governing authority. The preservation commission must propose an ordinance of designation to the governing authority no more than sixty (60) days after the city manager denies a building permit based on the moratorium. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 7) 
Sec. 5-38. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of any building, structure, site or work of art, excluding signs, within such historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or authorized agent unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted and approved by the preservation commission. 
(1)  Application for certificate of appropriateness. Owners of historic property or of property in a historic district, or their duly authorized agents, must make application for a certificate of appropriateness on forms and according to procedures promulgated by the preservation commission for such purpose. The Georgia Department of Transportation and contractors performing work funded by the Georgia Department of Transportation are exempt from provisions of this article. Local governments are also exempt from obtaining certificates of appropriates but shall notify the preservation commission at least forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning or undertaking of any work that would require a certificate of appropriateness, so as to allow the preservation commission an opportunity to comment. 
All applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the preservation commission. Written authorization of the property owner shall be required if the applicant is not the owner of record. 
(2)  Public notice. At least seven (7) days prior to review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. For such public hearings, the commission shall post notice in the form of a sign in a conspicuous place on the property in question. 
The preservation commission shall give the property owner or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing, as well as other parties expressing an interest in the issuance of such certificate. 
The preservation commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property or building, structure, site or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the preservation commission. Failure of the preservation commission to act within said forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property or building, structure, site or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the preservation commission. Failure of the preservation commission to act within said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed unless the owner or occupant of the property for which the certificate is requested agrees in writing to a delay. During such delay, negotiations may occur between the preservation commission and the owner or occupant to resolve any questions or issues regarding the application. 
(3)  Review of applications. When reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness, the preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, historical and architectural value and significance; architectural style; scale; height; setback; landscaping; general design; arrangement, texture and materials of the architectural features involved band the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style; and pertinent features of other properties in the immediate neighborhood. When considering applications, the secretary of the interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects," the secretary of the interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation," and the "City of Stone Mountain Historic District Design Guidelines" shall be cited in the approval or denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(4)  Interior changes. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangements or use having no effect in exterior architectural features. The preservation commission may delegate the responsibility for determining the extent of interior change and its effect on the exterior appearance to the planning director. 
(5)  Demolition. A decision may be made by the preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites or objects. 
(6)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property, that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, is excluded from review. 
(7)  Approval. The preservation commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect in the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. The preservation commission may approve the application as proposed, approve it with modifications, or reject the application. 
(8)  Final action. Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness by the preservation commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who have filed a written request for such notice with the preservation commission. 
In the event the preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action if it disapproves of the application submitted. The application may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure, which would require the issuance of a permit of any kind, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the preservation commission shall be binding upon the city manager and no permit shall be issued. 
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant hereto shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed which is not in accordance with such certificate the preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within twelve (12) months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are not renewable. 
(9)  Records. The preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the preservations commission's proceedings in connection with such applications. Such records shall be maintained in the offices of the city. 
(10)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the governing authority. Any appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the determination or, in the case of a failure of the preservation commission to act, within fifteen (15) days of the expiration of the forty-five-day period allowed for preservation commission action. The governing authority may approve, modify or reject the determination made by the commission if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the governing authority may be made to the superior court of the county. The governing authority is authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a property that is designated under the provisions of section 5-37 of this article, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 8; Ord. No. 05-05, pt. I, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 05-18, 10-4-05; Ord. No. 06-14, pt. I, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2011-05, 6-7-11) 
Sec. 5-39. - Acquisitions. 
The preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the governing authority, enter into negotiations with the owners of historic properties within historic districts for the acquisition by gift or purchase of ownership of the property or any interest therein. Final approval and ownership of these properties would be by the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 9) 
Sec. 5-40. - Failure to maintain historic property. 
Property owners within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The preservation commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings, structures, sites, and works of art located in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. 
If the preservation commission determines that a failure to provide ordinary maintenance and repair exists for a property in a historic district then the preservation commission will notify the property owner in writing by certified mail of the conditions of neglect which require remediation. The notice shall include a date for a hearing to allow the property owner to respond. The hearing shall be scheduled at a regular meeting of the preservation commission but not less than twenty-one (21) days from the date the notice is mailed. 
Within ten (10) days after the hearing the preservation commission shall notify the property owner in writing by certified mail a statement of the conditions of neglect that must be remedied and a reasonable time period for the completion of the remediation, but not less than thirty (30) days from the date the statement is mailed. 
If efforts to remediate the conditions are not begun within thirty (30) days of the date the statement is mailed then the property shall be considered in violation of this article and shall be subject to prosecution under the provisions of Chapter 5, Division 4, Nuisance Abatement Procedures, of The Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 10; Ord. No. 2016-11, Pt. I, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 5-41. - Exceptions. 
Where by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of any specific property; the preservation commission in passing upon applications shall have power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions or to interpret the meaning of said provision so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variance, modification, or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variations, the preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall be a situation beyond the control of the applicant, which is a problem unique to a specific property or in order to comply with this article, the person will violate another ordinance of the city. The burden of demonstrating the existence of the hardship by a preponderance of evidence shall be with the applicant. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 11) 
Sec. 5-42. - Application fees. 
Each application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), a copy of which will remain on file in the planning department, to partially defray the public expense in processing such application. The fee shall not be required for an application filed by the city or any nonprofit agency or organization. 
(Ord. of 6-7-94(1), § 12) 
Secs. 5-43—5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE AND TOWERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, adopted April 1, 1997, amended the Code by repealing Art. III, §§ 5-71—5-76, and adding a new Art. III, §§ 5-71—5-84. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 96-3, adopted March 12, 1996. 

Sec. 5-71. - Purposes. 
This article is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the city as a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this article shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the city; 
(2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennae; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the City; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunications tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-72. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electro-magnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this article the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
City manager means the city manager of the city or his/her designee. 
Governing body means the city council for the city. 
Macro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three (3) feet above the top of the structure but no more than ten (10) feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Micro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than three (3) feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than six (6) antennae per site. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Telecommunications facilities refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-73. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; or 
(3)  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body. 
(4)  Any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-74. - Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district. 
(a)  In the industrial (M) zoning district micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted as a use of right up to a height of eighty (80) feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two (2) users are permitted as a use of right up to height of one hundred (100) feet following design review by and receipt of building permit from the city manager. 
(b)  In central business (C-1) and neighborhood and highway business (C-2) zoning districts micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review and by receipt of a building permit from the city manager. Monopole towers up to a height of fifty (50) feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager and monopole towers up at a height of eighty (80) feet designed and intended to accommodate at least two (2) users are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. 
(c)  In low density residential (R-75), medium density residential (RM), medium to high density residential (A) and office and institutional (OI) zoning districts, micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. Monopole towers up to a height of fifty (50) feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. 
(d)  In the single family residential (R-200) zoning district, micro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use as of right on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a special use on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. 
(e)  Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be built after approval of a variance in accordance with Article X, Appendix A (Variances) of the Code of the City of Stone Mountain as well as receipt of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-75. - Preferred and disfavored location sites. 
(a)  Preferred locations sites. 
(1)  Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this article and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the city manager or the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(2)  Publicly-used structures. Publicly-used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly-used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly-used structures include, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(3)  Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roof line can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Mixed use buildings in high density districts. Mixed use buildings (housing above commercial or other non-residential space) are also preferred location sites. 
(b)  Disfavored location sites. Any single-family residential structure or site or multi-family duplex shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-76. - Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  General requirements for all telecommunications facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this article. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the city manager. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this article shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standard or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every twelve (12) months. 
(3)  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the city manager may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this article are met. 
(6)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted on neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The city manager may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the city manager. 
(8)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(9)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(10)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided however, that the city manager may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
1.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential property line. 
2.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
3.  Telecommunications facilities must be setback from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 5-77. 
b.  For antennae attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(b)  Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(2)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
(3)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and build environment. 
(4)  Towers shall not be located any closer than fifteen hundred (1500) feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
(5)  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
(6)  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
(7)  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
(8)  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
(9)  Placement of more than one (1) tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the tower on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-77. - Application procedures. 
(a)  General application requirements for all building and special use permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the city manager by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this chapter and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Basic information. 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 5-76(a)(7). 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
e.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
1.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
g.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
h.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
j.  Designation of which location preference, identified in section 5-75, above, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location 1 through 4 or is a disfavored site, describe: (a) what publicly-used building, co-location site or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; (b) what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; (c) why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and (d) how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and citywide network. 
(2)  Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one (1) mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
1.  Street address; 
2.  Assessor's block and lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
3.  Zoning district; 
4.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
5.  The number of antennae and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) And location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
6.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
7.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five (5) years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(3)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  If the proposed site is zoned R-200, R-75, RM, A or O-I and there are alternative sites in C- I, C-2 or M, applicants must justify why those alternate sites have not been proposed. The city manager will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The city manager shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the city manager. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such tower would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The city manager will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The city manager shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
c.  In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
d.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The city manager shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
e.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and bower lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(4)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the city manager to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(b)  Expedited review for building permits only. When a telecommunications facility will be a use as of right pursuant to section 5-74 of this article and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the city manager will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within ten (10) business days after receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  A request for a variance shall be initiated by application to the city manager and handled in accordance with the provisions of Article X, Appendix A (Variances) of the City Code. The governing body may issue a variance under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of section 5-76 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)  In granting variance, the governing body may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-78. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the city manager may be taken by any person aggrieved or any official of the city affected by the decision of the city manager. Such appeal shall be to the board of zoning appeals pursuant to Article X (Board of Zoning Appeals) of the city code. Appeals from any decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be made to the superior court within thirty (30) days of the decision. Any decision by the city manager or by the board of zoning appeals denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-79. - Nuisances 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the City of Stone Mountain Code of Ordinances shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-80. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the city manager any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within thirty (30) days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-81. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply far and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-82. - Pre-existing towers/non-conforming uses. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of this article shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use and shall be treated as a non-conforming use in accordance with Appendix A, Article VI, Section 6-1 (Nonconforming Uses) of the city code. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility that has received city approval as of the effective date of this article in the form of either a building permit or variance, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna on a non-conforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the non-conforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-83. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this article without having first obtained the necessary building permit or variance in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article or without obtaining the required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 5-84. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the governing body finds that the application of this article would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this article may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-1-97) 
Secs. 5-85—5-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-05, § 4, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, repealed the former Art. IV., §§ 5-101—5-415, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-19, Pt. I, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 07-04, pt. I, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 04-05, Pt. I, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 08-07, Pt. I, 7-1-08, Ord. No. 2015-09, 8-4-15, Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-5-16. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-101. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated the following terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this section: 
Approved means approved by the building official. 
Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures, including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Building official means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or any duly authorized representative. 
Condemn means to adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement means that portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a lot. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places by: 
(1)  Removing or making inaccessible to materials that serves as their food; 
(2)  Poison spraying, fumigating, and trapping; or 
(3)  Any other approved pest elimination methods. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Guard means a building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
Habitable space means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Housekeeping unit means a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
Imminent danger means a condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
Infestation means the presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means a vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including, but not limited to, being: 
(1)  Unlicensed; 
(2)  Wrecked; 
(3)  Abandoned; 
(4)  In a state of disrepair; or 
(5)  Incapable of being moved under its own power. 
Labeled means devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the labeled items listed in this definition and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. 
Let for occupancy or let means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to: 
(1)  A written or unwritten lease; 
(2)  An agreement or license; or 
(3)  A recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Openable area means that part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner means the following: 
(1)  Any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership or corporation: 
a.  having a legal or equitable interest in the property; 
b.  recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or 
c.  otherwise having control of the property. 
(2)  The term "owner" includes the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Parts. Whenever the term "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or "story" is stated in this code, it shall be construed as though it was followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Public way means any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
Rooming house means a building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term "rubbish" includes, but is not limited to, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Strict liability offense means an offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
Tenant means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
Terms defined in other codes . Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Existing Building Code or the NEC Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
Toilet room means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Ventilation means the natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
Workmanlike means executed in a skilled manner (e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work). 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-102. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment, upon conviction in the city municipal court, and each and every day that the premises shall remain in a condition in violation of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall be in addition to the provisions of the abatement of said nuisance and the charge of the cost of the same against the owner of the premises by the city. A fine imposed under this code shall be no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense. A sentence of imprisonment under this article shall not exceed sixty (60) days per offense. At the discretion of the municipal court judge, any sentence may be probated, altered or amended. Any owner, occupant or party of interest who violates any other property maintenance code within a twenty-four (24) month period shall immediately be issued a citation and subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
DIVISION 2. - TECHNICAL CODES 
Subdivision I. - Codes Adopted by Reference. 

Sec. 5-103. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  The city adopts, by reference, as if fully set forth herein, the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, as follows: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(3)  International Mechanical Code; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  International Fire Code; 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code; and 
(8)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings. 
(9)  International Residential Code for Tiny Homes. For the purposes of this code section tiny homes shall be considered accessory dwelling units (detached). 
(b)  The following codes, the latest editions as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Existing Building Code; and 
(2)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(c)  The most recent edition of the following code is adopted insofar as it does not conflict with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes: International Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(d)  Life Safety Code NFPA 101. 
(e)  The city also adopts the state minimum standard codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). 
(f)  For all permits granted or approved under earlier versions of Chapter 5, Buildings, it is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council to enforce this code under which the project was approved. 
(g)  The codes described in this section may also be referred to as the city "building codes," "construction codes," or "technical codes." 
(h)  The state minimum standards adopted in Sec. 5-103 shall prevail if a conflict occurs with any local code adopted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16; Ord. No. 2018-04, Pt. I, 3-6-18) 
Secs. 5-104—5-108. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 5-109. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-110. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof (which are public safety, health, and general welfare) through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan under the requirements of the construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-111. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Most restrictive controls; conflicts. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. The state minimum standards adopted in Sec. 5-103 shall prevail if a conflict occurs with any local code adopted in this chapter. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in section 5-221(b) shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. The construction code provisions shall be enforced where construction code provisions conflict with a standard. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his or her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of: 
(1)  Buildings; 
(2)  Structures; and 
(3)  The electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-112. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes; provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-113—5-120. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Office of Building Administration 

Sec. 5-121. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established an Office of Building Administration and the person in charge shall be the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. The duties of the Office of Building Administration may be contracted out in full or in part to a third-party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. Employees or third-party contractors working for the Office of Building Administration shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he or she is the owner of such. Employees or third-party contractors shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his or her duties or conflicts with the interests of the Office of Building Administration. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the Office of Building Administration. The records of the Office of Building Administration shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any employee charged with the administration and enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him or her in the administration or enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the Office of Building Administration during the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-122. - Building official. 
(a)  Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to assist the building official with the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes; provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he or she shall first present the proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after a proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official or the building official's designee, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the property owner, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in a case where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code. The building official may revoke a permit upon a determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to the existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code . Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate; provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-123—5-160. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Permits 

Sec. 5-161. - Application. 
(a)  Required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make an application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner who is neither a licensed contractor nor the occupant of a residential structure being altered. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work; provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs with a value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit; provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Contents. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his or her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application; provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 2, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-162. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of specifications and drawings, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for the specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. 
(1)  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the state laws regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his or her official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(2)  Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire-resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire-resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire-resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire-resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. 
a.  A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all: 
1.  Buildings; 
2.  Exterior storage facilities; 
3.  Permanent access ways; 
4.  Evacuation routes; 
5.  Parking lots; 
6.  Internal roads; 
7.  Chemical loading areas; 
8.  Equipment cleaning areas; 
9.  Storm and sanitary sewer accesses; 
10.  Emergency equipment; and 
11.  Adjacent property uses. 
b.  The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. 
a.  A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate the following: 
1.  Rooms; 
2.  Doorways; 
3.  Corridors; 
4.  Exits; 
5.  Fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating; 
6.  Location of liquid tight rooms; and 
7.  Evacuation routes. 
b.  Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-163. - Examination of documents. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-164. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he or she shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his or her refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When an application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his or her discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit proceeds at his or her own risk without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted, or that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made an application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he or she proposes to build, erect, or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-165. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the building official with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-166. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. 
(1)  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work is commenced. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the initiation of work pursuant to a building permit, a building permit shall be subject to a utilization period of twenty-four (24) months from date of issuance. The permit shall expire and become invalid after the given utilization period has elapsed. The utilization period begins on the date of permit issuance. The expiration date for the building permit shall be specified on the permit. An exception to the 24-month expiration may be granted in accordance with [subsection] (3) below. 
(3)  Upon request of the applicant for a building permit at the time of the initial application, the building official may approve an expiration date exceeding the utilization period if the applicant demonstrates that the complexity and size of the project makes completion of the project within the utilization period unreasonable. 
(4)  A request for an extension of the utilization period may be submitted no later than twenty (20) calendar days prior to the expiration of the utilization period. The building official may extend the building permit one (1) time for a period up to and not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) calendar days if the applicant shows that the work pursuant to the permit cannot be completed within the utilization period due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control. The applicant's name, address, telephone number, the building permit number, site address and a description of the circumstances beyond the applicant's control which prevented completion of the work prior to the expiration date shall be submitted to the building official. If the project is less than fifty (50) percent complete (as determined by the building official), the building official shall require a performance bond to be submitted prior to approval of the extension. If a performance bond is required, the amount of the bond shall be justified with a cost estimate from the applicant for the completion of the project. 
(b)  Issued on basis of affidavit. 
(1)  Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. 
(2)  In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for: 
a.  Conformity with the permit; 
b.  Providing copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed; and 
c.  Upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)  In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his or her place a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he or she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." 
(1)  One (1) set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. 
(2)  The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his or her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-167. - Fees. 
(a)  Required. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance; penalty. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of: 
(1)  All permit fees and other money collected; and 
(2)  The names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule. On all buildings, structures or electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing an application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. 
(1)  Denied if underestimated. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. 
(2)  Included in calculation. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-168. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing buildings. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He or she shall inspect all buildings, structures or electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He or she shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he or she shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(c)  Service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f) of this section. He or she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services; provided that after investigation he or she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his or her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such a position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such a position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation and foundation wall. To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and forms erected prior to the placing of concrete. 
b.  Framing. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, bracing and fasteners are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
c.  Moisture barrier. To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finishing materials. 
d.  Final. To be made after the building is completed and ready for immediate occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation. To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame. To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify the installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three (3) inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his or her agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-169. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuance. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a commercial building which, in the opinion of the building official, may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The temporary/partial certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited if the certificate of occupancy is not issued within ninety (90) days. 
(4)  Existing buildings. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two (2) sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connections. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-170. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he or she is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the Office of Building Administration. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the building owner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-171. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the owner's expense, or his or her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-172—5-180. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Appeals 

Sec. 5-181. - Building official decisions. 
The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his or her duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the Mayor and City Council whenever any one (1) of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-182. - Notice. 
A notice of appeal shall be in writing to the City Clerk and filed within 30 calendar days of the decision of the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-183. - Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. 
In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the building official's opinion, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his or her order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-184—5-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRENCHING 

Sec. 5-186. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions as the result of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth to width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor, or successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing, or controlling an excavation or trench. 
Trench means a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of the trench is not greater than 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-187. - Compliance with local, state and federal regulations required. 
No person shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in compliance with the provisions of this division and in compliance with any applicable laws of the state or of the United States or any rules and regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-188. - Federal regulations adopted. 
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly part 1926, subpart P, Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring, and section 1926.650 et seq. of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, are adopted as a part of this division the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-189. - Certificate required. 
(a)  No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench unless such person holds a valid certificate evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. 
(b)  In the event any person who holds a valid certificate from the city is found to be in violation of the safety standards or requirements on any job site, the certificate may be revoked after notice and hearing as herein provided. In the event of revocation, the certificate may be reinstated one (1) time upon repeat by the person of the educational program required for issuance of the initial certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-190. - Permit required. 
(a)  No excavation or trenching shall be performed until a permit or authorization for the same has been obtained from the city. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of the safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the job site. 
(b)  No permit or authorization shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-191. - Inspections; violations. 
The city shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify the existence of the required certificates, and verify compliance with the OSHA safety standards adopted in section 5-188. The inspectors may operate pursuant to a contract between the city and a third-party entity. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-192. - Appeals. 
Any person whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal according to the procedures of Article IV, Division 2, Subdivision V, Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-193—5-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5-196. - Fire limits. 
The city fire limits, for purposes of the building code, shall include all real property within the incorporated boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-197. - Overcrowding prohibited. 
(a)  Bedroom requirements. 
(1)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(2)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-inhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(b)  Overcrowding specifications. 
(1)  Minimum occupancy area. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following table: 

 
Note—For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m 2 . 
Note a—See subsection (b) (3) of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
Note b—See subsection (b) (2) of this section for limitations on determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the table contained in subsection (b) of this section shall not be included as sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of the table contained in subsection (b)(1) of this section if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(c)  Exception. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency dwelling unit meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  An efficiency unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet. An efficiency unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance, and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower. 
(4)  The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3). 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Part 1 § 4, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-198—5-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINDINGS OF THE EXISTENCE OF NUISANCES 

Sec. 5-200. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
The governing authority of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia finds and declares that within the city limits of the City of Stone Mountain there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the City of Stone Mountain; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. 
It is further found and declared that in the City of Stone Mountain where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which rendered adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, Pt. I(§ 1), 7-7-15) 
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-201. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential and all existing premises. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall constitute the minimum requirements and standards for: 
(1)  Premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; 
(2)  The responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; 
(3)  The occupancy of existing structures and premises; and 
(4)  Administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§§ 2, 7), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-202. - Intent. 
(a)  This article shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. 
(b)  Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety, as required herein. 
(c)  Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the International Existing Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§§ 2, 7), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-203. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in section 5-201 and section 5-202. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. The state minimum standards adopted in Sec. 5-103 shall prevail if a conflict occurs with any local code adopted in this ordinance. 
(b)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this article or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. 
(2)  No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. 
(3)  The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for the removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. 
(4)  Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(c)  Other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Existing Building Code. Nothing in this article shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the International Zoning Code. 
(d)  Existing remedies. The provisions in this article shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
(e)  Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this article shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(f)  Historic buildings. The provisions of this article shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this article shall be those that are listed in section 5-103 and considered part of the requirements of this article to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this article and the referenced standards, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(h)  Requirements not covered by article. The requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this article, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§§ 2, 7), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-204—5-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 5-221. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the Office of Building Administration the Office of Property Maintenance. The duties of the Office of Property Maintenance may be contracted out in full or in part to a third-party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. Employees or third-party contractors working for the Office of Property Maintenance shall be subject to the same restrictions found in Article IV, Division 2, Subdivision III, Section 5-121 (b). 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-222. - Authority of building official to appoint. 
In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint: 
(1)  Other related technical officers; 
(2)  Inspectors; 
(3)  Code enforcement officers; and 
(4)  Other employees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-223. - Liability for damage while discharging official duties. 
(a)  The building official, officer or employee charged with the administration or enforcement of this article, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. 
(b)  Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this article shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this article; and any officer of the Office of Property Maintenance, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-224—5-231. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 5-232. - Enforcement of this article. 
The building official or his or her designee shall administer and enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-233. - Authority to adopt rules and procedures. 
(a)  The building official shall have the authority, as necessary, in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare to: 
(1)  Adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; 
(2)  Interpret and implement the provisions of this article; 
(3)  Secure the intent thereof; and 
(4)  Designate requirements applicable because other conditions. 
(b)  Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this article, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-234. - Inspections. 
(a)  Required. The building official or his or her designee shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. 
(b)  Reports. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. 
(c)  Expert opinion. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-235. - Authorized right of entry. 
The building official or his or her designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the building official or his or her designee is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-236. - Proper identification required. 
The building official or his or her designee shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-237. - Notices and orders. 
The building official or his or her designee shall issue all the necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-238. - Official records required to be kept. 
The building official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the Office of Building Administration specified in the provisions of this article. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-239. - Coordination of inspections. 
(a)  Whenever, in the enforcement of this article or another code or ordinance, the responsibility of more than one (1) building official of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the building officials involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. 
(b)  Whenever an inspector from any city office or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of law, ordinance or code not within the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-240. - Approval. 
(a)  Modification criteria and procedure. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases; provided the building official shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this article impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this article and that such modification does not lessen the health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of the action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Office of Building Administration. 
(b)  Alternative materials, methods and equipment to be approved by building official. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code; provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this article, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in: 
(1)  Quality; 
(2)  Strength; 
(3)  Effectiveness; 
(4)  Fire resistance; 
(5)  Durability; and 
(6)  Safety. 
(c)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this article, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this article, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction. 
(1)  Methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. 
(2)  Reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
(d)  Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless: 
(1)  Such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary; 
(2)  Placed in good and proper working condition; and 
(3)  Approved. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-241. - Unsafe structures and equipment. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Structure unfit for human occupancy shall have the same meaning as provided in article IV of this chapter. 
Unlawful structure means a structure: 
(1)  Found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this Code; or 
(2)  Erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that the equipment is a hazard to the life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
Unsafe structure means: 
(1)  One that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing the minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire; 
(2)  Because such structure contains unsafe equipment; or 
(3)  Is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
(b)  Condemnation finding. When a structure or equipment is found by the building official or his or her designee to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of Article V [editor's note - this is our current nuisance abatement reference] of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-242—5-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 5-266. - Applicability. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this division shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for the maintenance of structures, equipment and property. 
(b)  Owner/occupant responsibility to maintain premises. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control. 
(c)  Vacant structures and land to be maintained in safe, secure and sanitary condition. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-267. - Exterior property requirements. 
(a)  Keep exterior premises in clean, safe and sanitary condition. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Maintain grading and drainage to prevent soil erosion and stagnant water. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Excepted from this subsection are approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
(c)  Keep sidewalks and driveways repaired and free of hazardous conditions. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(d)  Weeds; definition; assessment. 
(1)  All premises and exterior property, including both developed and undeveloped lots in platted subdivisions, shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. 
a.  The term "weeds" means all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs. 
b.  The term "weeds" does not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
(2)  Upon the failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, he or she shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with article IV of this chapter and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(e)  Rodent harborage prohibited. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reification. 
(f)  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another vent. 
(g)  Accessory structures to be maintained. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(h)  Motor vehicles. 
(1)  Prohibited. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
(2)  Exception. A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work; provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
(i)  Defacement of property. 
(1)  Prohibited. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. 
(2)  Owner's responsibility to restore and maintain. It shall be the owner's responsibility to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-268. - Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
(a)  Maintained in clean and sanitary condition. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. 
(b)  Enclosures specifications. 
(1)  Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas containing water more than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least forty-eight (48) inches (1,219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. 
(2)  Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than fifty-four (54) inches (1,372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. 
(3)  Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six (6) inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. 
(4)  No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-269. - Exterior structure requirements. 
(a)  Maintained in good repair. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Protective treatment. 
(1)  All exterior surfaces including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)  Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. 
(3)  All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. 
(4)  All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. 
(5)  Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
(c)  Premises identification. (Reserved). 
(d)  Structural members to be capable of load support. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(e)  Foundation walls to prevent entrance by rodents and other pests. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
(f)  Exterior walls to be weatherproof. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(g)  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(h)  Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terracotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(i)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(j)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(k)  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(l)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(m)  Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
(1)  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(2)  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easy to open and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(n)  Insect screens. 
(1)  Specifications. During the period from May 1 to August 31 of each year, or as otherwise provided by the city council, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
(2)  Exception. Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
(o)  Doors and locks. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with section 5-369(c). 
(p)  Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
(q)  Rodent guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents. 
(r)  Building security specifications. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
(1)  Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. 
a.  Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have a lock throw of not less than one (1) inch. 
b.  For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. 
c.  Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. 
d.  All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed and installed in such a manner as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort. 
(2)  Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six (6) feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with window sash locking devices. 
(3)  Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-270. - Interior structure. 
(a)  Introduction. 
(1)  The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
(b)  Structural members shall be load supporting. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(d)  Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(e)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(f)  Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-271. - Handrail and guardrail requirements. 
(a)  The following specifications apply to handrails and guardrails: 
(1)  The exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four (4) risers shall have a handrail on one (1) side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. 
(2)  Handrails shall not be less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (107 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. 
(3)  Guardrails shall not be less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. 
(b)  Exception. Guards shall not be required where exempt by the adopted building code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-272. - Rubbish and garbage requirements. 
(a)  Accumulation. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(b)  Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
(1)  Storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
(2)  Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors. 
(c)  Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. 
(1)  Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one (1) of the following: 
a.  An approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; 
b.  An approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or 
c.  An approved leak proof, covered, outside garbage container. 
(2)  Containers. The operator of every establishment which produced garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-273. - Extermination. 
(a)  Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility prior to leasing. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
(c)  Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(d)  Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
(e)  Occupant. 
(1)  Responsibility. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. 
(2)  Exception. Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-274—5-292. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 5-293. - Applicability. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this division shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this division. 
(c)  Alternative devices permitted. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International Building Code shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-294. - Lighting requirements. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. 
(1)  Specifications. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three (3) feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
(2)  Exception. Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m 2 ). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
(b)  Common halls and stairways. 
(1)  Residential. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a sixty (60) watt standard incandescent lightbulb for each 200 square feet (19 m 2 ) of floor area or equivalent illumination; provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 mm). 
(2)  Nonresidential. In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress stairways, shall be illuminated at all times; provided the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one (1) foot candle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads. 
(c)  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-295. - Ventilation requirements. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. 
(1)  Specifications. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum glazed area required in section 5-294(a). 
(2)  Exception. Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet (2.33 m 2 ). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
(b)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
(1)  Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by subsection (a) of this section, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. 
(2)  Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
(c)  Cooking facilities. 
(1)  Prohibited in rooming unit or dormitory. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
(2)  Exception. An exception is where cooking is specifically approved in writing by the building official. 
(d)  Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
(e)  Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-296. - Occupancy limitations. 
(a)  Privacy required. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(b)  Minimum room widths. 
(1)  Habitable room. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven (7) feet (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. 
(2)  Kitchen. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three (3) feet (914 mm) between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
(c)  Minimum ceiling heights. 
(1)  Specifications. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet (2,134 mm). 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  In one-family and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four (4) feet (1,219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six (6) inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height. 
b.  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches (2,033 mm) with not less than six (6) feet four (4) inches (1,932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 
c.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet (2,134 mm) over not less than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five (5) feet (1,524 mm) or more shall be included. 
(d)  Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one (1) person shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m 2 ) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one (1) person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m 2 ) of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(2)  Access from bedrooms. 
a.  Other means of access required. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. 
b.  Exception. Units that contain fewer than two (2) bedrooms. 
(3)  Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
(4)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(5)  Other requirements. 
a.  Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this article including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this section; 
b.  The plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements of sections 5-317 and 5-320(d); 
c.  The heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of sections 5-343 and 5-346(b); and 
d.  The smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of section 5-371. 
(e)  Overcrowding. 
(1)  Minimum occupancy area. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following table: 

 
Note—For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m 2 . 
Note a—See subsection (e)(3) of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
Note b—See subsection (e)(2) of this section for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the table contained in subsection (e)(1) of this section shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of the table contained in subsection (e)(1) of this section if: 
a.  The total area is equal to that required for separate rooms; and 
b.  The space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(f)  Efficiency unit. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m 2 ). A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet (29.7 m 2 ). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections (f) (2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this division shall be provided. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
(4)  The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3). 
(g)  Food preparation. 
(1)  All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. 
(2)  There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-297—5-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 5-316. - Applicability. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this division shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-317. - Required facilities. 
(a)  Dwelling units. 
(1)  Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. 
(2)  The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. 
(3)  A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(b)  Rooming houses. At least one (1) water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units. 
(c)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants. 
(d)  Employees' facilities. 
(1)  A minimum of one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
(2)  Drinking facilities defined. 
a.  The term "drinking facilities" means a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler with pre-disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. 
b.  Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-318. - Toilet rooms. 
(a)  Privacy required. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  No more than one (1) floor. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units shall have access by traversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
(2)  For employees. 
a.  Specifications. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one (1) story above or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of five hundred (500) feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. 
b.  Exception. Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of five hundred (500) feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities. 
(c)  Floor surface for other than dwelling units. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-319. - Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
(a)  Generally. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(b)  Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
(c)  Plumbing system hazards to be corrected. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the building official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-320. - Water system. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. 
(2)  All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
(b)  Contamination. 
(1)  The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. 
(2)  Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets, to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(c)  Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(d)  Water heating facilities. 
(1)  Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  A gas burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. 
(3)  An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-321. - Sanitary sewerage system. 
(a)  Generally. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(b)  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-322. - Storm drainage not to create nuisance. 
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-323—5-341. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 5-342. - Applicability. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this division shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-343. - Heating facilities. 
(a)  Required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
(b)  Residential occupancies. 
(1)  Specifications. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Exception. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above thirty (30) degrees Fahrenheit (-1 degree Celsius), a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) shall be maintained. 
(c)  Supply. 
(1)  Specifications. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one (1) or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to April 1 and to maintain a temperature of not less than sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required; provided the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
b.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above thirty (30) degrees Fahrenheit (-1 degree Celsius) a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) shall be maintained. 
(d)  Occupiable work spaces. 
(1)  Specifications. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to April 30 of each year, or as otherwise provided by the city council, to maintain a temperature of not less than sixty-five (65) degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
b.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(e)  Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three (3) feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and two (2) feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-344. - Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(b)  Removal of combustion products. 
(1)  Connected to approved chimney or vent. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
(2)  Exception. Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation. 
(c)  Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(d)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(e)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(f)  Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping there from, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-345. - Electrical facilities. 
(a)  Required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and section 5-346. 
(b)  Service. 
(1)  The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the ICC Electrical Code. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than sixty (60) amperes. 
(c)  Electrical system hazards to be corrected. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the building official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-346. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
(b)  Receptacles. 
(1)  Habitable space. Even habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. 
(2)  Laundry area. Every laundry area shall contain at least one (1) grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. 
(3)  Bathroom. Every bathroom shall contain at least one (1) receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
(c)  Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one (1) electric lighting fixture. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-347. - Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Maintained to safely handled loads. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire hazards. 
(2)  Display of current certificate of inspection required. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter; or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. 
(b)  Elevators. 
(1)  Minimum one (1) working elevator for occupied building. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. 
(2)  Exception. Buildings equipped with only one (1) elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-348. - Duct systems to be free of obstructions and perform properly. 
Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-349—5-367. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 5-368. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this division shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(c)  Owner's responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-369. - Means of egress. 
(a)  Generally. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. The means of egress shall comply with the NSPA Life Safety Code 2010 and the International Building Code. 
(b)  Aisle width. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be unobstructed. 
(c)  Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code. 
(d)  Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following: 
(1)  Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. 
(2)  Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings; provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-370. - Fire-resistance ratings. 
(a)  Assemblies to be maintained. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
(b)  Opening protectives required to be maintained. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smoke stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-371. - Fire protection systems. 
(a)  Generally. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
(b)  Smoke alarms. 
(1)  Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
a.  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
b.  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
c.  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars, but not including, crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level; provided that the lower level is less than one (1) full story below the upper level. 
(2)  Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
(c)  Power source. 
(1)  Specifications. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring; provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for over current protection. 
(2)  Exception. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
(d)  Interconnection. 
(1)  Specifications. Where more than one (1) smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one (1) alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing: 
1.  Alterations; 
2.  Repairs; or 
3.  Construction of any kind. 
b.  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 2), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-372—5-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-05, § 3, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, renumbered the former Art IV, Div. 4, §§5-161—5-166 as Art. VI, Div. 9, §§ 5-391—5-396. 

Sec. 5-391. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this division shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this division shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, Pt. I(§ 1A), 7-7-15) 
Sec. 5-392. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes means (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in ch. 2 of tit. 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in ch. 2 of tit. 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. ch. 2 of tit. 8 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of ch. 13 of tit. 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term 'dwellings, buildings, or structures' shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Stone Mountain. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with Code Section 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer who is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, this city Code section, and O.C.G.A. Code §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by ordinances adopted under O.C.G.A. section 41-2-7, this city Code section, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, Pt. I(§ 1B), 7-7-15) 
Sec. 5-393. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwellings, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Stone Mountain appoint or designate the public works department, city fire marshal, city police chief, and his/her designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this division; 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the City of Stone Mountain charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearings shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing: 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon any interested party that has answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this division, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in ch. 39A of tit. 41, of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement actions shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in paragraph (g) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (c) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of the superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of DeKalb County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
a.  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of the completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A., ch. 4 of tit. 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county or municipality whose lien is being collected. 
b.  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
c.  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to the article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(e)  The county tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of DeKalb County. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(f)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(g)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(h)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this division. 
(i)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, Pt. I(§ 1C), 7-7-15) 
Sec. 5-394. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, Pt. I(§ 1D), 7-7-15) 
Sec. 5-395. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this division shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, Pt. I(§ 1D), 7-7-15) 
Sec. 5-396. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Dekalb County. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, Pt. I(§ 1E), 7-7-15) 
Secs. 5-397—5-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - FORECLOSURE REGISTRY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-05, § 5, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, renumbered the former art IV, div. 5, §§5-175—5-179 as art. VI, div. 10, §§ 5-411—5-415. 

Sec. 5-411. - Purpose. 
(a)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a foreclosure registry as a mechanism to protect property values in neighborhoods for all property owners. 
(b)  Due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are foreclosed or where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure, the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties are negatively impacted. 
(c)  Improperly maintained and secured foreclosed properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of foreclosed real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(d)  This foreclosure registry will require creditors or mortgagees to provide the city with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing foreclosed real property into compliance with applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 5), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-412. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, certain phrases and words are defined below. Words or phrases not defined in this article, but defined in applicable state law or this Code, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
Chapter means Chapter 5 of the Code of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
Creditor means a person or entity to whom a debt is owed or who has a right to require the fulfillment of an obligation or contract, wherein said debt or right is secured by a deed to secure debt, deed of trust or other instrument conveying a lien upon or security title to real property. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by or working on behalf of the city. 
Foreclosed real property, means real property that is subject to any process under Title 44, Article VII of Georgia law whereby a grantor of a secured debt in real property is divested of all rights to said real property and title to the real property is not sold in an arms-length transaction but retained by a creditor or mortgagee after a foreclosure sale or proceeding or transferred to a creditor or mortgagee pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the City of Stone Mountain. 
Mortgagee means a person or entity that holds or receives a deed to secure debt, deed of trust, or other instrument conveying a lien upon or security title to real property. 
Property agent means any person or entity empowered by a creditor, mortgagee, or transferee, as it pertains to the foreclosed real property, with authority: 
(1)  To ensure security and maintenance; 
(2)  To comply with code enforcement orders issued by the city; 
(3)  To provide a trespass authorization upon request of an enforcement officer; 
(4)  To conduct inspections; 
(5)  To accept rental payments from tenants if no management company is otherwise employed; and 
(6)  To serve as an agent authorized to receive any citation under this chapter and notice pertaining to any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
Real property means any improved residential or commercial land or portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the municipal limits of the city. 
Statement of plan means a specific written document prepared by the property owner regarding the maintenance or rehabilitation of the foreclosed real property which shall include the following: 
(1)  The proposed maintenance plan to ensure compliance with all applicable code requirements; and 
(2)  A description of what will be done to secure the structure and surrounding land so that it will not become open to the general public or create any safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 5), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-413. - Registry of foreclosed real property. 
Any creditor or mortgagee that obtains foreclosed real property by way of a foreclosure sale or proceeding shall pay to the city an annual registration fee for each foreclosed real property. The annual registration fee shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council. Registrants shall also file with the city: 
(1)  Said creditor's or mortgagee's official contact information, including a name, title, street address, telephone number and e-mail address; 
(2)  The official contact information, including a name, title, street address, telephone number and e-mail address of a local property agent; if a creditor or mortgagee is local, it can designate itself as the local property agent; 
(3)  The address, including parcel identification number, of the foreclosed real property; and 
(4)  The statement of plan. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2013-02, Pt. I, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 5), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-414. - Registry of transferred foreclosed real property. 
Any creditor or mortgagee who has foreclosed on real property and then transfers said foreclosed real property to a person or entity shall, within thirty (30) days of said transfer, pay to the city a registration fee for each transferred foreclosed real property in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and register with the city: 
(1)  The transferee's official contact information, including a name, title, street address, telephone number and e-mail address; 
(2)  The official contact information, including a name, title, street address telephone number and e-mail address of a local property agent; if transferee is local, it can be designated as the local property agent; and 
(3)  The address, including parcel identification number, of the transferred foreclosed real property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 5), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-415. - Administration, enforcement, violation and penalties. 
(a)  All creditors or mortgagees subject to registration or registered pursuant to this article shall: 
(1)  Comply with applicable provisions of this chapter; and 
(2)  Report any change in contact information to the city within fifteen (15) days of the change. 
(b)  City may make foreclosure registry information accessible online. 
(c)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(d)  Violation of this article shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent and shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with Code section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 5), 2-2-16) 
Secs. 5-416—5-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-05, § 3, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, renumbered the former art IV, div. 6, §§5-181—5-187 as art. VI, div. 11, §§ 5-421—5-427. 

Sec. 5-421. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a vacant property registry as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are vacant. 
(b)  Improperly maintained and unsecure vacant properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of vacant real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(c)  This vacant property registry will require the owner to provide the city with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing vacant real property into compliance with applicable provisions of state and federal law, and the Code. 
(d)  If there is a conflict between the provisions and requirements in this article and state law, as it exists now or may be amended hereafter, then state law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, Pt. I, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 6), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-422. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, certain phrases and words are defined below. Words or phrases not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized on behalf of a vacant real property owner, with respect to vacant real property, to: 
(1)  Accept inquiries, notices, and service of process; 
(2)  Ensure security and maintenance; 
(3)  Comply with code enforcement orders issued by the city; 
(4)  Provide a trespass authorization upon request of an enforcement officer; 
(5)  Conduct inspections; and 
(6)  Accept rental payments from tenants, if no management company is otherwise employed. 
Chapter means Chapter 5 of the Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
City Clerk means the individual holding the office of City Clerk or their designee. 
Code means the Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by or working on behalf of the city. 
Evidence of utility usage means a bill or invoice from a supplier of water, electricity or gas showing at a minimum the base charge charged by the supplier for usage at the real property. 
Lawfully inhabited means that the building or structure is occupied by the owner or tenant or pursuant to the express consent of the owner or tenant. 
Partially constructed or incomplete means real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by the city, but no valid building permit has been issued. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least sixty (60) days and has no evidence of utility usage within the past sixty (60) days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete without a valid building permit. 
The term "vacant real property" shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one (1) unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, Pt. I, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 6), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-423. - Registry of vacant real property. 
(a)  Any person who owns vacant real property shall, no later than (10) days after it becomes vacant real property, register with the city clerk the following information for each vacant real property as identified by its tax parcel number: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number. 
(b)  Any person who owns vacant real property shall pay to the city an annual fee set by resolution of the mayor and city council for each registered vacant real property as identified by its tax parcel number. The annual fee shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, Pt. I, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2016-01, Pt. I, 1-5-16; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 6), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-424. - Updating change in registry information. 
Any person registered pursuant to section 18-183 shall update any change in information required to be submitted by that section to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, Pt. I, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 6), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-425. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of applicable provisions of state and federal law and the Code. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Fail to register or pay the registration fee in accordance with applicable provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Fail to update a change in registry information. 
(c)  Any person who is required, but fails to register, pay the registration fee or update a change in registry information as required by this article, upon citation or summons by an authorized city employee, and judgment, or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the municipal court, shall be subject to penalties not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, Pt. I, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 6), 2-2-16) 
Sec. 5-426. - Deregistration. 
(a)  An owner may apply to remove vacant real property from the vacant property registry at such time as the vacant real property: 
(1)  Is lawfully inhabited; 
(2)  There is evidence of utility usage; and 
(3)  It does not have any outstanding warnings or citations for a violation of any requirements under state or federal law or the Code. 
(b)  The city clerk shall grant or deny an owner's application to remove vacant real property from the vacant property registry within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. An application is complete when it contains all of the information required by subsection (a) of this section. The city clerk's decision shall be in writing, dated, signed and mailed to the owner at its agent's address. If no decision is made within thirty (30) days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, Pt. I, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 6), 2-2-16 ) 
Sec. 5-427. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  As required by O.C.G.A § 44-14-14(j), any determination made by the city clerk pursuant to the remaining provisions of this article shall be in writing, dated, signed and mailed to the owner at an agent's address. 
(b)  Any determination made pursuant to this article may be appealed by an owner or transferee to the city manager. The appeal must be in writing and received by the city manager within fourteen (14) days of the date of determination. To be considered complete, the appeal shall include: 
(1)  A description of the determination being challenged; 
(2)  The date the determination was made; and 
(3)  All the reasons that the owner or transferee believes that the determination represents an error in a material fact or a material misapplication of the requirements of this article. 
(c)  An appeal shall be deemed received by the city manager if postmarked prior to midnight on or before the day it is due. 
(d)  The city manager may only reverse a determination of the city clerk if he or she finds that the determination was based on an error in a material fact or a material misapplication of the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The city manager shall, within thirty (30) days after a complete appeal is received, issue a written decision affirming, reversing or modifying the determination of the city clerk. 
(f)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14(j), an owner or transferee may appeal the written decision of the City Manager to recorder's court. Said appeal shall be filed within fourteen (14) days after the date of the issuance of the written decision. 
(g)  The city Clerk may develop guidelines and forms, make recommendations and take such other steps as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, Pt. I, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, Pt. I(§ 6), 2-2-16) 
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, adopted September 7, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 6, arts. I and II, §§ 6-26—6-30, and adding a new ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-10. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 4-3001—4-3005. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 12; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; noise control, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A; regulation of traffic at cemetery, § 13-2. 
State Law reference— Dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-1 et seq.; interment of deceased indigents, O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5; receipt of cemetery or burial lots in trust, annual returns, commissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4; municipal corporation as trustee of funds donated to cemetery, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-5; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq.; authority of coroners, etc., to disinter bodies, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-45. 

Sec. 6-1. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to all cemeteries owned by the City of Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 6-2. - Management. 
(a)  The city manager shall be responsible for the execution of this chapter and may, subject to the purchasing ordinances of the city, contract for services for the execution of this chapter. 
(b)  Where referenced in this chapter, "sexton" shall mean the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 6-3. - Rules for interment or disinterment. 
(a)  No interments shall be allowed in the city cemeteries unless: 
(1)  A burial permit has been obtained from the sexton. 
(2)  Full payment has been received for the burial lot. 
(3)  The person arranging for the burial has a night to the use of the lot. 
(4)  The lot is not used beyond its capacity. 
(5)  Proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the grave. 
(6)  All interments except the remains from cremation shall require a coffin or casket that is contained in a vault. The specifications of vaults must be approved by the city in advance of interment. Each vault shall be buried to such a depth that there will be a minimum of twelve (12) inches of earthen cover between the top of the vault to the natural ground level. The requirement of a vault may be waived by the sexton for burials in lots designated for indigents. 
(7)  All orders for the opening of graves must be filed at City Hall in writing on forms furnished by the city. Notice of twenty-four (24) hours will be required before interment. In case of emergency, notice may be less than twenty-four (24) hours, provided the party responsible for opening a grave can prove reasonable cause and a good faith effort to make notice as soon as possible. 
(8)  A burial permit, issued by the board of health of DeKalb County or other authorized authority, must accompany every application for the opening of a grave if the death occurred outside the state. 
(9)  Remains of cremation must be accompanied by a certificate from the crematorium. 
(10)  A deposit set by resolution of the governing authority has been paid to guarantee the installation of grave markers within ninety (90) days of interment. Grave markers must have the full name, date of birth and date of death of the deceased engraved on the marker. Grave markers must be approved and conform to the regulations found in section 6-8 of this Code. Upon installation of approved grave markers the deposit shall be refunded to the depositor. 
(b)  No deceased person shall be disinterred from a municipal cemetery without a permit obtained from the sexton. Where evidence of a grave exists either in the records of the cemetery or by sounding, a rightful burial by permission of the lot owner shall be presumed, and the body shall not be moved. Removal may be allowed only when proof is tendered that tile person requesting removal is the next of kin and has the right of removal. A copy of this proof must be tendered to the sexton at the time of removal along with payment of the permit fee. The city shall be supplied by the person requesting removal with a statement of indemnity releasing the city from any liability by the performance of the removal. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, Pt. 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2013-03, pt. I, 3-5-13) 
Sec. 6-4. - Fees and lot valuation. 
(a)  The mayor and city council by resolution shall place a value on all unsold lots in municipal cemeteries and have such valuations recorded on an official map or plan thereof, to be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The mayor and city council by resolution shall establish the fees required for a transfer of ownership, and burial or disinterment permits. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 6-5. - Records of ownership. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all municipal cemetery lots, of the burial capacity of each lot, sold and unsold, of the location of each grave and the names of the persons buried therein and the date of burial of each. 
(b)  A fee shall be required for the transfer of ownership of lots in the municipal cemeteries. 
(c)  The city clerk shall submit to the mayor and city council an updated annual report on the ownership records required in section 6-5(1) within six months of the end of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 6-6. - Cemetery accounts. 
(a)  There shall be a budgetary fund established for both revenues and expenditures for city owned cemeteries. No receipts from cemetery lot sales or burial permits may be appropriated for any purpose other than for the maintenance or improvement of the city owned cemeteries. 
(b)  All gifts, grants, bequests, or other moneys received by the city for the city owned cemeteries shall be recorded in the cemetery fund. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep full and detailed accounts of cemetery receipts and expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 6-7. - Digging of graves. 
(a)  No person, company, funeral director, grave digging service or vault service shall open a grave in the city cemetery without a city permit issued by the sexton. 
(b)  The sexton shall be authorized to require proof of insurance form any person or company performing grave openings. 
(c)  Any person digging graves in a municipal cemetery must remove all unused or surplus dirt, rocks and other materials from the cemetery so as to leave the lots and walks or roads in good condition. With the permission of the sexton surplus materials may be placed in the cemetery at the direction of the sexton. 
(d)  A grave opening fee shall be set by the sexton to cover the administrative costs to the city of such grave openings. 
(e)  No heavy machinery will be allowed in the cemetery in wet weather. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 6-8. - Rules for construction and maintenance. 
(a)  All work must be approved in advance by the sexton including that done by private owners, contractors, and monument companies. 
(b)  Monuments, paving, curb, wall, coping or any other edifice constructed on cemetery lots shall be made of marble, granite or other natural stone material. No brick or cinder block material shall be allowed in the construction or repair of any cemetery lot or monument. Steel reinforced concrete walls shall be allowed upon approval by the sexton. 
(c)  All headstones and markers shall have proper foundations no wider than three (3) feet. 
(d)  No fence, railing, or enclosure of any kind will hereafter be allowed to be erected in any part of the cemeteries unless previously approved by the sexton. The erection of vaults or tombs wholly or partly above the ground will not be allowed without special permission from the sexton. Applications for permission to build such structures must be accompanied by plans and specifications for approval. 
(e)  No marble or stone enclosure or box shall be erected or built over any graves on any lot unless approved by the sexton. In cases where it is desired to duplicate those structures already on a lot, such enclosures or boxes must be supported by foundations at the center of the sides as well as at the ends. Applications for permission to build such structures must be accompanied by plans and specifications for approval. 
(f)  Guy ropes may be attached to trees or posts only by special permission from the sexton, sufficient padding to be used in all cases. Planks must be laid on the sod where barrows or trucks are used to move stone. 
(g)  No mortar or cement shall be mixed on the roadways or paths. Boards must be used in every case. No monumental work shall be delivered at the cemetery until the foundation is completed, and the contractor is ready to proceed with the work. Notice must be given at city hall before any monumental work is brought into the cemetery. 
(h)  No stone work shall be brought into the cemetery on weekends except by permission of the sexton. 
(i)  The sexton shall have the authority to enter any lot or grave site and issue stop work orders in connection with any provision of section 6.8. The sexton shall also have the authority to remove any dead or dangerous tree, shrub, vine, structure, or any object contrary to the regulations contained in section 6.8. 
(j)  A fee set by resolution of the governing authority shall be required for the installation by the city of boundary markers for every lot purchased. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2013-03, pt. I, 3-5-13) 
Sec. 6-9. - General rules and regulations. 
(a)  No signs of an advertising nature shall be permitted within the cemetery. 
(b)  Visitors are required to keep to the walks and roads, and are not permitted to climb upon banks, terraces, walls or monuments. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in the cemeteries. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Removal of flowers following a burial shall be the responsibility of the lot owner or family of the deceased, and shall be completed within ten days of burial. Papers or decayed flowers must not be thrown on the roadways of lots, but must be removed from the grounds or placed in trash receptacles. 
(f)  No through traffic shall be permitted in city owned cemeteries. 
(g)  City owned cemeteries shall be closed to the public at dusk each day except for the holder of a valid burial permit or the holder of a license issued by the state to operate a funeral home, or with permission of the sexton. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct any of the walks or driveways in city owned cemeteries. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to bring such animal into any city cemetery, except for seeing eye dogs and any honorary guard utilizing horses in a funeral procession. 
(j)  Only one (1) flag, plaque, banner, emblem or any manner of signage shall be permitted to be displayed at any one (1) time on a grave site in which a human body is interred. 
(k)  No flag, plaque, banner, emblem or signage displayed on a grave site on which a human body is buried shall exceed dimensions of eleven (11) inches by fourteen (14) inches or a total of one hundred fifty-four (154) square inches regardless of dimensions. 
(l)  Flags, plaques, banners, emblems or other signage which do not exceed the dimensions or square inch restrictions set forth in paragraph (k) above may only be displayed by a direct descendant of the person interred in the grave site. Flags, plaques, banners, emblems or other signage as set forth in paragraph (k) above may be displayed by a non-relative or organization for a period of thirty (30) days on a grave site upon submission of written approval for such display to the city by a direct descendant of the person interred in the grave site. 
(m)  No flag, plaque, banner, emblem or other signage shall be displayed on any city property without an affirmative resolution of the city council approving such display. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2010-10, 9-7-10; Ord. No. 2012-01, pt. I, 1-3-12) 
Sec. 6-10. - Penalties. 
Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, pt. 1, 9-7-99) 
Chapter 7 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, Art. V. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Elections, O.C.G.A. title 21; municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.; applicability and construction of municipal election law, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-14, 21-3-15; contested elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-420. 

Sec. 7-1. - Superintendent. 
The mayor and city council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, who shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45, now and as it may be amended hereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2001; Ord. No. 2013-06, pt. I, 7-2-13) 
Sec. 7-2. - Authority for county to conduct city elections. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45, now and as it may be amended hereafter, the city does hereby authorize DeKalb County to conduct all city elections and perform all duties as superintendent of elections with the exception of the qualification of candidates. 
(Ord. No. 95-7, § II, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2013-06, pts. I, II, 7-2-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-06, adopted July 2, 2013, amended the Code by repealing § 7-2 in it entirety and renumbering the amended § 7-3 to § 7-2. Former § 7-2 pertained to use and procurement of voting machines to record and compute the vote at all city elections; and derived from Ord. No. 95-7, § I, adopted September 5, 1995. 
Chapter 8 - ENVIRONMENT AND LAND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5; erosion and sediment control, ch. 9; health and sanitation, ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; sewers, ch. 22; signs, ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25; subdivision regulations, ch. 26; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; development of rivers with reference to flood control, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-331; acquisition of right to flood roads and highways, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-40 et seq.; soil and water conservation, O.C.G.A. § 2-6-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Rules of construction. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(2)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(3)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
(5)  Words not defined in this chapter shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by Webster's Third New International Dictionary, copyright 1970. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4003) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
As-built drawings means amended site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development of changed use, including particularly any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure. 
Developer means any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. This definition shall not apply to individual single-family dwelling unit construction within a subdivision recorded subsequent to November 3, 1987 or to alteration, modification or additions to single-family dwelling units except for, in either case, individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots as are located within the intermediate floodplain. For the purpose of this section, only the alterations of the drainage system shall be deemed to be development on individual single-family lots. 
Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, retention facilities and the storm sewer system. 
Erosion means the general process whereby earth is moved by flowing surface or subsurface water. 
Exceptional and historical trees means those trees or strands of trees which are exceptional representatives of their species in terms of size, age or unusual botanical quality, or are associated with historically notable events. 
Flood means a temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams and lakes which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Flood hazard map means the official city map designating the elevation and boundaries of flooding under intermediate regional flood conditions maintained by the city engineer, based upon floodplain reports prepared by the U.S. Corps of Engineers or other reputable reports accepted by the city engineer and based upon competent engineering studies prepared by a currently state registered professional engineer, or the city engineer. 
Intermediate regional flood means a one-hundred-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every one hundred (100) years or having a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year. 
Intermediate regional floodplain means the land area within the intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours as defined on the flood hazard map. 
Live retention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for storm water storage for a specified period of time. 
Maintenance of retention facility means preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment of the retention facility in good condition; insuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from sediment; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, the proprietor; this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant including a developer. 
Person means any human being, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body or other legal entity. 
Reach means a longitudinal segment of a stream or river measured along specified points on the stream or river. 
Retention facility means a facility which provides for storage of storm water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
Sedimentation means the processes that operate at or near the surface of the ground to deposit earth, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in water channels. 
Sedimentation facility means a retention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process which may be construed as part of or separately from a retention facility. 
Site plan means that plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the developer will conform with applicable provisions of the chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
Stream means natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to tennis courts, fences, swimming pools and buildings, excluding utility facilities except as hereinafter provided. 
Tree means any woody plant which has a single or combined trunk with a caliper (diameter) of eight (8) or more inches five (5) feet above the ground, or any flowing ornamental woody plant having a caliper of two (2) or more inches five (5) feet above the ground. 
Tree crown means the outside diameter of a tree's branches. 
Tree permit means that permit issued by the city engineer authorizing the removal of trees as provided herein. 
Tree protective zone means those areas required under applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance to be maintained as buffers subject to the conditions of those requirements and, in addition, an area twenty (20) feet in width (but not in addition to any required buffer area) encompassing the perimeter of any planned development as defined in the zoning ordinance; however, the tree protective zone may be used for vehicular access and utility easements (only if these uses are provided approximately perpendicular to the greater distance of the tree protective zone) and for city authorized or required drainage improvements. 
Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4003) 
Sec. 8-3. - Public policies; intent. 
(a)  This chapter establishes public policies for the protection of the natural environment and specifies standards for land development to insure achievement of these public policies. 
(b)  By declaration of public policies for environmental protection, the city council expresses its intent to protect the public interest by seeking to assure, where appropriate, maintenance of the natural environment, prevention of its degradation and assuring high quality land development. The city council further declares its intent that these policies shall constitute the public policy framework within which a comprehensive program for protection of the natural environment and implementation of a comprehensive drainage improvements program shall be accomplished. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4001) 
Sec. 8-4. - Purposes. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish public policies for the protection of the natural environment and to establish requirements, standards and procedures for land development. The public policy objective of protecting the natural environment is to be achieved by: 
(1)  Regulating the alteration of land and topography; 
(2)  Regulating the removal and requiring the replacement of certain vegetation; 
(3)  Requiring erosion control and sedimentation control; 
(4)  Protecting city streams and floodplains from substantial alteration of their natural functions and from sediment and debris accumulation; 
(5)  Specifying standards for drainage system design; and 
(6)  Assuring the continuous and efficient operation of the drainage system. 
(b)  It is the mayor and city council's intent that land development be accomplished in conformity with the public policy statements. To that end, the plans required under applicable provisions of this chapter shall be reviewed by the city engineer to enable a full exchange of information between the city and the developer as to the city's public policies for land development. However, these policies shall not be used as a control or regulatory mechanism nor be construed as land development standards enforceable under applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The mayor and city council further declares their intent that these public policies be evaluated periodically so as to reflect the community's interest in protection of the natural environment and to give direction to city actions in matters affecting the natural environment and land development. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4002) 
Sec. 8-5. - Scope and exclusions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any lands other than federal and state lands, except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. section 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  Single-family residences: 
a.  The construction of single-family residences when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy; or 
b.  The construction of single-family residences not a part of a larger project and not exempted under subparagraph a. of this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence not otherwise exempt must conform to the minimum standards as set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6 and that such standards may be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; forestry land management practices, including harvesting; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil and Water Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(7)  Any project involving one and one-tenth acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one and one-tenth (1.1) acres or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent a city or county which is an issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subparagraph b. of paragraph (4) or by paragraph (1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (8), (9), or (10) of this section; 
(8)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the Georgia Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; or construction and maintenance, or either, by any water or sewerage authority established by the General Assembly of this state; provided, however, that: 
a.  If such projects are constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the banks of any channels or drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events or intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round, then such projects shall conform to the specifications used by the Department of Transportation for control of soil erosion and sedimentation on its highway construction projects; 
b.  If such projects are constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the banks of any state waters which do have water in them year round and in which the drainage area of the watershed upstream from such projects is less than three (3) square miles, then such projects shall conform to the specifications used by the Department of Transportation for control of soil erosion and sedimentation on its highway construction projects; 
c.  If such projects are constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the banks of any state waters which do have water in them year round and in which the drainage area of the watershed upstream from such projects is equal to or more than three square miles, then such projects shall conform to the minimum standards set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6; and 
d.  If such projects are constructed within one hundred (100) feet (horizontal) of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 5 Article 2 the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," regardless of the size of the watershed area, then such projects shall conform to the minimum standards set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6; 
(9)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any airport authority, provided that any such land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum standards set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6; or 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, provided that any such land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum standards set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4009) 
Sec. 8-6. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Administration. The city engineer or his designee shall administer and enforce provisions of this chapter as follows: 
(1)  The city engineer is designated to administer and enforce the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control and drainage provisions of this chapter for all development and construction projects with the following duties and responsibilities: 
a.  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
b.  Advise permittee when additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known to be required that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
c.  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(2)  The city engineer shall administer and enforce those provisions of this chapter which apply to developed and occupied areas and to property in an undeveloped state affecting city responsibility for maintenance of the storm drainage system. The city engineer shall assure that maintenance is provided within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse so that flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(b)  Flood hazard map preparation. The city engineer shall prepare and maintain the flood hazard map using the most current flood insurance study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with accompanying maps, or by such engineering studies prepared under the supervision of a currently state registered professional engineer which the city engineer, by using common and appropriate engineering procedures, shall deem accurate and acceptable for floodplain definition, or such studies as the director may prepare. 
(c)  Bond provision. A bond shall be required under this chapter as follows: 
(1)  Policy. It is hereby declared to be public policy that the developer of any property upon which development is proposed to be conducted shall be required to furnish a bond or other financial security necessary to insure the installation and maintenance of all structures and facilities required by this chapter. 
(2)  Standards. Current bonding provisions used by the city to insure installation, proper functioning and maintenance of drainage facilities within public rights-of-way shall remain in effect pending accomplishment of an evaluation of the city's bonding procedures. 
(d)  Inspection and right of entry. Upon presentation of city engineer designee identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, employees of the development and roads and drainage departments may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development and construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with ordinance provisions. City engineer designees may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All drainage facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be accessible at all times for city inspection. Where drainage facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. Where an easement does not exist for the drainage system, the permission of the owner shall be obtained before entrance; however, in the event of emergency maintenance requirements, permission of the owner shall not be mandatory. 
(e)  Emergency maintenance. The city engineer may conduct emergency maintenance operations on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the city engineer, create a condition potentially injurious to life, property and public road system. 
(1)  The tree provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the case of emergencies such as floods, windstorms, ice storms or other disasters. 
(2)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the city. 
(f)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city engineer determines that activity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plans, he may issue a notice of violation. Whenever the city engineer determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, he may issue a notice of violation. The notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be to the owner of the property or his agent and shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  List the specific provisions of this chapter which have been violated; and 
(4)  State that, if these repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the city engineer, summons shall be issued for the owner to appear in recorder's court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. However, in the judgment of the city engineer where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this chapter or constitute a public health and safety hazard, he may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(g)  Remedies. The city engineer shall hear and decide appeals from administrative or enforcement actions taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter within fifteen (15) days of the appeal being filed. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city engineer or seeking a variance from the development standards of this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the city council in accordance with the jurisdictional and procedural requirements of the zoning ordinance, provided however, the city council shall not have authority to approve any variance that would conflict with regulations of the federal flood insurance program. 
(h)  Duration of permit. Any development, grading or tree permit issued by the city engineer or approval of site plan or hydrologic study by the city engineer shall be in force for one (1) year. If not substantially acted upon within that time, the permit and/or approval shall be rescinded. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4010) 
Sec. 8-7. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  This chapter may be amended by the city council after giving public notice and holding a public hearing thereon in accordance with the procedural requirements of this Code. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development activity within the city. The provisions shall not, however, be construed as repealing or modifying any condition attached to the issuance of any development permit issued prior to November 3, 1987. This chapter shall not be construed so as to require any department of the city government to amend any development permit issued prior to the date of this chapter. However, the standards set forth in this chapter shall apply to all development, as defined herein, subsequent to November 3, 1987. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4011) 
Sec. 8-8. - Plan submission. 
(a)  Policy. It is hereby declared to be public policy that all site plans submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements for their preparation and shall also provide information to enable a determination to be made by the city engineer as to plan conformance with public policy statements of this chapter. 
(b)  Standards. All persons proposing development or construction shall submit site plans to the city engineer illustrating the means by which conformance with policy provisions may be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
(1)  Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional floodplain shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this and other applicable Code provisions. 
(2)  Grading, erosion control, sedimentation control, and drainage plans shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently state registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect or combination as may be appropriate for project planning and design. Vegetation plans may be prepared by and implemented under the supervision of a currently state registered professional architect, forester, landscape architect or engineer as may be appropriate for project planning and design. When the hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles of flood routing, super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies or other advanced hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently state registered professional engineer proficient in hydrology. 
(3)  Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with this chapter shall be submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and shall include: 
a.  Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this chapter for grading, vegetation alteration, erosion control, sedimentation control and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the two-foot interval; golf courses and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement but general grading plans shall be submitted. Related plans shall show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits and proposed alterations to the existing site; 
b.  A hydrologic engineering analysis of storm water runoff under existing and proposed developed site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross section area required to carry the affected stream at the intermediate regional flood stage level. The requirements for a complete hydrologic study may be waived by the city engineer for any development where the site plan submitted illustrates existing or proposed improvements sufficient to insure compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter; 
c.  Delineation of the boundaries and contour elevations of the intermediate regional floodplain for streams draining in excess of one hundred (100) acres. Unless shown on the flood hazard map, the intermediate regional flood contour elevations shall be established by engineering field control surveys and then be added to the flood hazard map upon approval of the city engineer and be clearly designated on each site plan, subdivision plat and construction plan. The actual building boundaries shall be shown; the same information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected. The evaluation contours representing the intermediate regional flood conditions shall be shown when they are located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining IRF elevations shall be established. 
d.  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control and drainage plans as related to other major items of construction; and 
e.  Upon development project completion location, size, and invert elevations of piped segments of the storm drainage system, of control wires, and maximum water surface elevations in retention ponds shall be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on a final plan for other developments which shall be submitted to the city engineer. The professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect reviewing the construction shall provide a certificate that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans for the project when required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4004) 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 8-9. - Grading. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Encourage the design of residential grading plans to provide natural appearance of land contours and to provide ease of use in public areas; 
(2)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon existing vegetation; 
(3)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon the drainage system by strict erosion control and sedimentation and control measures; and 
(4)  Minimize erosion and shear failure potential by encouraging limited cutting and filling. 
(b)  Standards. The following standards shall apply to grading: 
(1)  All grading operations shall be conducted in compliance with the approved site plans. 
(2)  Before beginning construction activity, the intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours shall be identified on the property by staking or other identifying mechanisms no less than every one hundred (100) feet, and shall be identifiable throughout project development. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4005) 
Sec. 8-10. - Erosion control and sedimentation control. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Minimize the removal of vegetation; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of bare earth to precipitation by encouraging the scheduling of land development in increments of workable size which can be completed within a single construction season or within a time period compatible with the type and size of the project; 
(3)  Provide for the reestablishment of vegetation within a reasonable period following completion of final grading and utility installation; 
(4)  Give priority to the paving of streets, parking lots and other areas within a reasonable time following completion of final grading; and 
(5)  Encourage the use of erosion control and sedimentation techniques found in "Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia" as published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Committee. 
(b)  Standards. The following standards shall apply to erosion control and to sedimentation control: 
(1)  Sedimentation facilities (debris basins, sedimentation traps) and other control measures such as hay bales, berms, interceptor ditches and terraces, shall be installed in conjunction with the initial grading operations and be maintained throughout the development and construction process to remove sediment from runoff waters draining land under development. These shall be maintained by the developer to assure functional operation during all phases of construction by periodic maintenance activities. 
(2)  Land which has been cleared for development, and upon which construction has not commenced within sixty (60) days of this initial clearing shall be protected from erosion and consequent sedimentation by appropriate vegetation and land covering techniques such as seeding, sodding, ground cover installation or other vegetative or earth covering techniques. 
(3)  Construction activity on individual single-family lots or groups of lots shall be conducted only if sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period to prevent sediment from any lot or group of lots during all phases of project construction. Substantial completion of final grading and initial ground covering shall be completed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit through seeding, sodding, ground covering installation or other vegetative or earth covering techniques. 
(4)  No grading, cutting or filling shall be accomplished on any site under development such that unprotected land surfaces will be in contact with surface water or will encroach upon natural waterways or their floodplains, unless erosion control and sedimentation control devices can be installed between the grading area and water surface during development and construction, and vegetation be restored upon project completion. The provisions of this section shall not apply to grading necessitated by drainage or other utility improvements required or authorized by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4006) 
Sec. 8-11. - Vegetation protection. 
(a)  Policy. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Protect natural vegetation except where its removal is essential to property development, creation of open spaces for recreational, safety or aesthetic purposes or control of disease and infestation; 
(2)  Protect vegetation within the intermediate regional floodplain and within five (5) feet of the banks of those streams not having defined intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours, so as to assist in the retention of storm water runoff and the control of erosion, including particularly protection of stream bank stability by vegetation protection or restoration; 
(3)  Protect vegetation within natural areas and within fifty (50) feet of scenic roads as may be designated by the mayor and city council. Natural areas are defined as those sites which have: 
a.  Unique biological communities including unique wildlife or rare or exceptional vegetation possessing outstanding botanical qualities; or 
b.  Mature biological communities containing climax vegetation and a climax ecological balance of at least fifty (50) acres; or 
c.  Archaeological or historical value of state or regional significance. 
Scenic roads are defined as those roads which may be designated by the mayor and city council as deserving special protection from land development because of their scenic beauty, extent of vegetation or geologic formations. 
(b)  Standards. The following standards shall apply to the protection of vegetation: 
(1)  No exceptional or historical tree nor any tree located within a tree protective zone may be removed with a permit or approval of a site plan. 
(2)  The following standards shall be used for determining exceptional trees in the city. Any tree achieving or exceeding the mature diameters and heights for each specified species of tree named below shall be considered exceptional and subject to the requirements of this chapter. Any other tree in the city not named below shall be considered exceptional if it also reaches the upper range of the mature diameter and height for that species of tree, as defined in G. Norman Bishop's Native Trees of Georgia, University of Georgia, November, 1965. 
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY  STANDARDS 

 
(1)  Existing trees within the tree protective zone shall be protected except that, where development necessitates removal of trees therein, a plan for tree replanting shall be submitted and approved by the city engineer. Replanting under the approved plan on the project site shall be accomplished prior to use or building occupancy, except that this replanting may be deferred in accordance with the schedule submitted with the replanting plan until the next appropriate season for vegetation installation. All trees planted in accordance with the plan shall be at least four (4) feet in height. 
(2)  The city engineer may authorize the removal of exceptional and historical trees and trees located within the protective zone on the basis of the following criteria: 
a.  The condition of the trees with respect to disease, insect infestation, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and interference with utility services and drainage facility; 
b.  The necessity of removing trees in order to construct property improvements or to allow reasonable use of the property; 
c.  The topography of the land and the effect of tree removal on erosion, soil retention and the diversion or increased flow of surface waters; 
d.  The utility of using existing trees to serve as buffers between conflicting uses and maintenance of the existing vegetative cover in the area; 
e.  The number, size and location of trees and other vegetation to be planted on the site; and 
f.  Good forestry practices, i.e., the number of healthy trees or species of trees which the site or any portion thereof can support. 
(3)  Selective cutting of vegetation in accordance with generally accepted forestry practices, including the removal of deceased, infested or damaged trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(4)  Earth and other materials resulting from or used during the development process shall not be temporarily or permanently stored in locations which would cause suffocation of that root system of trees which are to be preserved; in particular there shall be no significant grade changes (except as required by the approved plans) or storage of these materials within the area immediately below the crown of these trees. 
(5)  The city engineer, upon advice of the county extension service or state forestry commission in accordance with commonly accepted forestry practices and finding of tree disease and infestation, may require the removal of trees to prevent the transmission of disease and infestation; to prevent the danger of these trees falling; or to prevent potential injury to life and property. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4007) 
Sec. 8-12. - Drainage. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Recognize the necessity of joint action by the city and the development industry in resolution of existing drainage problems and prevention of their worsening or recurrence; 
(2)  Work in a cooperative relationship with the development industry to accomplish the above-stated objective by encouraging through this chapter and other public actions the development of fewer but larger major retention facilities and the incremental resolution of existing drainage problems on a priority basis in concert with private development activities; 
(3)  Maintain, where feasible, the natural environment of city streams through reduction of flow quantities resulting from new development and, where feasible, restore the floodplain to its natural functional purpose to resolve existing flooding problems, but recognize the necessity of using urban streams for storm water runoff in those situations where maintenance of the natural stream environment would result in continuation or worsening of flooding conditions; 
(4)  Incrementally assume maintenance responsibility for the public drainage system; 
(5)  Require of the development industry the responsibility to maintain the functioning of the storm drainage system; 
(6)  Encourage the construction of joint retention ponds serving several properties which can be accepted for maintenance by the city upon completion of project development. The city encourages (where engineering judgment so warrants) the location of these retention facilities off the site of the property under development and may participate in the construction of major retention facilities which would serve not only the needs of the property under development, but would assist in resolving existing flooding problems; 
(7)  Encourage innovative design solutions to the effective retention of runoff. Drainage control measures to retain and regulate the rate of storm water discharge which shall be acceptable shall include, but need not be limited to, retention ponds, retention on flat roofs, parking lots, streets, open space areas, underground storage and oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. In addition, the city council encourages the development of retention facilities in such a manner that they will become aesthetically and recreationally beneficial to the community in which they are located; 
(8)  Encourage accommodating runoff from residential properties or between individual single-family lots through underground piping rather than open surface drainage swales and minimize cross drains from streets to natural drainage ways by longitudinal piping or by retaining within the streets, for as long a reach as commonly accepted standards of engineering judgment permit, runoff to a point of discharge not directly affecting individual single-family lots. 
(b)  Standards. The following standards shall apply to drainage: 
(1)  All engineering design items for storm drainage and erosion control and sedimentation control and delineation of the intermediate regional floodplains shall meet the applicable minimum requirements of published design standards of the city, available from the city engineer. Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic computations shall not be less than shown by applicable rainfall curves published by the National Weather Service for the affected area. 
(2)  A combination of storage and controlled release of storm water runoff shall be required for all development and construction which will increase the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one (1) cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm and shall not apply to individual single-family lots of less than two (2) acres. 
(3)  The release rate of storm water from all developments where retention is required shall: 
a.  Not exceed the peak storm water runoff rate from the area in its existing state for all intensities up to and including the one-hundred-year frequency for all durations of rainfall; or 
b.  Not be greater than that calculated for a storm of two-year frequency with a runoff coefficient of 0.20, 0.25, and 0.35 for land with an average slope of up to two (2) percent, two (2) percent to seven (7) percent and over seven (7) percent respectively. 
(4)  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of one-hundred-year frequency. 
(5)  Land uses within the intermediate regional floodplain shall not diminish or restrict the capacity of the channels or floodplains of the stream, its tributaries, drainage ditches or any other drainage facilities or systems in downstream areas. If the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the intermediate regional floodplain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the development permit shall be denied unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the intermediate regional floodplain. Altered sections of the intermediate regional floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt build-up. 
(6)  The live retention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the one-hundred-year frequency rainfall as published by the National Weather Service for the affected areas. The retention system required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of a one-hundred-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the proposed development, with a release rate that does not exceed the approved release rate during the same duration storm. Retention control structures and other drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. 
(7)  When the developer requests and the city engineer determines that development and construction projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined retention or other drainage facilities more practical, the city may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two (2) or more properties by two (2) or more developers. This authorization shall be granted by the city council upon appli 
cation for approval being submitted through the city engineer. Where joint retention facilities serving two (2) or more properties are approved for construction no use of land or occupancy of building within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention facility, except upon approval by the mayor and city council. 
(8)  The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all retention and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of storm water runoff: 
a.  Permanent fencing at least four (4) feet in height shall be required around all these facilities having a maximum water or undercut depth of more than four (4) feet or a bank slope greater than one and one-half (1½) (horizontal) to one (1) (vertical) or those designated by the health department as constituting a public health hazard. This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. The fence shall include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. Fencing may be waived by the city engineer in nonresidential areas where the pond is more than five hundred (500) feet from a residential district and in residential districts when retention is provided in natural areas such as stream channels and fencing, in the opinion of the city engineer, would damage the environment or affect stream flow. 
b.  These facilities shall be located on tracts of land, designated for this use on the recorded plat, with sufficient area around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall be immediately adjacent to or be provided with an access easement to a public street. The access easement shall provide at least ten (10) feet of width outside of above ground obstructions including trees, headwalls, weirs, settling basins or other drainage structures. 
c.  Perforated standpipes or a french drain, in accordance with published design standards available from the city engineer or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing of water and inadequate drainage shall be installed within all these facilities. 
d.  Except as provided in subsection (b)(8)e. above, the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the retention facilities during grading, construction, and following final approval of the completed project. This maintenance obligation shall be binding on future owners, successors and assigns of the property. 
e.  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after the date of adoption of this provision, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility one year after the release of the performance bond for subdivision streets. A special drainage district as authorized by Georgia Laws 1972, p. 1552 is established for property in a single-family residential subdivision at the time the plat is finally recorded, and will be so noted on the plat. Upon completion of developer maintenance all retention ponds shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage and otherwise be as originally permitted. 
f.  Retention facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed under permits issued prior to the city ordinance assigning maintenance responsibility will not be accepted for city maintenance unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the mayor and city council and suitable access easements are provided. At the time the mayor and city council accept a retention facility for city maintenance, a special drainage district will be established that includes all properties for which the retention facility is designed to compensate for increased peak runoff rates due to development. 
(9)  Special drainage system maintenance requirements. 
a.  No impoundment of water which retains in excess of 0.5 acre feet of runoff shall be removed without first obtaining a development permit, which shall only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the developer show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties. 
b.  Trash, garbage, construction materials, construction materials, construction by-products or other debris shall not be deposited in any part of the drainage system. 
c.  No restrictions or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage system or intermediate regional floodplain without first obtaining a development permit. When on- or off-site debris has accumulated within an immediate regional floodplain in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties adjacent to the intermediate regional floodplain, the city engineer shall require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water. 
d.  No permanent structures or additions shall be constructed within the intermediate regional floodplain other than those nonbuilding facilities required or authorized by the city engineer which will not conflict with the hydrologic design characteristics of the approved development and construction plans. Land within the intermediate regional floodplain may be used to meet setback, yard, open space and buffer requirements in accordance with applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(10)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(11)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(12)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(13)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. of 11-3-87, § 11-4008) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 8-13. - Water conservation restrictions. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
(2)  Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
(3)  Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)  Restrictions on Residential Buildings. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity type-tank, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six tenths (1.6) gallons of water per flush; however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992. 
(2)  Employs a shower hear that allows a flow of more than an average of two and five tenths (2.5) gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure. 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one (1.0) gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two (2.0) gallons of water per minute. 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and five tenths (2.5) gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  Restrictions on Commercial Buildings. On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Exemptions; Fee. 
(1)  Exemptions. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section when: 
a.  It is unnecessary to obtain a building permit under existing ordinances for repairs, renovations or construction contemplated; or 
b.  When such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; or 
c.  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
d.  Units to be installed are: 
(i)  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
(ii)  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or, 
(iii)  Toilets for juveniles. 
(2)  Fee. The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subparagraph (1)b, c or d of this subsection shall obtain the exemption by applying to the city. A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(e)  Enforcement; Penalty. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector appointed by the city. 
(2)  Any person violating this section shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this section may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed three (3) months. 
(Ord. of 2-5-91, §§ 1—5) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ 1—5 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 5, 1991, as § 8-13 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. 
Secs. 8-14—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-31. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the planning and zoning committee's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 8-37. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before October 12, 1982. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 12, 1982. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after October 12, 1982 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 12, 1982 date. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, art. 6, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-32. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has in O.C.G.A., article IX, section II, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 1, § A, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-33. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 1, § B, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-34. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 1, § C, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-35. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 1, § D, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-36. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § A, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-37. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 16, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § B, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2016-18, Pt. I, 10-4-16) 
Sec. 8-38. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § C, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-39. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § D, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-40. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § E, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-41. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § F, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-42. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § G, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-43. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 2, § H, 12-5-00) 
Secs. 8-44—8-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-51. - Designation of administrator. 
The city clerk/director of public works is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 3, § A, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-52. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the city clerk/director of public works on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 8-62(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city clerk/director of public works shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 3, § B, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city clerk/director of public works shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-37, then the city clerk/director of public works shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 8-52(2). 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with section 8-52(2). 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the clerk/director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 8-52(1)(c) and section 8-62(2) or section 8-64(2). 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the clerk/director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the clerk/director and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 3, § C, 12-5-00) 
Secs. 8-54—8-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-61. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 4, § A, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-62. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-61(4), Elevated buildings. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 8-53(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (see section 8-51(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 8-62(3)a—c, above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-37, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if section 8-62(4)a above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 4, § B, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-63. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-37, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-37, then the city clerk/department of public works shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-61(4), elevated buildings. 
The clerk/director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 4, § C, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-64. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-37, may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-61(4), elevated buildings. 
The clerk/director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in sections 8-52(1)(c) and 8-52(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 4, § D, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-65. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 4, § E, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 8-66. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning and zoning committee as established by mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city clerk/director of public works in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning committee may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided in state statute. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning committee shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city clerk/director of public works shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning and zoning committee may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, Art. 5, 12-5-00) 
Secs. 8-67—8-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATERING 

Sec. 8-100. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production on storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plants, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 8-101. - Rain sensor shut-off switch. 
(a)  Lawn and landscape irrigation practices within the city, especially during the summer months, can cause a waste of valuable water resources. The purpose of this article is to mandate that water be used for lawn and landscape irrigation in a manner that prevents waste, conserves water resources for their most beneficial and vital uses, and protects the public health. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Rain sensor shut-off switch means an electric device that detects and measures rainfall amounts and overrides the cycle of an irrigation system so as to turn off such system when a predetermined amount of rain has fallen. 
(c)  Any irrigation system installed within the city on or after October 1, 2013 shall be equipped with a rain sensor shut-off switch. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to landscape irrigation systems installed on golf courses or any system dependent upon a nonpublic water source. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, pt. I, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 8-102. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The city code enforcement department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court of the city or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, pt. I, 12-21-10; Ord. No. 0213-07, pt. I, 9-3-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-07, adopted September 3, 2013, amended the Code by renumbering former § 8-101 to § 8-102. 
Chapter 9 - EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-07, adopted July 6, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 9, §§ 9-1—9-10, in its entirety, and adding a new ch. 9. Former ch. 9 pertained to erosion and sedimentation control, and derived from Ord. No. 05-08, adopted April 5, 2005. 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; environment and land development, Ch. 8; nuisances, Ch. 16; zoning, App. A; slopes under land subdivision regulations, § 26-80. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "Stone Mountain Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division of an authorized representative. 
District: The DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 9-4(c). 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 9-3, paragraph (5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "Definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 9-4(c), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 9-4(b)(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Stone Mountain without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city clerk and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 9-5(c). Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 9-4(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two (2) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5), subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 9-4(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 9-5(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(7)  A fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 9-4(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 9-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 9-5(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this section, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The public works director will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The public works director shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. 
(1)  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 9-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within ten (10) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 9-10. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10 §§ 10-1—10-3, and enacted a new Ch. 10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, § 6-2025; Ord. of 1-7-92. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; codes of technical regulations, § 3.19. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 5; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; nuisances, Ch. 16; parks and recreation, Ch. 19; police, Ch. 21; solid waste, Ch. 24; streets designated for emergency vehicles only, § 13-33; water facilities under land subdivision regulations, § 26-82. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide fire protection services, Art. IX, § II, Par. III. 
State Law reference— Starting fire on land of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-23; transmitting false report of a fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. Title 25; firemen's pensions, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of officers, agents, etc., for acts performed while fighting fires or performing duties at the scene of emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30; state codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Title. 
The title of Chapter 10 shall be: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-2. - Fire services. 
(a)  The city shall participate in the DeKalb County Fire District for emergency services, including but not limited to, fire suppression, emergency medical services, search and rescue, and hazardous material mitigation. 
(b)  The city shall provide fire prevention services as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-3. - Fire marshal. 
(a)  Appointment. The position of fire marshal shall be established by the personnel classification plan or by contract with a third party entity. 
(b)  Qualifications. The fire marshal must have the following certifications from the International Code Council: 
(1)  Fire Inspector I 
(2)  Fire Inspector II 
(3)  Fire Plans Examiner 
(4)  Certified Fire Marshal 
(c)  Duties. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this code chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 10-4—10-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-11. - Applicability of state minimum fire safety. 
(a)  Pursuant to Stone Mountain Resolution 07-09-59, the city adopts the state minimum fire safety standards established in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to chapter 2 of title 25, including all subsequent revisions thereof. The City of Stone Mountain will enforce the state minimum fire safety standards as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a) with respect to those buildings and structures listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13, except for hospitals, nursing homes, jails, ambulatory health care centers, and penal institutions and except for buildings and structures which are owned and operated or occupied by the state. 
(b)  The fire marshal for the City of Stone Mountain will be responsible for enforcing such fire safety standards within its jurisdiction and will: 
(1)  Conduct fire safety inspections on existing buildings and structures; 
(2)  Review plans and specifications for proposed buildings, structures, and developments, and conduct fire safety inspections of such buildings and structures; 
(3)  Issue/approve permanent and temporary certificates of occupancy; 
(4)  Conduct inspections for special events, tents, public fireworks displays, and outdoor burning as required; and 
(5)  Coordinate fire arson investigations by the Georgia Fire Marshal's Office. 
(c)  The City of Stone Mountain will charge and retain appropriate fees for performing the above listed duties in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-12. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an action of the fire marshal or other city official or employee of the city including, but not limited to, disapproval of an application, refusal to grant a permit, a determination that the fire code or city ordinances do not apply or have been misconstrued, but excluding those actions or violations which are within the purview of the state fire marshal or code violations which are subject to the jurisdiction of municipal, state or federal court, may appeal and be heard by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Notice. A notice of appeal shall be in writing to the city clerk and filed within thirty (30) calendar days of the decision giving rise to the appeal. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the fire marshal. 
(c)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the fire marshal's opinion is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the fire marshal may, in his or her order, limit the time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 10-13—10-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-21. - City fire limits; storage of explosives, flammable liquids and liquefied petroleum gases. 
(a)  The city fire limits for purposes of this article shall include all real property within the incorporated boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Districts within the city where storage of explosives, flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases are restricted or permitted under this article shall be legally described in a map entitled "City of Stone Mountain Fire Districts." 
(c)  Maps, which shall be approved by the city council and maintained in the city clerk's office, shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-22. - Obstruction or tampering with fire hydrant and apparatus prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to place ashes, cinders, dirt, rubbish, building material or any other material around or in close proximity to any fire hydrant so as to cause hindrance or delay in access thereto, or prevent the free use thereof, by the fire department. No person shall, in any way, interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant or attempt to take water from a fire hydrant without special authority from the fire chief or his or her designee. 
(b)  Without the fire chief's consent, no person not an active member of the fire department shall at any time ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the fire department, nor shall any person make use of any fire apparatus, hose, or other equipment of the fire department, other than for the purpose for which the equipment was intended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-23. - Open burning. 
(a)  State regulations incorporated. Open burning is prohibited in the city, with certain exemptions as set forth in this section. The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 391-3-1.02(5) of the regulations promulgated by the state environmental protection department under the Georgia Air Quality Act, as amended from time to time, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. A copy of said regulation shall be kept on file by the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
(b)  When permitted. Open burning is prohibited except under the following circumstances and conditions: 
(1)  Open burning in a reasonable fashion for the purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption is allowed; 
(2)  Bonfires, recreation fires or fires used for promoting an outdoor event are allowed; provided fires in excess of three (3) feet across are subject to permitting by the fire marshal; 
(3)  Fires set for purposes of training firefighting personnel. 
(c)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire on any public street, alley, or property except in city parks that are open for recreational purposes. Fires in city parks must be built and maintained in permanently mounted grills or personal grills. 
(d)  Burning under hazardous conditions. The fire marshal may prohibit any open burning when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such burning hazardous and may restrict burning in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the state fire marshal and incorporated by reference into the City of Stone Mountain Code. 
(e)  Liability. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the liability of any person for any damages caused as a result of building or maintaining a fire. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-24. - Sprinkler protection required. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
Approved system-commercial areas means commercial areas less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, for light hazard areas, i.e., offices and shipping areas, of commercial buildings less than five thousand (5,000) square feet a modified sprinkler system may be used. This system may be used upon appeal to the fire marshal's office by the owner of the building. 
Approved system-commercial/residential means commercial buildings over five thousand (5,000) square feet, or residential structures, or those structures required to be sprinkled by some other code. The term "approved system-commercial/residential" means a sprinkler system designed in accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standards and referenced publications. 
Commercial means: 
(1)  A business involved in the exchange of services, products, or property of any kind; and 
(2)  The buying, selling and exchange of articles. 
Modified sprinkler system means a combination sprinkler system operating off the domestic water supply designed in accordance with specifications on file in the fire marshal's office. 
Multifamily residential structure means a structure with a maximum of four (4) stories in height, except duplex and freestanding single-family residences. The term "story" means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
New includes any additions to existing buildings, whether vertically or horizontally, or any existing building or structure which shall be deemed to be a new building in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation or a fire or other hazard of serious consequence. The term "substantial renovation" means any construction project involving exits or internal features of such building or structure costing more than the building's or structure's gross assessed value according to county tax records at the time of such renovation. 
(b)  Sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with the International Fire Code Standards for new construction and renovations. 
(c)  All new multifamily residential structures shall be protected throughout with an approved automatic fire protection system. 
(d)  There shall be early fire detection systems in all sections of multifamily occupancies. Existing buildings may have an approved battery operated smoke detector. The bureau of fire prevention may require a hard-wire detection system if battery operated detectors are not maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(e)  The owner is responsible for the inspection and testing of the sprinkler system in accordance with the rules of the state safety fire commissioner. 
(f)  If this Code in any way conflicts with the provisions in the city's building code, the fire prevention code, or the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-25. - Plan review and inspection fee schedule relating to fire marshal requirements. 
The city, in accordance with common professional practice, has established fees for plan reviews and inspections conducted by the fire marshal or his/her designee. These fees are established in addition to any and all fees levied by the other relevant city departments. The plan review and inspection fees are included in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-26. - Prohibited use of open-flame cooking devices. 
(a)  With the exception of one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, and occupancies where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the use of charcoal burners, gas grills, and other types of open-flame cooking device shall be prohibited on balconies, in breezeways, within the means of emergency egress, or within ten (10) feet of combustible construction. 
(b)  No prohibited-use grills as defined by this section may be stored in breezeways, balconies/patios, stairways or exit access areas of the above. 
(c)  Electric grille or similar electrical apparatus shall be permitted so long as they are not modified to charcoal or wood use or produce an open flame. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 10-27—10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 10-41. - Responsibility of property owner or occupant. 
All owners and occupants of improved real property lying within the city are required to post the address of such real property owned or occupied by them with the street address assigned to such property by the city, in such manner that said address is clearly visible and legible from the street on which the improvement on such property fronts. The address may be written in one (1) or two (2) languages provided one (1) language is English. The obligation hereby imposed shall be the joint duty of all owners and occupants of improved real property lying within the city who are over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-42. - Apartment complexes. 
All owners of apartment complexes lying within the city are required to post the building identified for each apartment building within the complex, whether the identifier be a number or letter or a combination thereof, in such manner that said building identifier is clearly visible and legible from the street or private drive on which each building fronts. The identifier for each building within apartment complexes lying within the city will be a minimum of one (1) foot in height, will contrast with the building itself so as to be highly visible, will be reflective so as to be seen easily in darkness and will not be obstructed at any time by natural or manmade objects. All owners of apartment complexes lying within the city will have a grace period of six (6) months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived to come into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 10-43. - Violations. 
(a)  Except for article III, all persons who violate any provision of chapter 10 shall be subject to the general penalty found in section 1-11 of the Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
(b)  Persons who violate any provision of article III shall be subject to a fine in an amount set by a resolution of the city council. Every thirty (30) days shall be deemed a separate offense if the person does not remedy the violation. 
(c)  Upon notice from the fire marshal work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the fire codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the property owner, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the fire marshal shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, Part I, 2-2-16) 
Secs. 10-44—10-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; buildings, Ch. 5; environment and land development, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 16; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 17; parades, demonstrations and picketing, Ch. 18; parks and recreation, Ch. 19; sewers, Ch. 22; solid waste, Ch. 24. 
State Constitution reference— General home rule powers, Art. IX, § II. 
State Law reference— General authority of county board of health to adopt rules, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-4(4), 31-3-6; adoption procedures for rules, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. II, § 11-21 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - County ordinance adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted in its entirety as a part of this article and section, chapter 13, health regulations, of the Code of Dekalb County, as amended. 
(b)  Any person violating the terms of this section or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 10-6-87; Ord. No. 03-02, Pt. I, 4-1-03) 
Editor's note— The ordinance adopted in the above section is on file in the city hall. 
Sec. 11-2. - Placement of refuse (commercial districts). 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association, business, or other entity to place refuse upon the city streets or sidewalks for the purpose of collection by city or private refuse collection agencies in any district zoned O & I, C-1, C-2, M, or SC at any time. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, association, partnership, business or other entity violating the terms of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91; Ord. No. 95-4, 3-7-95) 
Sec. 11-3. - Use of dumpsters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any materials from a dumpster marked by the city for collection of recyclable materials. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place trash, refuse or garbage in any dumpster privately maintained by any other person, partnership, corporation, association or entity without the express written permission of the person, partnership, corporation, association, or entity which shall have leased such dumpster for its own use. 
(c)  Any person violating the terms of this section or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91) 
Secs. 11-4—11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 1, 1991, added §§ 11-21—11-28. The editor has designated these sections as Art. II, with the existing §§ 11-1—11-3 designated Art. I. 

Sec. 11-21. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions may include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-22. - Office of the county emergency management director. 
It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the city that the city be a part of the county emergency management unit. The chief executive officer of the county shall nominate for appointment by the governor a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency and disaster operations plan emergency functions set forth in section 11-21. The plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-23. - County emergency management office. 
The county emergency management office shall be established around existing city and county departments, and the emergency functions described in section 11-21 above are assigned as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-24. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Stone Mountain, the Mayor separately, or jointly with the CEO, county commissioners, or in their absences, their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-25. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-26. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-27. - Liberality of construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-28. - Effective date. 
This article is effective immediately and where the provisions of this article are in conflict with existing local laws, the provisions of this article will govern, and such provisions of existing laws which are in conflict are hereby rescinded. 
A copy of this emergency management article will be attached to and become a part of the county emergency management resolution. 
(Ord. of 10-1-91) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; occupation taxes and business license fees, § 6.12; licenses, § 6.13; franchises, § 6.14; delinquent taxes and fees, § 6.18. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; cemeteries, ch. 6; environment and land development, ch. 8; health and sanitation, ch. 11; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13; truck routes, § 13-81 et seq.; prohibited activities causing noise, § 15-6; permitting disorderly conduct in place of business, § 17-3; remaining in front of public place, § 17-6; curfew for minors, § 17-38; parade and assembly, ch. 18; parks and recreation, ch. 19; signs, ch. 23; solid waste, ch. 24; subdivision regulations, ch. 26; taxation, ch. 27; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. Title 10; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. Title 43; exemptions from municipal taxes and license fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 et seq.; specific, business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Peddlers and solicitors—Licenses. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, certain words are defined as follows: 
Peddler. Any person traveling from place to place, house to house, or in or along the streets, within the city limits, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature, offering and exposing them for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. 
Solicitor. Any person traveling from place to place, house to house, or in or along the streets within the city limits, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature, for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the sale, or whether or not such vendor is collecting advance payment on the sales. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or solicitor within the city, without having a valid license issued by the city clerk. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following peddlers and solicitors are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Minors under the age of eighteen (18) engaged in the solicitation of donations or the sale of any type of property for the purpose of financing extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs, provided that such solicitation activities shall have been approved by the principal of the school sponsoring such social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs. 
(2)  Political candidates engaged in the solicitation of campaign contributions provided that at the time of such solicitation, each such candidate has formally qualified and is seeking election to a local, state or national elective office. 
(3)  Nonprofit, tax exempt, charitable organizations and churches. 
(d)  Application for license. Applications for licenses by peddlers and solicitors shall be made to the city clerk, shall be sworn and in written form, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and physical description of applicant; 
(2)  Address of applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted and the goods to be sold, and if the goods are farm or orchard products, statement whether they are produced or grown by the applicant; 
(4)  The name and address of the person, firm or corporation which the applicant represents; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to business is desired; 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with the state issued vehicle license tag number. 
(e)  License fees. The fee for solicitors and peddlers shall be: 
(1)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day, no yearly fee. 
(2)  Additional licenses may be issued to employees of a license holder on the payment of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day. 
(f)  Right of appeal following denial. If a license is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial to the city manager. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city manager a written statement of the grounds for appeal within ten (10) days after notice of denial 
(g)  Transfer of license. Licenses issued under this section shall not be assigned or transferred, nor shall they be used by any person other than the person to whom they were issued. 
(h)  Suspension and revocation of license. Licenses issued under this section may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent obtaining of the license by giving false information on any substantial matter in the application for the license; 
(2)  Any violation of the provisions of this section; 
(3)  Conviction of the license holder of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude; 
(4)  Conducting the soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to be a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of the city. 
(i)  License to be carried. Every peddler or solicitor, at all times while engaged in peddling or soliciting shall carry the licenses issued to him or her under this section, together with any other license required of him or her by the provisions of this Code. 
(j)  Vehicle tag. Every vehicle used for peddling or soliciting shall display, in a conspicuous place on the vehicle, a windshield tag or sticker furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, adopted October 5, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former § 12-1 and adding a new § 12-1. Former § 12-1 pertained to peddling and soliciting without a license, and derived from the Code of 1976, § 10-5002. 
Sec. 12-2. - Same—Regulations. 
The following rules and regulations shall be complied with by every peddler or solicitor: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to sell or attempt to sell any goods, wares, or merchandise by means of any shout, outcry, sound, speaker or amplifier, or any instrument or device which can be heard for a distance greater than two hundred (200) feet, on any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or on any private premises in the city. 
(2)  A peddler or solicitor shall not have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, shall not be permitted to operate in any congested area where his or her operations might impede or inconvenience the public. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor for the purposes of soliciting or peddling to ring the bell, knock at the door or enter into any building when a sign has been posted on the building stating "No Soliciting or Peddling," or words to that effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, adopted October 5, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former § 12-2 and adding a new § 12-2. Former § 12-2 pertained to door-to-door selling or soliciting, and derived from the Code of 1976, § 10-5002. 
Sec. 12-3. - Same—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of sections 12-1 and 12-2 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or in which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, adopted October 5, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former § 12-3 and adding a new § 12-3. Former § 12-3 pertained to transient or temporary retail and wholesale sales of goods and merchandise not produced or processed on the premises, and derived from the Code of 1976, § 10-5002. 
Sec. 12-4. - Billiard rooms. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
(2)  Billiards means any of several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions which balls are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the games known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards" and "English billiards." 
(b)  No billiard room shall operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served or allowed to be used in or on the premises of a billiard room or any place operated in connection therewith unless such premises or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages and derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private industrial concerns, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Code 1976, §§ 10-5003, 10-5005; Ord. No. 2010-03, pt. I, 4-6-2010) 
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. Title 43, Ch. 8, § 43-8-15, reads as follows: Effect of local ordinances. This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the issuance of billiard room licenses by city officials or county governing authorities for the operation of public billiard rooms in any municipal corporation where the operation of a public billiard room is prohibited by local ordinance. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Sec. 12-5. - Coin operated amusement machines. 
Every business owner, except an owner holding a bona fide coin operated amusement machine solely for personal use or resale, who offers others the opportunity to play for a charge, whether directly or indirectly, any bona fide coin operated amusement machine shall be considered as engaged in the business of an operator or proprietor of coin-operated amusement machines, as the terms are herein defined, and shall be subject to the following regulations. 
(1)  Definitions. 
a.  Amusement center. An "amusement center" is hereby defined as any establishment where any coin-operated amusement machine is provided for play to the public. 
b.  Coin-operated amusement machine. "Coin-operated amusement machine" means: Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to subsections (b) through (f) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
—Pinball machines; 
—Console machines; 
—Crane machines; 
—Claw machines; 
—Pusher machines; 
—Bowling machines; 
—Novelty arcade games; 
—Foosball or table soccer machines; 
—Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
—Target or shooting gallery machines; 
—Basketball machines; 
—Shuffleboard machines; 
—Kiddy ride games; 
—Skeeball machines; 
—Air hockey machines; 
—Roll down machines; and 
—Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
—Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
—Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
—Gas and electric meters; 
—Pay telephones; 
—Pay toilets; 
—Cigarette vending machines; 
—Coin-operated vending machines; 
—Coin-operated scales; 
—Coin-operated gumball machines; 
—Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
—Coin-operated massage beds; and 
—Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table for the playing of "billiards" as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; 
—Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia; 
—Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
c.  Operator. The term "operator" as used herein is hereby defined to be any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up for operation by another and leases or rents for the purpose of operation by another machines as herein regulated, whether such leasing or renting be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise. 
d.  Proprietor. A "proprietor" is hereby defined to be any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who, as the owner or lessee, has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement machine is placed or kept for use or play, or an exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(2)  Operating regulations. All businesses operating as an amusement center hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
b.  Inspection. The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine(s) are operated or set up for operation, and shall inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
c.  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, pt. I, 4-6-2010) 
Secs. 12-6—12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-1, adopted February 13, 1995, repealed §§ 12-31—12-70 and enacted new §§ 12-1—12-32. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 6-1001—6-1003, 6-1007—6-1012, 6-1014, 6-1015, 6-1021(3) of the 1976 Code; Ord. of 10-6-87, App. 1, 6-1012, 6-1021(1), (2), (4)—(10); Ord. of 12-3-91(2); Ord. of 11-10-92, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-94(2), § I. However, in order to provide better classification, §§ 12-1—12-32 were redesignated as 12-36—12-67 at the editor's discretion. Ordinance No. 95-5, adopted April 4, 1995, repealed §§ 12-71—12-82 and enacted new §§ 12-71—12-81. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. of 10-6-87, §§ 6-1022(10)—(12). An ordinance adopted December 5, 1995 repealed §§ 12-1—12-32 which were designated as 12-36—12-67. Formerly, such sections pertained to Ord. No. 95-1, §§ 12-1—12-32, 2-13-95. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-26—12-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OCCUPATION TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-02, adopted April 5, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former div. 2, §§ 12-36—12-66, and adding a new div. 2. Former div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of December 5, 1995; Ord. No. 97-8, adopted May 6, 1997; and Ord. No. 07-01, adopted February 6, 2007. 

Sec. 12-36. - Required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
(a)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for the business, trade, profession or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such occupational tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk, code enforcement officer and/or police officers of the city, upon request. 
(b)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Chapter 3 of Title 46. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Persons engaged in recreation activities sponsored by the parks and recreation department of the city. 
(12)  The following classes of persons may peddle, conduct business, or practice the professions and semi-professions without paying an occupation tax, administrative fee, or regulatory fee for the privilege of so doing: 
a.  Any disabled veteran of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
b.  Any blind person; or 
c.  Any veteran of peace-time service in the United States armed forces who has a physical disability incurred during the period of such service; provided such person receives a certificate of exemption issued by the commissioner of veterans service, has furnished proof of disability, and provides documentation that the person making application is a resident of this state and that the income of such person is such that he or she is not liable for the payment of state income taxes, subject to O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax, or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Number of employees shall be computed on a full-time position basis. An owner and/or manager, or an employee who works forty (40) hours or more per week, shall be considered a full-time employee. Employees who work less than forty (40) hours per week shall be considered for the purpose of this division a part-time employee. Each part-time employee shall be considered to be equal to one-half (½) of a full-time employee. The total number of employees shall be the sum of all full-time employees plus all part-time employees rounded to the next whole number. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization (but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize one hundred (100) percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes). 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-38. - Administration. 
The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the levying and assessment and collection of the occupational tax and penalties. The clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of the state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the collection of the occupational tax fees. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-39. - Occupation tax levied. 
An occupational tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-13-7 based on the number of employees of the business or practitioner. The tax rate shall be that rate adopted by resolution of the city council and maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-40. - Paying occupation tax on business with no location in state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-41. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-42. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-43. - Professionals as classified in state law, paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs (1) through (18) shall pay their tax based on the number of employees as all other businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-44. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-45. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes; nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-46. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax is delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. The certificate and occupation tax shall be due and payable annually within thirty (30) days of January 1, of each year and shall, if not paid by May 1 of each year, be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due. On any new profession, trade or business begun in the city before July of any year, the certificate and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) percent penalty imposed if not paid within 90 days from the date business is commenced. When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. Any certificate not renewed prior to May 1 shall be suspended. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies available to the city for the collection of occupation taxes from persons subject to the tax who fail or refuse to pay the tax, the city municipal court is authorized to impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-47. - Occupational tax registration to be displayed. 
All persons shall exhibit and display the occupation tax registration issued to them in some conspicuous place in their business establishment. Any transient person doing business within the city, and liable for occupational tax within the city, shall carry such registration either upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which he uses in such business; and such person shall exhibit the registration to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-48. - License transferable. 
All occupational tax registrations shall be transferable for a business moving from one location to another, within the city, if such person or business notifies the city clerk in writing of such new address no later than the day of moving. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-49. - Duration of occupational tax. 
Each occupational tax issued under this article shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-50. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid or have the license available for review at the request of a city enforcement official. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-51. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-52. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-53. - Amendment, repeal of provisions. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time; and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. An amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-54. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this chapter; and in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration before commencing business; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration shall be subject to penalties provided for failure to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-55. - Applications of provisions to prior provisions. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this chapter, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-56. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendments adopted by the city council. All provisions relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and in effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-57. - Appeals. 
Any person who desires to contest the determination of the city clerk with respect to any provision of this chapter shall so notify the mayor in writing within ten (10) days of such determination, specifying the reasons such person believes the determination of the clerk is incorrect. The mayor shall thereupon notify such person of the time and place of the next meeting of the council, or of an occupational tax review board consisting of not less than three (3) members of the council; and such aggrieved person may appear at such time and place to present arguments as to why the determination of the clerk is incorrect. The determination of the council or of the review board appointed by the council, as the case may be, with respect to the contested determination of the clerk shall be binding and conclusive upon such person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 12-58. - Requirement of public hearing. 
The city council shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will set or increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-5-11) 
Secs. 12-59—12-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 12-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this division and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The city as hereinafter referred to shall mean the incorporated limits of the City of Stone Mountain, Dekalb County, State of Georgia and such other areas as the city may be empowered to impose taxes within. 
Due date. The twentieth (20th) day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel, which demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excises tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. A room(s) occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truckstop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, bed and breakfast inn, time-share or other condominium, public club or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether that rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room(s). 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator. Any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten (10) consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The hotel-motel excise tax imposed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-72. - Tax rate; applicability; maximum rate. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51, there is hereby levied an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room, lodging or accommodations furnished by any person licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten (10) consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one (1) or more consecutive days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. No tax levied pursuant to this section shall be levied or collected at a rate exceeding five (5) percent of the charge to the public for the furnishings. The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(D)(3). Any action by the city to increase the tax imposed under this section above five (5) percent shall become effective no sooner than the first day of the second month following its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95; Ord. No. 05-13, pt. I, 6-7-05) 
Sec. 12-73. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of five (5) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant, unless an exemption is provided under section 12-74. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-74. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from a permanent resident; the United States and the state or any instrumentality of either thereof; or any official or employee of this state, or of its units of local government, or of any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-75. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city manager on a form provided by such official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date that this division becomes effective. 
(b)  Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city manager. The registration shall be signed b the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, buy a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city manager shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-76. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city manager monthly on or before the twentieth (20th) day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of taxes when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city manager showing the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city manager. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction for submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act," as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-77. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city manager is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city manager shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth (20th) day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-78. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city manager shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city manager. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 12-77(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-79. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city manager may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount of delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this division sells his business or ceases operation of the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city manager either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the tax as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the city manager. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city manager, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city manager, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-80. - Administration of ordinance; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city manager. The city manager or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this division for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city manager may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city manager or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return make or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this division, the city manager may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager when required by such official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city manager shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 12-81. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this division is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city manager, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 95-5, 4-4-95) 
Secs. 12-82—12-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR CAFES AND DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, adopted October 6, 2009, amended the Code by repealing former art. III, §§; 12-111 and 12-112, and adding a new art. III, §§ 12-106—12-117. Former art. III pertained to display of merchandise, and derived from ordinances of July 12, 1988 and September 6, 1988, and Ord. No. 04-03, adopted February 19, 2004. 

Sec. 12-106. - Purpose. 
This article shall apply to the establishment, operation and maintenance of all outdoor cafes and any outdoor display of merchandise on public property within the city. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the city for the benefit of all businesses and citizens located there, and no right of individuals or individual businesses are created therein, and to create an aesthetic ambiance which will attract residents and visitors to the downtown area. Further, this article is designed to allow an array of cafe tables adjacent to a restaurant where customers dine undisturbed and/or allow outside displays by organizations, establishments or businesses for vending goods, for distributing information or for displaying goods while allowing pedestrians to stroll by and shall not impede the efficiency of the pedestrian path. The city manager and zoning administrator shall have broad discretion to grant, modify, or revoke permits pursuant to this article in the interests of improving the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 12-107. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Design requirements means the standards adopted with this article that guide design and materials in encroachment areas. 
Encroachment means tables, umbrellas, chairs, or objects related to the business on the public right-of-way, sidewalk or common area on public property. 
Outdoor cafe means the placing, locating, or permitting of the placing or locating of chairs and tables on the right-of-way, such as sidewalks, adjacent to a business licensed to operate as an eating establishment where food and other refreshments are served or upon public property within designated areas. 
Outdoor display of merchandise shall mean the placement of single or multiple tables or displays by organizations, establishments or businesses for vending goods, for distributing information or for displaying goods. 
Permittee means the recipient of an encroachment permit under this article. 
Sidewalk means that area of public right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines reserved for pedestrian traffic, not including street crossings. 
Zoning administrator means the city clerk or the person authorized to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 12-108. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Under this chapter, no merchant, vendor, business or property owner shall: 
(1)  Place any tables, chairs or merchandise on any portion of the public property other than that directly in front of his existing place of business. In no event shall such items be placed in the landscaped areas. 
(2)  Block or restrict the passageway to less than five (5) feet in width or block the ingress/egress to any building. 
(3)  No items shall be placed so as to block any driveway, crosswalk, or counter service window. 
(4)  Arrange any tables, chairs, merchandise or decorations so as to impede the efficiency of the pedestrian path. In areas of congested pedestrian activity, the zoning administrator is authorized to require a wider pedestrian path for the protection and welfare of the public. 
(5)  Sublicense the encroachment area separately to non-occupants of the premises. 
(6)  Place objects around the perimeter of an area occupied by tables and chairs which would have the effect of forming a visual barrier. 
(7)  Use tables, chairs, umbrellas and any other objects of such quality, design, materials, and workmanship that are not approved or otherwise authorized by the zoning administrator. 
(8)  Use umbrellas or other decorative material which are not fire retardant, pressure treated, or manufactured of fire resistive material. 
(9)  Fail to secure permission of the landlord where a building has multiple occupants. 
(10)  Vend or display without the insurance coverage specified. 
(11)  Sound or permit the sounding of any device on the public property which produces a loud noise or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device in violation of the noise regulations in chapter 15, noise control. The city reserves the right to decrease noise levels of businesses if interfering with public activities. 
(12)  Fail to daily pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse left by the business on the public right-of-way. 
(13)  Store, park, or leave any stand or items overnight on any street or sidewalk except for tables, chairs and umbrellas which may be kept in the permitted area at the permittee's risk. All tables, chairs and umbrellas left overnight on any street or sidewalk must be secured from being moved by forces of nature (wind) or unauthorized persons. 
(14)  Store, park, or leave any vehicle, truck, or trailer within the encroachment area. 
(15)  Use the encroachment area to stock or store tables, chairs, or other items not in use except when stored in an approved location designated on the application. 
(16)  Fail to daily remove from the public right-of-way all grease, stains, food spots, etc. caused by the operation of the outdoor cafe. 
(17)  Vending conducted from any conveyance or in any mode other than from a city approved cart, stand or skirted table. Grocery carts or cardboard boxes are prohibited from being used as displays. 
(18)  Display of merchandise on the ground, on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering. 
(19)  No vending machines are permitted on any building that is also operating as an outdoor cafe. 
(20)  The consumption of alcohol or open container of alcoholic beverage on any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park or picnic area, or designated and approved outdoor café area except for conditions provided within section 3-5(c) of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The encroachment permit is a temporary license which may be denied, suspended or revoked for any conduct which is contrary to this section or for conduct of the business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the operator's or public's health, safety, or welfare. No property right is created by this article, and the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09; Ord. No. 2017-02, pt. I, § 1, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 12-109. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in the business of running an outdoor cafe, place outdoor cafe items or place single or multiple tables or displays by organizations, establishments or businesses for vending goods, for distributing information or for displaying goods upon the sidewalks or public property in the city unless he shall hold a currently valid permit issued under the terms of this article. 
(b)  A permit shall be issued only to a valid licensed business or non-profit business/organization located within the city that wishes to provide tables and chairs on the public property directly adjacent to the business to be used by the general public or for the outdoor display of merchandise. 
(c)  A permit shall only be issued for the operation of an outdoor cafe directly adjacent to and by a restaurant which receives over fifty (50) percent of its annual revenue from the sale of prepared food items including soft drinks and coffee. 
(d)  No permit is required for any activity promoted or sanctioned by Main Street Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09; Ord. No. 2013-09, pt. I, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 12-110. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by this article shall be made at city hall in a form prepared and deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator. Such application shall include but is not limited to the following information: 
(1)  The name, home and business address, and telephone number of the applicant, and the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the business. 
(2)  The name, home address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's encroachment. 
(3)  A copy of a valid occupational tax certificate to operate a business establishment adjacent to the public property, which is the subject of the application. 
(4)  Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the encroachment permit. The policy shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator for verification that the insurance adequately protects the city and meets the intent of this section. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without thirty (30) days' advanced written notice to the city. The policy shall be a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or higher, if deemed necessary by the city attorney. 
(5)  A sketch to scale of the proposed location showing the layout and dimensions of the existing public area and adjacent private property. This shall include the location of tables, chairs, enclosures (including type, material, and height), umbrellas, heaters, other outside furnishings, and any temporary overnight storage areas. 
(6)  Proof of any required alcohol license, health permits or other state permits for the business involved. 
(7)  Photographs, drawings, or manufacturer's brochures fully describing the appearance of all proposed tables, chairs, umbrellas, or other objects related to the business including fire resistant and/or pressure treated certifications. Umbrellas shall be placed so that they do not pose a hazard to pedestrians. Plastic tables or chairs shall not be allowed. 
(b)  Fees for the use of public property permitted by this article shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
Not later than fifteen (15) days after the filing of a complete application for a temporary encroachment permit, the applicant shall be notified by the zoning administrator of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. 
Fees for the use of public property are in addition to the occupational tax certificate required for operation within the city. No fees shall be charged for encroachments solely for the purpose of beautification, but all other provisions of this section shall apply. 
(c)  Application for a permit shall be made at city hall within forty-eight (48) hours of written notice for failure to obtain a permit. Where the same owner, occupant, or person responsible has been given notice for the same violation at the same location within the previous one hundred eighty (180) days, such requirements of written notice may be waived and legal proceedings commenced immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09; Ord. No. 2013-09, pt. I, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 12-111. - Form and conditions of permit. 
The permit required by this article shall be issued on a form prepared by the zoning administrator. In addition to naming the permittee and any other information deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator, the permit shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  Each permit shall be effective for one (1) year, from January 1 to December 31, subject to annual renewal, unless revoked or suspended prior to expiration. No fees will be refunded. 
a.  The permit issued shall be personal to the permittee, only, and shall not be transferable in any manner. 
b.  Sale, lease, sublease or any transfer of business ownership shall render the permit null and void. 
c.  The permit may be suspended by the zoning administrator when necessary to clear the public property for public safety or for a community or special event authorized by a permit issued by the city. 
d.  The zoning administrator may require the temporary removal of items within the encroachment area when street, sidewalk, common areas or utility repairs necessitate such action. 
e.  The permit shall be specifically limited to the area shown on the site plan attached to and made part of the permit. 
f.  The encroachment area covered by the permit shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times, and the area shall be cleared of all debris on a periodic basis during the day and again at the close of each business day. 
g.  No temporary advertising is allowed in the encroachment area except for the posting of menu items or prices on approved equipment or objects. 
h.  Each umbrella shall be of singular base color. 
i.  No tables and chairs or any other parts of the business shall be attached, chained, or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, other fixture, curb or sidewalk within or near the permitted area. 
j.  The issuance of a permit does not grant or infer vested rights to use of the area by the permittee. The city retains the right to deny the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit for any reason. 
k.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and any other objects provided shall be maintained with a clean and attractive appearance and shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times. 
l.  The city retains the right to suspend the privilege of using glass containers within the encroachment area during festivals and events and when streets are closed. The use of glass containers will be revoked if an incident jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of customers or the general public. Any violation of state or local laws will also result in a revocation of this privilege. Repeated offenses may result in revocation or denial of the encroachment permit. 
m.  All signs shall comply with the sign ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 12-112. - Denial, revocation or suspension; removal and storage fees; emergencies. 
(a)  Under this article, the zoning administrator or designee may deny, revoke, or suspend a permit at any time for any business authorized in the city if it is found that: 
(1)  Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended, revoked or canceled. 
(2)  The permittee does not have insurance in force which is correct and effective in the minimum amount described herein. 
(3)  Changing conditions of pedestrian or vehicular traffic cause congestion necessitating removal of the encroachment. Such decision shall be based upon findings of the zoning administrator that the minimum five-foot pedestrian path is insufficient under existing circumstances and represents a danger to the health, safety, or general welfare of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(4)  The permittee has failed to correct violations of this chapter or conditions of his permit upon receipt of the zoning administrator's notice of violations delivered in writing to the permittee. 
(5)  The permittee has failed to take positive actions to prohibit violations from recurring. 
(6)  The permittee has failed to make modifications upon receipt of the zoning administrator's notice of modifications delivered in writing to the permittee. 
(b)  Tables, chairs and other vestiges of the business may be removed by the public works department, and a reasonable fee shall be charged for labor, transportation, and storage; if the permittee fails to remove the items within thirty-six (36) hours of receipt of the zoning administrator's final notice to do so for any reason provided for under this article. If the action is taken based on subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section, the action shall become effective upon the receipt of such notice, and the permittee shall have four (4) hours to remove the items. 
(c)  Upon denial or revocation, the zoning administrator shall give notice of such action to the applicant or the permittee in writing stating the action which has been taken and the reason therefor. The action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the permittee. 
(d)  The permittee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the city manager within five (5) working days from receipt of notice. An appeal does not stay the denial or revocation of the encroachment permit. The hearing shall be held within two (2) working days from the date of notice of the request. The permittee or applicant may be represented by an attorney and may present witnesses, affidavits and any relevant documentary evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The city manager or his designee shall notify the permittee or applicant of the determination in writing within five (5) days following the date of the hearing. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment or by both as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 12-113. - Indemnity. 
As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the city, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 12-114. - Americans With Disabilities Act. 
Any person or entity receiving a permit hereunder agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 12-115. - Liability. 
The city shall not be liable to any permittee or any license holder for any damage, loss, inconvenience, business interruption, demolition, loss of business, loss of property or any other loss as a result of any public safety emergency vehicle responding to an emergency call which must encroach upon the public right-of-way of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 12-116. - Yard sales. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent yard sales by citizens of the city so long as such yard sales are located on the property of the citizen who is conducting the yard sale and such citizen shall apply for a permit to engage in such activity; nor shall this article prevent merchants with occupational licenses from conducting such sales on the premises designated as their business address in their application for an occupational license; however merchants shall also apply for a permit to conduct yard sales. No fee shall be required for issuance of a yard sale permit to citizens conducting yard sales on their own property or to merchants as provided herein. Yard sales may be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 am and 5:00 pm local time. No property address, business or private, shall have more than four (4) yard sales per calendar year nor more than two (2) such yard sales in any one (1) calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. I, 10-6-09) 
Secs. 12-117—12-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICABS, LIMOUSINES AND OTHER PASSENGER-CARRYING VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 4, 1990, amended this article to read as set out in §§ 12-136—12-145. The article was previously entitled "Taxicabs and Sightseeing Cars," consisted of §§ 12-136—12-147, and was derived from Code 1976, §§ 6-1021—6-1031. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2; motor vehicle accident insurance, O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq.; liability of owner of leased vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207; "proof of financial responsibility" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-2(5). 

Sec. 12-136. - Definitions. 
(a)  Business license means the license required of any business operating within the city. 
(b)  Driver means an individual permitted to drive a vehicle for hire. 
(c)  Extended limousine means a sedan-type motor vehicle capable of normally transporting no fewer than nine (9) persons, including the driver. 
(d)  Fees means nonrefundable payments required in this article. 
(e)  Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than nine (9) passengers with a minimum of five (5) seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and a limousine. 
(f)  Limousine service means service regularly rendered to the public by furnishing transportation for hire, not over fixed routes, by means of limousines or extended limousines operated by chauffeurs, on the basis of telephone contact, written contract, or other prearrangement with the holder of the business license. 
(g)  Permit means the written authority granted to persons who qualify to drive vehicles for hire. 
(h)  Taxicab means a motor vehicle used as a public conveyance, subject to the rules and regulations of this article. 
(i)  Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the time the vehicle travels or is in waiting, and to indicate the fare to be charged. 
(j)  Vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle, animal-drawn vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the transportation of passengers for hire, the charges for the use of which are determined by agreement, mileage or by the length of time for which the vehicle is engaged. Excluded herefrom are MARTA buses or other vehicles regulated by state public service commission. 
(k)  Van means any vehicle other than a sedan-type vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than seven (7) and not more than fifteen (15) passengers. 
(l)  Sedan includes any luxury or nonluxury sedan-type vehicle which has a seating capacity of not more than five (5) passengers and the driver. 
(m)  Contract driver means any individual permitted to drive a vehicle for hire who is an independent contractor of a business licensed under section 12-137. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1); Ord. of 2-4-92, § 1) 
Sec. 12-137. - License and driver permits required: expiration; nontransferable; posting in public view. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article and having been issued a city business license for a company base of operations located in the geographical boundaries of the city. Limousine operations having no more than three (3) vehicles for hire shall be excepted from the requirement to maintain a company base of operations located in the geographical boundaries of the city. No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and had the city inspection sticker affixed nor contract with any driver that has not first met the requirements of this chapter and been issued a driver's permit. Driver's permits shall not be issued to any driver not employed by, contracting with, or representing a licensed company. All company licenses, individual vehicle stickers and driver permits are nontransferable and shall expire on December 31 of each year; licensees should contact the police department November 15 of each year for renewal scheduling. The company license must be posted in public view at the licensed locaton; driver permits are to be posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1)); Ord. of 2-4-92, § 2) 
Sec. 12-138. - Doing business defined; license requirements; fees. 
(a)  Any person shall be deemed doing business in the city under this article if such person or entity is picking up passengers in the city or operating from a central base located within the city or if such person or entity is picking up passengers and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed as doing busines in the city under this article if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates vehicles for hire on his own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the city. 
(b)  Any applicant for a license to operate a business under this article is required to provide information showing qualifications on a form provided by the records department, to provide information requested by the police department, and to submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and fingerprinting. If the applicant is other than that of a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten (10) per cent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this article. An applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Have not been convicted, been on probation or parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five (5) years previous to the date of application for the violation of any of the following offenses of this state, or any other state, or of the United States: homicide, rape, aggravated battery, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, child molestation, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, any felony where a motor vehicle was used, any crime of violence or theft, any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs, or any crime of moral turpitude. First offender status is recognized. 
(4)  Show on the application of a company dispatch location or dispatch terminus location within the geographical boundaries of the city from which business will be conducted. Applicants for limousine operations having no more than three (3) vehicles for hire shall be excepted from having a city-based business location. The indicated company location must meet all applicable city zoning or ordinance requirements. The dispatch location must be staffed by company agents or employees, have a published telephone number, and have sufficient off-street parking for accommodating its vehicles for hire when not in use. 
(5)  Maintain an automobile liability insurance policy or appropriate vehicle for hire insurance coverage on all vehicles licensed for use in the city, and provide a current copy of the insurance policy along with the application evidencing such coverage. A minimum of $25,000 property damage and $100,000/$300,000 liability coverage will be acceptable. The policy shall provide that the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured shall not release the insurer from the payment of damages for injuries sustained or losses that occurred while coverage is in force. It should also have a requirement stating that the city should be notified of any cancellation of the policy by the insurance carrier. It should also state that if execution against the insured is returned unsatisfied because of insolvency or bankruptcy, an action may be maintained by the injured or his personal representative against the insurer under the terms of the policy for the amount of the judgment not to exceed the policy limits. Before the policy is cancelled for nonpayment of premium or other cause, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the records department at least thirty (30) days before the policy lapses. The policy shall further provide that it shall not be cancelled or rendered unforceable because the insured failed to notify the insurer of an accident or injury, or any other condition upon which notice of claim is ordinarily required. 
(6)  File applications for the initial licensing and inspections of vehicles along with a list of all drivers that will be scheduled for driver permitting and indicate whether drivers are company employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract drivers insurance coverage in the requirements outlined above must be included in the application. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the rate schedule and the daily hours of operation. 
(8)  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in the county who will be the registered agent for the purpose of service of process. 
(c)  Each application for a business license shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) for each vehicle to be operated in the city. Fees for vehicle inspections and driver permits shall be recommended by the police department for approval by the mayor and council. Fees are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1)); Ord. of 12-3-91(2)) 
Sec. 12-139. - Driver permit requirements; responsibilities. 
(a)  No request for a driver's permit will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter on company stationery to the police department from a licensed company requesting issuance of a driver's permit to the named individual. The driver permit applicant will further furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the police department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation and fingerprinting. Driver permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Possesses a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in sections 40-5-58 and 40-5-64 of the Official Traffic Code of Georgia. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers, and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Have not been convicted, been on probation or parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five (5) years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of this state, or any other state, or of the United States: homicide, rape, aggravated battery, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, child molestation, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, any felony where a motor vehicle was used, any crime of violence or theft, any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or any crime of moral turpitude. First offender status is recognized. 
(b)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other licensing or permitting information previously supplied to the police department within ten (10) days of the change. 
(c)  All drivers who are contract drivers shall submit a copy of their written contract with the licensee hereunder at the time of their application for a driver permit. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1); Ord. of 2-4-92, § 4) 
Sec. 12-140. - Operational requirements for licensees and driver permit holders. 
(a)  Drivers must practice good personal hygiene and wear proper dress while operating a vehicle for hire. "Proper dress" shall mean the wearing of shoes, ankle-length pants, a shirt or blouse with sleeves and collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. Licensees are responsible for driver dress and conduct. 
(b)  Drivers must maintain daily trip sheets or logs of all passengers, the time, place of entry, the destination of each passenger, the amount charged, and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. Trip sheets must be transferred to and maintained at the licensed business premises for a period of six (6) months. 
(c)  Drivers are not to smoke, or use tobacco products of any type, play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
(d)  Drivers are not to drive, and company licensees are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the required markings affixed to the vehicle, a taximeter, top light, two-way radio, and inspection sticker as outlined in this article, all in proper order and working. Limousines are excepted from having markings, top lights, two-way radios or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating their company business name. 
(e)  Drivers and company licensees are responsible for maintaining each vehicle in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in this article. 
(f)  Company licensees are responsible for checking drivers to ensure that each driver has a current driver permit in his possession and posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being operated along with a visible vehicle inspection sticker. 
(g)  Company licensees are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Company licensees shall ensure that their drivers use open stands on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis. 
(h)  Company licensees shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(i)  Company licensees are responsible for violations of this article by their vehicle operators whether such operator is a direct employee or an independent contractor. 
(j)  Any licensee hereunder who shall use contract drivers shall maintain an umbrella automobile liability insurance policy or appropriate vehicle for hire insurance coverage on all vehicles permitted for use in the city and driven by contract drivers. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $25,000.00 for property damage and $100,000.00/$300,000.00 for other liability. Such insurance requirements are in addition to those required under section 12-138(b)(5) above. Provided, however, the requirements of this subsection may be satisfied through a rider to the automobile liability insurance policies or vehicle for hire insurance coverage required under section 12-138(b)(5) so long as such rider indicates that the insurance required therein shall cover contract drivers who for any reason shall fail to provide adequate insurance coverage. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1); Ord. of 2-4-92, § 3) 
Sec. 12-141. - Annual vehicle inspections; inspection stickers. 
(a)  All vehicles for hire to be used by a licensee in the city shall be inspected annually and approved by the police department. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, a sticker will be affixed to the left side of the windshield. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection shall include the rear view mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors, and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. 
(3)  The vehicle shall have a spare tire, jack and other equipment/tools required to change a tire, a functional two-way radio and taximeter in proper working condition. The taximeter is to be positioned so that it is visible from the passenger compartment. Taximeter accuracy shall be verified according to the police department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. Limousines are excepted from having a two-way radio and taximeter. 
(4)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall be subject to immediate vehicle inspection sticker removal by the police department. Additional inspection requirements may be required as needed dependent on type of vehicle use for hire. 
(b)  The inspection sticker is proof that the company met the licensing and insurance requirements at the time of license issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection. Each vehicle operator must have in his vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any company or vehicle letting insurance coverage lapse shall have its inspection sticker or stickers removed by the police department and its business license suspended or revoked by the records department. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the records department, the license reinstated, and the vehicle or vehicles reinspected and new inspection stickers issued by the police department. 
(c)  Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle and are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The records and police departments must be notified within ten (10) days of any vehicle taken out of service; stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the police department. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1)) 
Sec. 12-142. - Suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
A business license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor or his designated representative, and a drivers permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designated representative for the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for license or permit. 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or driver's permit. 
(4)  For violations of any part of this article. 
(5)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the police department. 
(6)  Having four (4) or more moving traffic violations in any twelve-month period. 
(7)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. "Sexual orientation" shall mean the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(8)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing a vehicle to operate in the city without a city inspection sticker. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1)) 
Sec. 12-143. - Hearings. 
(a)  Decisions of the records and/or police department that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant or licensee may be appealed to a business license committee. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the mayor's office within fifteen (15) days after the final decision. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing the written petition unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the presiding committee chair person or his designated representative. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(c)  The findings of the committee shall be forwarded to the mayor after the conclusion of the hearing. It shall be the duty of the mayor or his representative to notify the appellant of the action of the committee. 
(d)  The finding of the business license committee shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days by written petition to the mayor and full council from the date of findings by the committee. 
(e)  The finding of the committee shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1)) 
Sec. 12-144. - Notice. 
For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States Mail. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1)) 
Sec. 12-145. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article may, in addition to any suspension or revocation action, be punished upon conviction by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, or imprisoned in the common jail of the county for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or any combination of the above. 
(Ord. of 12-4-90(1)) 
Secs. 12-146—12-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURANCE BUSINESS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-06, adopted Oct. 1, 1996, repealed Ch. 12, Art. V, §§ 12-172—12-174, in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as herein set out. Former §§ 12-172—12-174 derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 6-1041, 6-1043 and 6-1044. 
State Law reference— Municipal licensing and taxation of insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 

Sec. 12-172. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1997 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 12-173, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. section 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, 10-1-96) 
Cross reference— Insurance taxes, § 27-1. 
Sec. 12-173. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50) per location for the year 1995 and each additional year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, 10-1-96) 
Sec. 12-174. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-172 above. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, 10-1-96) 
Sec. 12-175. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. subsection 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-172 above. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, 10-1-96) 
Sec. 12-176. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 12-172 and 12-173 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 1997 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, 10-1-96) 
Secs. 12-177—12-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNBROKERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ 1—11, 13—18 of an ordinance adopted June 13, 1990, as §§ 12-181—12-197 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. The ordinance did not contain a § 12. 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 12-181. - Definitions. 
(a)  Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time or in the business or purchasing intangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or rival dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this article. 
(b)  Pledge goods means tangible personal property other than choses in action, securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, which property is purchased by deposit with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business. 
(c)  Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association or any other legal entity, however organized. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 1) 
Sec. 12-182. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker business or pawnshop in the city without first having procured a city license therefor as hereinafter provided. A license must be obtained for each separate business location, and no license may be transferred to any person or to any other location. It shall be unlawful for any person to do pawnbroker business or attempt to do a pawn business without a license issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 2) 
Sec. 12-183. - Application for license. 
The application for a license required by section 12-182 shall state the name of and address of the person or persons if a partnership or directors and officers if a corporation, shall state the place where such business is to be carried on, and shall specify the amount of capital proposed to be used by the applicant in such business. Such persons shall not commence doing business until the application has been approved by the city council, a license fee is paid, and bond as hereinafter provided is posted with the city. License fees shall be set yearly by the city council. 
Name: 
Place of Business: 
Amount of Capital Proposed To Be Used in Such Business: 
Set of Fingerprints: 
Bond of $10,000.00 
License Fee 
A Copy of Ordinance Adopted June 13, 1990, Will Be Given With Each Application 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 3) 
Sec. 12-184. - Investigation by police department. 
All applications for pawnbroker's licenses shall be investigated by the police department to determine that the applicant is of good reputation and moral character and that all requirements of this article have been met. The applicant will also furnish with the application a set of fingerprints for the applicant, all partners of a partnership, and all directors and officers of a corporation together with all employees on such form or forms as shall be provided by the city. No license shall be issued to any applicant currently under probation for conviction of a misdemeanor or felony or any applicant who has been convicted of a felony within five (5) years of the date of application. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 4) 
Sec. 12-185. - Bond. 
An applicant for a pawnbroker's license shall file with the application a bond payable to the city conditioned for the faithful observance and performance of all provisions of this article and all state and federal laws pertaining to pawnbrokers. The bond shall be in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with a corporate surety and shall be effective for the period of issuance of the license. All licenses shall be issued on a yearly basis only. The city will furnish to all applicants the necessary application forms. Once a license has been issued, the applicant may file an application for renewal upon such forms as provided by the city; but bond is required for all licenses and renewal licenses. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 5) 
Sec. 12-186. - Posting of license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker's business in the city unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business the license certificate issued him by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 6) 
Sec. 12-187. - Forfeiture of pawn. 
The pawnbroker shall retain in his possession every pledge or pawn for a minimum period of forty (40) days after the maturity of the loan or pawn or after the last payment of interest and/or principal is due. If the pledgor shall fail or neglect for forty-one (41) days after maturity of the loan or pawn or the due date of last payment to redeem the pawned property, the pawnbroker may sell such property held for redemption without notice to the pledgor. After a loan is in default, the pawnbroker may refuse to accept any payment less than the entire principal and interest due. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 7; Ord. of 3-5-91(1)) 
Sec. 12-188. - Pawn ticket. 
Each pawnbroker shall furnish to the pledgor a printed receipt clearly showing the amount loaned with a specifically detailed description of the pledged property pawned, date of receipt thereof, date for redemption, and name of the pawnbroker and his address. The reverse side of the receipt shall be marked in such a manner that the amounts of principal and interest and any other charges paid by the person securing the loan shall be currently designated thereon. The pawnbroker shall affix to each article pledged a tag upon which shall be inscribed a number corresponding to the number on the pawn ticket as well as the name and address of the pledgor. The following information shall be printed on the front or back of each pawn ticket: 
"In the event of failure to pay the loan within ____________ days from the date hereof, or within forty-one (41) days after maturity, you shall thereby forfeit all right and title unto such pledge and pawned property to the pawnbroker." 
Each pawnbroker shall prepare and deliver to the pledgor at the time of the pledge a separate pawn ticket for each and every item pledged. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 8; Ord. of 3-5-91(1)) 
Sec. 12-189. - Maximum interest rate. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge interest exceeding two (2) percent per month on any pledge or such other rate of interest as may be provided by state law. Each pawn ticket shall provide in addition to the other required information the interest rate being charged. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 9) 
Sec. 12-190. - Memorandum of entry. 
Each pawnbroker shall at the time of each loan deliver to the person pawning or pledging any items a memorandum or note signed by him containing the substance of the entry required to be made by him in any record book as hereinafter required, the estimated value of the items pledged, the amount of the loan, interest rate thereon, and dates for all payments. The memorandum or note may be combined with the pawn ticket. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 10) 
Sec. 12-191. - Recording entry. 
Each pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase or sale the date of the transaction, the name of the person or persons conducting the transaction, the name, age and address of the customer, the drivers license or social security number of the customer, description of the property pledged and if available the serial and/or model number, the number of the pawn ticket, the amount of the loan, and maturity of the loan. Entry shall be in ink or type and shall be in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line through the entry without destroying its legibility with the correction signed by the customer. The book shall be open to inspection by any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. In addition, each pawnbroker must furnish this same information on a weekly basis to the police department, due by 12:00 p.m. on each Monday, covering the previous week's transactions, or on a daily basis if requested by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 11) 
Sec. 12-192. - Safekeeping of pledges. 
Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions of this article shall provide a safe place for the keeping of pledges received by him and shall have sufficient insurance on the property held as pledges for the benefit of the pledgors in case of destruction by fire, water or any other natural or unnatural hazard, as well as theft. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 13) 
Sec. 12-193. - Acts of employees. 
The holder of a pawnbroker's license shall be responsible for any and all acts of his employees and for any violation by them of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 14) 
Sec. 12-194. - Employee registration. 
Each pawnbroker shall, within three (3) days from hiring an employee, register with the police department the name and address of employee and shall furnish the fingerprints of the employee on such form as is provided by the police department. The prohibition pertaining to pawnbrokers for prior convictions of misdemeanors and felonies provided in section 2-184 shall also apply to employees. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 15) 
Sec. 12-195. - Revocation of license. 
Upon conviction of violation of any provision of this article, the city council shall revoke such license. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 16) 
Sec. 12-196. - Penalty. 
Any pawnbroker violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction be fined a maximum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense and/or incarceration for a period of not more than thirty (30) days or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 17) 
Sec. 12-197. - Appeal from adverse action. 
Any person applying for a pawnbroker's license whose application is denied or any person whose pawnbroker's license is revoked may appeal such action by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager's office within ten (10) days after receiving certain notice of denial of the application or revocation of the license. Such appeal shall be heard by the mayor and council at a hearing to be held no more than twenty (20) days after receipt of notice of the appeal unless the person appearing shall consent in writing to be represented by counsel and to present such evidence as he deems germane to the issue of denial of application or revocation of license. Such person appealing shall have the right to have the hearing reported by a court reporter, and all action taken by the mayor and council shall be by a majority vote. 
(Ord. of 6-13-90, § 18) 
Secs. 12-198—12-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LEVY AND COLLECTION OF BUSINESS LICENSE TAX FROM DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LOCATED WITHIN CITY 

Sec. 12-201. - Levied. 
There is hereby levied on depository financial institutions located within the city a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts, as defined and allocated in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, of such depository financial institutions. For purposes of this article, "gross receipts" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 96-5, 5-7-96) 
Sec. 12-202. - Minimum annual business license tax for depository financial institutions. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from depository financial institutions located within the city shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-5, 5-7-96) 
Secs. 12-203—12-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 12-301. - Findings; public purpose; legal authority. 
(a)  Based upon the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by the city, and based upon a review of a report from the Stone Mountain city police chief concerning increased criminal activity around establishments providing adult entertainment and the expenditure of additional funds for law enforcement to combat such criminal activity, we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment", begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for the allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(b)  This article is also adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Article III, Section VI, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  This article is further adopted to protect the public safety, health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-302. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which is offered for sale any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities: or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas, but which business does not have a valid license to sell alcoholic beverages as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observations by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent is net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion; or an assembly of persons united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, but which business does not have a valid license to sell alcoholic beverages as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Explicit media outlet means any commercial establishment which has an inventory of goods that is composed of at least fifty (50) percent of books, pamphlets, magazines, or other printed publications, films, or other media which depict sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five (5) years. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Sexually explicit nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a full opaque covering or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state which, to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or public region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: Anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty, masturbation which, to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-303. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without a valid adult entertainment occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year an adult entertainment establishment applicant shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the applicant's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment applicant shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, shall be closed between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and 2:55 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(g)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(h)  No adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore or other establishment regulated or defined in this article shall sell or offer to sell any of its stock in trade or other merchandise to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(i)  If any portion, or subparagraph, of this section of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-304. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, public area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-305. - Occupation tax certificate required. 
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments, defined in this chapter, without an occupation tax certificate so to do. No occupation tax certificate so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-306. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid occupation tax certificate or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, which occupation tax certificate shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-307. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-308. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold to offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-309. - Location. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, government building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
(3)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which a pool hall, establishment engaged in retail package sales of distilled spirits, or another establishment regulated or defined in this article of Chapter 12 is located. 
(4)  Within any zoning category other than the following category: Neighborhood and Highway Business C-2. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured along a straight line from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-310. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult use establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this chapter for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term convicted shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The terms employed as an adult use establishment employee and work on any licensed premises shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he shall file a notice with the permitting officer of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (a) hereinabove. The city shall have fifteen (15) days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the permitting officer shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed within ten (10) days thereafter to city council who shall issue such order as is required. The decision of the city council may thereafter be appealed, within thirty (30) days, to DeKalb Superior Court. An investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the permitting officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time of notice filed. 
(c)  Suspension; revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this code, the ordinances of the city laws and regulations of the state or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-311. - Application for occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain an occupation tax certificate to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager, or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a processing fee of five thousand ($5,000.00) shall be paid to the business license manager to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. This business license manager shall issue a receipt showing that such processing fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-312. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full true name. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation. 
(5)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or occupation tax certificate for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one (1) of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five (5) years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(9)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the occupation tax certificate is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The business license manager shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(10)  Address of the premises to be regulated. 
(11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(12)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 12-309 which provide that no adult business or use restricted shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family use or purposes; within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel upon which a pool hall, establishment engaged in retail package sales of distilled spirits, or another establishment regulated or defined in this article is located; or within any zoning category other than neighborhood and highway business C-2. 
(13)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-313. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-314. - Application—Investigation. 
The city shall process all applications for adult entertainment establishment permits within forty-five (45) days of the city's actual receipt of an application for a license. The city clerk shall reject any application containing any false material statements or omissions. Any rejected application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been resubmitted on the date of re-submission, instead of the original date of submission. Should it be determined that an application for an adult entertainment establishment permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement, the city clerk shall revoke said application and the subject adult entertainment establishment permit shall be revoked. If the city does not process an application for an adult entertainment establishment permit within forty-five (45) days as set forth above in this paragraph then the applicant shall be permitted operation of the business for which the permit is sought unless and until the city clerk notifies the applicant of a denial of the application. [Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit at its next regular meeting if it finds:] 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  Application conforms in all respect to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, if attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses. 
(6)  Applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws. 
(8)  The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not within five (5) years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which an occupation tax certificate is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family uses or purposes; within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel upon which a pool hall, establishment engaged in retail package sales of distilled spirits, or another establishment regulated or defined in this article is located; and within any zoning category other than neighborhood and highway business C-2. 
(12)  That the grant of such occupation tax certificate will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 02-14, Pt. I, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 12-315. - Persons prohibited as applicants. 
No occupation tax certificate provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-316. - Occupation tax certificate—Refusal, appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within forty-five (45) days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall within ten (10) days, notify applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an occupation tax certificate may appeal such denial to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk. A hearing before mayor and council shall be scheduled within forty-five (45) days of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-317. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Occupation tax certificates for adult entertainment establishments expire on December 31 of each year and may be renewed provided that the applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. Renewal applications shall be due by January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-318. - Occupation tax certificate nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that it the applicant is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such occupation tax certificate, and in such case, the occupation tax certificate upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an occupation tax certificate is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-319. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its occupation tax certificate until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the mayor and council for the city. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's codes, have been met. 
(b)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his occupation tax certificate. 
(c)  Any application for an extension of expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-320. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The applicant shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-321. - Appeal—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-322. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, over-rule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-323. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-324. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-325. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. 
(b)  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and chief of police. 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten (10) days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-326. - Hearing officer report—Action by council. 
The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-327. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-328. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-329. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an occupation tax certificate, the chief of police shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five (5) days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate in the event of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
(3)  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
(4)  An applicant has violated any provision of this adult entertainment chapter; 
(5)  An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter; and 
(6)  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation tax fine or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any occupation tax certificate hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one (1) day nor more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. No applicant may apply for an occupation tax certificate during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of either. 
(d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council for the city by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and council for the city within forty-five (45) days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the mayor and city council, the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be to the Superior Court of DeKalb County filed within thirty (30) days of the final action of the mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-330. - Occupation tax certificate and annual renewal fees. 
The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax and any renewal fee for such occupation tax certificate shall be based on the gross receipts schedule pursuant to the ordinance providing for the issuance of such occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-331. - Unlawful to serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer, wine, distilled spirits or controlled substance upon premises of licensee. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under this chapter of the City Code after the effective date of this article shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine, distilled spirits or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. Any licensee whose license was granted prior to the adoption of this amendment shall not be subject to this amendment until December 31, 1998, at which time all licensees within the city shall be subject to this provision, including those licensees licensed before the effective date hereof. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the premises of nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas or ballets at any mainstream theater, concert, hall, museum or educational institution which derives less than twenty (20) percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 12-332. - Change of location. 
There is established an administrative fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to apply for a change of location for an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, Pt. 1, 8-4-98) 
Chapter 13 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Open container of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicle, § 3-5; animals, ch. 4; cemeteries, ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, ch. 10; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; taxicabs and sightseeing cars, § 12-136 et seq.; noise control, ch. 15; prohibited activities causing noise, § 15-6; sleeping in parked vehicle, § 17-7; criminal trespass by motor vehicle, § 17-10; parade and assembly, ch. 18; police, ch. 21; signs, ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25; off-street parking and loading regulations under zoning ordinance, app. A, art. VII. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal parking facilities, art. IX, § II, par. III. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. Title 40; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; local powers generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, 40-6-1 through 40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1022) 
Sec. 13-2. - Reserved 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-06, pt. I, adopted March 7, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former § 13-2 in its entirety. Former § 13-2 pertained to regulation of traffic at the cemetery; and derived from an ordinance of November 4, 1987. 
Cross reference— Cemeteries, ch. 6. 
Sec. 13-3. - Regulation of flow of traffic over city streets. 
(a)  The city council delegates to the chief of police and the city manager the power to regulate the flow of traffic over and across the streets of the city. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The city manager and the chief of police are delegated the authority to acquire and post such signs as may be necessary in order to effectuate the traffic regulations they deem necessary and proper. Upon placement of such signs the instructions contained thereon shall be deemed to carry the force of law, and any violation thereof shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable in the city court. 
(d)  The city council my, but its vote, change and repeal any decision made pursuant to this section by the chief of police and the city manager. 
(Ord. of 3-5-91(2), §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 06-06, pt. I, 3-7-06) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ 1—5 of an ordinance adopted Mar. 5, 1991, as § 13-3 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the code. 
Secs. 13-4—13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 13-26. - Speed limits—Generally. 
(a)  Except where otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the speed limit in the city shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(b)  Speed limits in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour shall be enforced on the following roadways: 

 
(Code 1976, § 7-1001; Ord. No. 2013-08, pt. I, 9-3-13) 
State Law reference— Speed restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Secs. 13-26.5, 13-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-06, pt. I, adopted March 7, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 13-26.5 and 13-27. Former § 13-26.5 pertained to specific speed zones; and derived from Ord. No. 98-3, adopted April 7, 1998. Former § 13-27 pertained to school zones and church zones; and derived from the Code of 1976, § 7-1002. 
Sec. 13-28. - Same—Signs. 
All vehicle drivers approaching any speed limit sign placed upon any street in the city shall reduce their speed to not in excess of the posted limit and retain such speed until the particular zone has been passed. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1003) 
Sec. 13-29. - No-turn signs. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not make a turn at any intersection where an official sign prohibiting same is exhibited. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1004) 
Sec. 13-30. - No through streets. 
No thoroughfare marked by a sign to show that it is not a through street shall be used by the driver of any vehicle unless the driver enters the thoroughfare for the purpose of stopping thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1012) 
Sec. 13-31. - Moving of houses, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to move any type of house, building or large machinery through the public streets of the city without first obtaining a special written permit from the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Before such permit shall be considered by the mayor and city council, the moving parties shall present before the mayor and city council the width, height and length of the object being moved, the time the object shall pass through the city, the proper manpower to engineer the moving over the streets, insurance to cover any type of damages, and sufficient police officers to handle the traffic situation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1017) 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Sec. 13-32. - Regulation of off-road vehicles. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "off-road vehicle" means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain and not primarily intended for use predominantly on public roads. Such shall include motorized four-wheel drive or low pressure tire vehicles, two-wheel dirt bikes, three-wheel motorized vehicles, or motorcycles and other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind, except that such terms shall exclude motor boats; any military, fire or law enforcement vehicle; farm machinery, tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land, for utilities services and maintenance, earth moving, construction or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
(b)  Operation restrictions. Any person operating an off-road vehicle under any of the following conditions shall be deemed in violation of this section and subject to the penalties hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Without operative brakes, or without mufflers or other silencing equipment. 
(2)  On any private property without express written permission of the owner of the property or his agents. 
(3)  On the public streets of the city unless such are properly licensed by the state including any required emission or inspection certificates. 
(c)  Time restrictions. Subject to the licensing requirements of this section and the state, off-road vehicles may not be operated upon private property in the period from 8:00 p.m. in the evening until 8:00 a.m. in the morning. 
(Ord. of 4-7-87(2)) 
Sec. 13-33. - Streets designated for emergency vehicles only. 
No thoroughfare, lane or street, marked to show that it is for emergency vehicles only, shall be used by any driver of any vehicle unless that vehicle is owned by the city, county, state or federal governments and designated for use as a police vehicle, an emergency medical vehicle or a fire services vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87(1)) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 10; police, ch. 21; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25. 
Sec. 13-34. - Traffic control signs. 
Traffic control signs as designated on the following list shall be placed at the street locations as follows: 
West Mountain Street - No right turn on red at Main Street from 4:00 p.m. until 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 10-7-08) 
Secs. 13-35—13-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 13-56. - Meaning of curb markings. 
The following meanings shall be given to curb markings designating requirements and prohibitions governing parking, standing and stopping: 
(1)  White shall indicate the lines wherein vehicles shall park in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Yellow paint shall indicate places where vehicles shall not park. 
(3)  Red paint shall indicate loading zones, taxicab zones, and other restrictive regulations indicated by posted signs. 
(4)  Blue paint shall indicate bus stops and places where parking is permitted for police vehicles and other city-owned vehicles as indicated by posted signs and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87(6), § 7-1026) 
Sec. 13-57. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in the schedule kept on file in the city hall, hereby made a part hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1013) 
Sec. 13-58. - Parking time limited on certain streets. 
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the times specified within the district or upon any of the streets described in the schedule kept on file in the city hall, hereby made a part hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1014) 
Sec. 13-59. - Intersections where stop required. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, vehicles shall be stopped at the entrances to all intersections described in the schedule kept on file in the city hall, hereby made a part hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1015) 
Sec. 13-60. - Parking at recreation facilities. 
(a)  Definition. Recreational facilities are those facilities within the city, whether owned or leased by the city, which are used as parks, tennis courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, athletic fields, gymnasiums, or any other related type activities. 
(b)  Parking prohibited. No person shall park in any parking lot or parking area provided incidental to any recreational facility unless such person is actively participating in the use of such recreational facility either as a participant in some activity conducted therein or as an observer thereof. 
(c)  Manner of parking. No person using a recreational facility shall park any vehicle in any area not designated as a permitted parking area nor shall any person using a recreational facility park any vehicle in such manner as to block the ingress or egress to such facility or parking areas incidental thereto. 
(d)  Exceptions. The restrictions set forth in this section shall not apply to any city-owned vehicle or any vehicle used by any person engaged in maintenance activities at any recreational facility. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87(6), § 7-1024) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 19. 
Secs. 13-61—13-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 12. 
Annotation— The provisions of the 1967 truck route ordinance (1) are not ultra vires; (2) do not attempt to make penal an act sanctioned by state law; (3) do not constitute a special law for which there is a general law having uniform operation throughout the state; and (4) do not illegally discriminate between local and nonresident uses of the streets of the city. However, trucks may not be relegated to unsafe streets only. A criminal prosecution will be enjoined when injury to property is threatened. Allison v. Medlock, 224 Ga. 648, 164 S.E. 2d 112 (1968). 

Sec. 13-81. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling within the city limits. 
Truck means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, including raw materials, and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds five (5) tons. 
Truck route means any street or portion thereof within the city, over which trucks are not prohibited to operate by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-12-88(1), § II) 
Sec. 13-82. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public safety in the use of the streets of the city; to facilitate and expedite traffic within the city; and to protect the streets of the city from unusual wear and damage. 
(Ord. of 7-12-88(1), § I) 
Sec. 13-83. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  All streets within the city except those listed in subsection (b) below are closed to truck traffic. 
(b)  The following are excepted from the provisions of subsection (a) above: 
(1)  Any truck may be deviated from a truck route and operated over a street listed herein where necessary to reach a destination point within the city for the conduct of business, provided streets upon which truck traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection of the street nearest such destination. 
(2)  Any truck may be operated over any city street listed herein where necessary to leave a point of origin within the city for the conduct of business, provided it leaves such street at the nearest intersection of a truck route to such point of origin. 
(3)  Any truck may be operated over any street listed herein if owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  MARTA bus routes: See section 13-25. 
(Ord. of 7-12-88(1), § III) 
Sec. 13-84. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police shall cause the city limits to be clearly sign-posted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with. 
(Ord. of 7-12-88(1), § IV) 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 21. 
Secs. 13-85—13-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-106. - Passenger buses generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle, overtaking any passenger bus stopped or about to stop for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers, shall stop such vehicle at least six (6) feet to the rear of the bus and keep same stationary until any such passengers have disembarked and reached a place of safety, or boarded such car or bus as the case may be. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alight from or board any bus while same is yet in movement. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of any bus which has not been provided and designated for that purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1005) 
Secs. 13-107—13-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MARTA BUSES 

Sec. 13-121. - Title. 
This division shall be known as "The City of Stone Mountain Ordinance Regulating MARTA Buses". 
(Ord. of 2-3-87, § I) 
Sec. 13-122. - Unscheduled and unauthorized stops, and leaving the bus unsecured. 
(a)  Before leaving the bus, the operator must set the parking brake firmly and make sure that it holds, place gear lever in neutral position and cut the engine off. If bus is on the slightest hill, the operator must set the front wheels to the curb. 
(b)  Under no circumstances is the rear interlock on the bus to be used in place of the parking brake. 
(c)  It is not permissible for an operator to leave his bus at any point along the route while passengers are still on the bus and keep the passengers waiting while he is eating a meal in a restaurant or transacting personal business. 
(d)  If it is necessary to leave the bus for any reason, the door must be closed. 
(Ord. of 2-3-87, § II) 
Sec. 13-123. - Engine running on long layovers. 
Operators are required to cut their bus engines off with layovers in excess of eight (8) minutes, except when the temperature is below twenty (20) degrees Fahrenheit or above ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. of 2-3-87, § III) 
Sec. 13-124. - Unauthorized parking. 
Buses must park in authorized areas with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:30 a.m. one (1) bus will be allowed to park at each of the below locations: 
a.  5347 E. Mountain Street. 
b.  5401 E. Mountain Street (in front of bank) 
(2)  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:30 a.m. one (1) bus will be allowed to park at the below location: 
a.  5379 E. Mountain Street (old post office). 
(3)  If businesses at any location set forth above are open, the bus shall not park there, and if asked or ordered by a law enforcement officer to move, the operator must do so. 
(Ord. of 2-3-87, § III) 
Sec. 13-125. - Routes. 
The following descriptions of MARTA bus routes shall be attached to the route 120 weekday, Saturday and Sunday run cards: 
  

 
(Ord. of 3-28-88; Ord. of 5-23-88; Ord. of 7-12-88(1), App. A) 
Sec. 13-126. - Series restrictions. 
MARTA buses in the 1600 series are prohibited within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 11-1-88(2); Ord. of 12-13-88) 
Secs. 13-127—13-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES, GOLF CARTS, AND SIMILAR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-02, adopted June 5, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former art. VI, §§ 13-136—13-142, and adding a new art. VI. Former art. VI pertained to bicycles, and derived from an ordinance of April 7, 1987 and an ordinance of July 7, 1987. 

Sec. 13-136. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Bicycles, Golf Carts, and Similar Vehicles Ordinance of the City of Stone Mountain." 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 13-137. - Findings; definitions; general restrictions. 
(a)  Findings. The mayor and city council find that all public streets, sidewalks and paved recreational paths located within the city's territorial boundaries and under its jurisdiction are designed and constructed so as to safely permit the use of the streets. Low speed vehicles are limited to public streets. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three (3) or more low-pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
(2)  Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having only two (2) wheels which are in tandem and either of which is more than thirteen (13) inches in diameter. 
(3)  Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles who has an established place of business in this state. 
(4)  Electric bicycle means a device with two (2) or three (3) wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. For such a device to be considered an electric assisted bicycle, it shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, as set forth in 49 CFR 571 et seq., and shall operate in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
a.  Have a power output of not more than one thousand (1,000) watts; 
b.  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per hour on level ground; and 
c.  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(5)  Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) means a self-balancing, two (2) non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one (1) person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of seven hundred fifty (750) watts (one (1) horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than twenty (20) miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs one hundred seventy (170) pounds. 
(6)  Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
(7)  Low-speed motor vehicle (LSMV) means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than twenty (20) miles per hour but not greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safely standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 CFR 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
(8)  Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two (2) or three (3) wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two (2) brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be three and five-hundredths (3.05) cubic inches (fifty (50) cubic centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle unassisted, at a speed not to exceed thirty (30) miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
(9)  Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
(10)  Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
(11)  Motorized cart or golf cart means every motor vehicle having no less than three (3) wheels and an unladen weight of one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(12)  Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, pocket bike, any other alternatively fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor engine, gas or electric, and is not otherwise defined as a motorized cart, low-speed motor vehicle (LSMV), motorcycle, electric assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, electric personal assistive mobility device or motorized wheelchair. 
(13)  Motorized skateboard means a self-propelled device, including Segways, that has a motor, gas or electric, a deck upon which a person may ride, not equipped with a seat, and at least two (2) tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in this Code as a motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized play vehicle, motor scooter, electric personal assistive mobility device or motorized wheelchair. 
(14)  Motorized wheelchair means a self-propelled wheelchair that is used by a physically disabled person for mobility. 
(15)  Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a two-wheeled vehicle other than a motor vehicle, bicycle with helper motor or a motorized scooter and which is propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other mechanical means, is capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour, and is designed to replicate the general appearance of a motorcycle, regardless of the scale of the replication. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 13-138. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates the terms of the article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11, Code of Ordinances, City of Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 13-139. - Liability and insurance. 
(a)  Each person using the streets, sidewalks, or recreation paths is liable for his own actions. 
(b)  Owners of motorized (golf) carts shall maintain liability insurance on any cart that is to be operated on the streets and recreational paths of this city. The level of insurance coverage shall be at least the minimum required for motor vehicles in this state. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require insurance coverage on motorized carts used solely on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12; Ord. No. 2012-05, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13-140. - Equipment. 
(a)  A low speed vehicle must be equipped with headlamps, stop lamps, turn signal lamps, tail lamps, reflex reflectors, parking brakes, rearview mirrors, windshields, and a vehicle identification number. Low speed vehicles not meeting these requirements are prohibited from operating within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Motorized (golf) carts that are operated on the roadways and recreational paths of the city shall be equipped with headlamps, tail lamps, brake lamps, turn signals, a rear view mirror, horn and a windshield. It is further recommended that additional reflective or illuminative devices, such as reflective tape or running lights, be placed on the sides of motorized (golf) carts that are driven before sunrise and after sunset. These equipment requirements are a minimum and are in addition to any requirement established by state law or promulgated by the state commissioner of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12; Ord. No. 2012-05, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13-141. - Registration; inspection. 
(a)  Registration and annual inspection required. Owners of any electric or gasoline-powered motorized (golf) cart that is to be operated over the designated streets, areas, or paths of the city must register the vehicle within ten (10) days of purchase with the city police department. Registrant must provide the police department with name and address of owner, vehicle manufacturer, model, vehicle identification number, color, and proof of ownership and insurance. Upon completion and police inspection of the cart to ensure compliance with all parts of this article, the police department shall issue two (2) decals as proof of inspection to the vehicle owner. Decals shall be affixed to the front and rear of the motorized (golf) cart and shall remain valid until January 31 of the following calendar year. 
(b)  Inspection fees. An annual inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be assessed for motorized (golf) carts belonging to a resident or business owner of the city. Non-residents or business owners located outside the city shall be assessed an annual inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each motorized (golf) cart. 
(c)  Disabled parking. Motorized (golf) carts may utilize parking designated as disabled parking provided that a permit issued under O.C.G.A. § 40-2-74.1 is displayed about the cart and the actual disabled person is the current driver or a passenger of the cart. Violations of this requirement may be prosecuted under O.C.G.A. § 40-6-226. 
(d)  Rental golf carts. Golf cart dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent golf carts to the public for use on the streets and recreation paths of the city. Each such establishment renting golf carts shall be required to register each and shall maintain a written record of each person renting a golf cart. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification and shall be furnished a copy of this article to read. Each renter must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and possess a valid driver's license. Golf carts for temporary use by the city or other organizations as part of managing special events are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12; Ord. No. 2012-05, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 13-142. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Only those persons who hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license may drive a golf cart on the streets or recreational paths of the city. Exception: Those persons who are fifteen (15) years of age or older but do not hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license may drive a golf cart on designated streets and recreation paths of the city if they are accompanied in the front seat by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(b)  Low-speed vehicles may be operated on public streets within the city limits. The operator of a low-speed vehicle shall not operate such vehicle on any highway where the posted speed limit exceeds twenty-five (25) miles per hour. No all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), regardless of power source, are permitted to operate on city streets or recreation paths. Low-speed vehicles may be operated on private property with the permission of the owner. 
(c)  A motorized cart or golf cart may be operated on any public street except as prohibited by ordinance and on all paved recreational paths located within the territorial boundaries of the city. This does not prohibit golf carts from crossing any road or street at properly marked intersections. 
(d)  No person under the age of fifteen (15) years shall be permitted to drive a low-speed vehicle or a golf cart on the streets or recreation paths of the city under any circumstance. 
(e)  All golf cart operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and recreation paths of the city. All golf cart operators are required to use available recreation paths in preference to city streets. 
(f)  Low-speed vehicles operating on city streets shall comply with all local and state traffic laws and may be cited for traffic violations in the same manner as motor vehicles. 
(g)  Golf carts may not be operated on sidewalks. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any low-speed vehicle or golf cart or for any other person operating, employing, or permitting the use of, or otherwise directing the use of such vehicle, to operate or permit the operator of any such vehicle to drive over the streets or recreation paths in violation of this article. 
(i)  Authorized users of sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Pedestrians. 
(2)  Non-motorized vehicles. 
(3)  Roller skates, roller blades and skateboarders (thirty (30) minutes before sunrise to thirty (30) minutes after sunset). 
(4)  Emergency and authorized maintenance vehicles. 
(5)  Motorized wheelchairs. 
(6)  Bicycles. 
(7)  Electric personal assistive mobility device. 
(8)  Public safety vehicles. 
(j)  Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations, and shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the city authorized to direct or regulate traffic. 
(k)  Seating on motorized (golf) carts. When a cart is in motion, all occupants of a motorized cart must be seated. No rider shall stand or be seated in the lap of another rider. 
(l)  Motorized (golf) carts that are operated at any time from a half-hour before sunset to a half-hour after sunrise and at any time when it is raining and at any other time when there is not sufficient visibility to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead and behind shall have headlamps and tail lamps illuminated. 
(m)  The use of motorized or golf carts complying with all guidelines set forth in this article shall be permitted on any city street for which the speed limit is twenty-five (25) mph or less, unless otherwise prohibited. Such a cart is permitted to cross a street of higher speed limit if traveling from one (1) permitted street to another. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12; Ord. No. 2012-05, 10-2-12; Ord. No. 2017-01, pt. I, 2-1-17) 
Sec. 13-143. - Prohibited. 
Prohibited users of recreation paths and sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles). 
(2)  Motorcycles. 
(3)  Horses, mules or donkeys. 
(4)  Low-speed vehicles. 
(5)  Unregistered electric golf carts. 
(6)  Unregistered gas golf carts. 
(7)  Go-carts. 
(8)  Minibikes and mopeds. 
(9)  All-terrain vehicles. 
(10)  Motorized play vehicles. 
(11)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles (not to include electric bicycles). 
(12)  Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 13-144. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Sidewalks and recreation paths are for transportation and public recreation by various groups of permitted users. No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the streets and recreational paths. Such hazardous activities and the special rules pertaining to them include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(b)  None of the prohibited users in section 13-143 shall use the sidewalks or recreational paths for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the recreation paths. For instance, when approaching oncoming path users, each user shall move to his right side of the path. Passing shall be on the left side of the path. 
(d)  Pedestrians should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by other users of the sidewalks and recreation paths to ensure safe passage. 
(e)  A warning or announcement shall be given by operators of golf carts and other users of the recreation paths, i.e., bicyclists or skaters when approaching pedestrians from the rear. This warning or announcement may be verbal, but it is recommended that bicyclists and golf cart operators equip their vehicles with a warning device such as a horn or bell. Each user of the recreation path~ shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of the other users and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(f)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol or illegal drugs and their use, including open container laws that apply to traffic on the streets of the city, also apply to the sidewalks and recreation paths. 
(g)  All litter shall be deposited in the receptacles provided along the sidewalks and recreation paths or retained by the user for proper disposal later. Littering on the sidewalks or recreation paths or the areas adjacent to the sidewalk or path shall be subject penalties described in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 6-5-12) 
Secs. 13-145—13-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SKATES; SKATEBOARDS; SCOOTERS 

Sec. 13-166. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Skates, Skateboards and Scooters Ordinance of the City of Stone Mountain." 
(Ord. of 8-4-87(4), § I) 
Sec. 13-167. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Scooter means a vehicle consisting of a board mounted on two (2) tandem wheels and steered by a long handle attached to the front axle; the rider stands with one (1) foot on the board, using the other foot to push. 
Skates means a keel-shaped metal runner attached to a plate or frame, with suitable clamps or straps for fastening it to the sole of a boot or shoe. 
Skateboard means a wooden, plastic or metal support attached to wheels capable of rolling on flat surfaces, or similar shaped device. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87(4), § II) 
Sec. 13-168. - Use of sidewalks, streets. 
Persons upon skates, skateboards, scooters or similar type devices shall not travel by such means upon the sidewalks of the central business district of the city, or any public street within the city or any publicly-owned property. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87(4), § III) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 25. 
Sec. 13-169. - Enforcement. 
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87(4), § IV) 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 21. 
Secs. 13-170—13-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-16, adopted December 1, 1998, amended the Code by repealing Art. VIII, §§ 13-191—13-194, in its entirety. Former Art. VIII pertained to railroads, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 7-1018—7-1021. 

Secs. 13-191—13-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REDLIGHT CAMERA ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 13-195. - Title. 
For convenience in reference, this article shall be entitled "The Red-Light Camera Enforcement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-196. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to enhance public safety through the use of technologies which reduce the violation of red traffic signals. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-197. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
In operation means operating in good working condition. 
Operator shall mean any individual driving and/or possession of a vehicle. 
Owner means the registered owner of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor vehicle company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. 
Recorded image means images recorded by a traffic-control signal monitoring device: 
(1)  With: 
a.  Not less than two (2) photographs. 
b.  Not less than two (2) microphoto- graphs. 
c.  Not less than two (2) electronic images. 
d.  Videotape. 
(2)  Showing a traffic-control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one (1) image or portion of tape, clearly depicting the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. 
(3)  A picture of the operator shall be taken, and may be introduced as evidence of the identity of the operator of the vehicle. 
Signature means any manual or facsimile of a person's signature. 
System location is the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video digital or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
Traffic-control signal monitoring device means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic-control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-198. - Monetary penalty. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the nearside of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal. 
(b)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk of the nearside of the intersection, or if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady green arrow signal indication. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this article if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic-control signal monitoring device, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal within the city limits as designated in subsections 13-198(a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-199. - Proof; certificate. 
(a)  Proof that a particular vehicle entered an intersection in violation of subsection 13-198(a) or (b) of the City of Stone Mountain City Code, as detected by a traffic-control signal monitoring device, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered with the state department of public safety (or any other state or local vehicle registration office) in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence in any prosecution of a violation of that section that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the recorded image. 
(b)  A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city police department, or a copy thereof, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic-control signal monitoring device shall be considered prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(c)  Recorded images made for the purpose of this subsection shall not be a public record. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from other source or sources which constitutes a prima facie case or a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provide by law in lieu of, but not in addition to, enforcement under this article. 
(e)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner or lessee of the vehicle files a sworn notarized statement with the city police department or other city agency designated by the city manager prior to the return date established on the citation identifying the name and address of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the appropriate city employee, a hearing may be set for prosecution of the alleged violation. 
(f)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the charged person can prove that they were not the operator of the vehicle through photographic evidence produced and maintained by the city when the vehicle owned by the charged person was in violation of section 13-198(a) or (b) of the City of Stone Mountain City Code. 
(g)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner or lessee of the vehicle testifies under oath in open court or other appropriate administrative hearing that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of alleged violation. 
(h)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation, is present, prior to the return date established on the citation issued pursuant to this section, to the court adjudicating the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the prosecuting attorney for the city, a hearing may be set for prosecution of the alleged violation. 
(i)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 13-198(a) or (b) of the City of Stone Mountain City Code as part of a funeral procession. 
(j)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 13-198(a) or (b) of the City of Stone Mountain City Code in order to avoid impeding the efforts of an emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection. 
(k)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained here, the prosecution and conviction for a violation of this article shall not require a picture of the driver described in section 13-197(f)(iii) above. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-200. - Penalty; effect of a conviction. 
(a)  Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a criminal conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. The civil monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall be no greater than seventy dollars ($70.00). 
(b)  Upon a failure to respond to any notice of violation by the prescribed date, the notice shall be considered a judgment and shall carry interest at the legal rate. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-201. - Summons. 
(a)  A summons for a violation of this section may be executed by the city by sending by first class mail, a copy thereof to the address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the state department of public safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or, in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor. Said summons shall be postmarked not later than ten (10) days after the date of the alleged violation. 
(b)  No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the summons. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-202. - Private entities. 
(a)  A private entity may enter into an agreement with the city to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city police department may swear to or affirm the certificate required by 13-199(b) of this section. 
(b)  No portion of any fine collected through the use of a traffic-control signal monitoring device may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor. Compensation to the manufacturer or vendor shall be based on the value of such equipment and shall not be based on the number of traffic citations issued or the revenue generated by traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-203. - Signage. 
(a)  The city shall erect signs on every highway which comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway which intersects the jurisdictional limits to the city. A sign shall be erected also by the city on each public road on the approach to the next traffic-control signal-monitoring device which is monitoring such next signal for such road. 
(b)  Such signs shall be at least thirty (30) inches by thirty (30) inches in measurements and shall warn motorists that traffic-control monitoring devices are being employed. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 13-204. - Warning period. 
Only warning notices and not citations shall be sent during the thirty-day period commencing on the date of each installation of a traffic-control monitoring device. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, pt. I, 9-19-05) 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Judicial branch, Art. V. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Constitution reference— General rights of defendants, Art. I, § I, Par. XIV; judicial power of the state, Art. VI, § I, Par. I; effect of constitution on municipal courts, Art. VI, § 10, Par. I. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Warrants. 
Any person having knowledge of the commission of a criminal offense may file a written verified complaint with the municipal court. If the court is satisfied that the violation has been committed and that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the defendant committed the violation, an arrest warrant shall be issued. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1001) 
Sec. 14-2. - Forfeiture of bond. 
If a defendant under bond does not appear when his name is called, and no continuance has been granted, then his bond shall be forfeited. Whether or not the defendant has been released on his own recognizance, a warrant of arrest may be issued. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1002) 
Sec. 14-3. - Minors, notice to parents upon arrest. 
Upon the arrest of any person under the age of eighteen (18), the clerk shall notify the parent or guardian informing him of the nature of the charge and the date the case will be heard. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1003) 
Sec. 14-4. - Acceptance of pleas. 
Before accepting a plea to an offense charged, the municipal court shall in all cases, in language in which the defendant can understand, inform him of the nature of the charge against him and the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction, and shall inform the defendant of his fundamental constitutional rights. The fundamental constitutional rights should include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  That he is not required to make any statement and that anything said by him may be used against him; 
(2)  That he may have a lawyer; 
(3)  That he may have his case delayed to give him sufficient time to be advised by a lawyer; 
(4)  That he may have a lawyer present during any questioning and proceeding; 
(5)  That he may testify in his own behalf; 
(6)  That he may appeal any final decision rendered by the court; 
(7)  That a record of any conviction will become a part of his permanent record; 
(8)  That he may be admitted to bail in appropriate cases; 
(9)  That he is innocent until proven guilty; 
(10)  That he may have the complaining or material witness present and the right to cross-examine; and 
(11)  That he may bring witnesses in his own behalf. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1004) 
Sec. 14-5. - Pleas. 
(a)  The defendant shall enter one (1) of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty; 
(2)  Not guilty; 
(3)  Nolo contendere (with the permission of the court); or 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged. 
(b)  If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the municipal court shall enter a plea of not guilty for him and set the case down for trial. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1005) 
Sec. 14-6. - Disposition of cases. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all prosecutions docketed at a designated session of the municipal court shall be disposed of during that particular session. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1006) 
Sec. 14-7. - Continuance of cases. 
Only the judge or other officer presiding shall have the authority to continue the case. No continuance shall be allowed except for good cause shown. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1007) 
Sec. 14-8. - Appearance of complaining witnesses. 
A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1008) 
Sec. 14-9. - Rules of evidence. 
The general rules of evidence shall be applicable in the trial of all cases. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1009) 
Sec. 14-10. - Judgment and sentences. 
Upon a verdict or plea of guilty and after announcing the judgment, the municipal court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for confinement and/or forced labor; 
(2)  Commit such person for confinement and/or forced labor; 
(3)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; or 
(4)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one (1) or more fixed dates in the future. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1010) 
Sec. 14-11. - Parole. 
The mayor shall have the authority to parole on good conduct persons convicted in the municipal court of violating the laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1011) 
Sec. 14-12. - Certiorari. 
Any person convicted in the municipal court shall have the right to certiorari as provided in section 5.14 of the charter. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1012) 
Sec. 14-13. - Associate judge. 
(a)  There is hereby established the position of associate judge in the municipal court of the city. 
(b)  The associate judge shall be appointed annually by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(c)  The associate judge shall be compensated in an amount to be determined by the city council and fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Qualifications of such associate judge, removal from office and the oath of office shall be the same as those provisions for the municipal court judge in section 5.11 of the city charter. 
(Ord. of 2-1-94) 
Sec. 14-14. - Chief judge, appointment, compensation. 
(a)  There is hereby established the position of chief judge in the municipal court of the city. 
(b)  The chief judge shall be appointed annually by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(c)  The chief judge shall be compensated in an amount to be determined by the city council and fixed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, Pt. 1, 3-2-99) 
Chapter 15 - NOISE CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-07, adopted August 7, 2007, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-11, and adding a new ch. 15. Former ch. 15 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an Ord. of April 7, 1987, and Ord. No. 97-10, adopted July 8, 1997. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; cemeteries, ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13; nuisances, ch. 16; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 17; parade and assembly, ch. 18; parks and recreation, ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Workers' compensation for loss of hearing caused by harmful noise, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-264; prevention of motor vehicle noise, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71; nuisances, O.C.G.A. Title 41; noise level of watercraft, O.C.G.A. § 52-7-10. 

Sec. 15-1. - Noise control. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(b)  Sound measurement standards for law enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this section, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  Restrictions of one hundred (100) feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noises at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
b.  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(2)  Restrictions of one hundred (100) feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph, sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
b.  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or in the case of private real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. and on Saturday and Sunday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible at a distance or one hundred (100) feet or more from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraph a. or b. above. 
(3)  Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units. Except for persons within commercial enterprises that have an adjoining property line or boundary with a residential dwelling unit, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five (5) feet beyond the adjoining property line, wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically-produced sounds made by a radio-receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "property line or boundary" shall mean an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of: 
a.  Adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouse, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or 
b.  Adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. 
Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. 
(4)  Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, construction or commercial entities in the normal course of their business; 
b.  Noises and/or sounds emanating from any official county school event on county school property; 
c.  Noises and/or sounds that are permitted by a special event permit pursuant to provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the city; provided, however, that the producer or coordinator of the special event must comply with the terms, restrictions and conditions of the special event permit; 
d.  Noises or sounds made by domestic animals; 
e.  Noises or sounds made by wireless telecommunication facilities; 
f.  Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument form within a motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound is controlled by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; or 
g.  Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions. 
h.  Sporting events, organized or unorganized using no amplification devices. 
(5)  Time restrictions on use of landscape maintenance motorized devices such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws. It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including but not limited to leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws, within any residential zoning district or in areas within three hundred (300) feet of any residential zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. except that within the agricultural-residential zone no person shall use or operate any such devices within three hundred (300) feet of any residential swelling on adjacent property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  Registration of outdoor entertainment events. Registration is required of all outdoor entertainment events that have commercial entertainment and/or electronic amplification. Registration of the event must be seventy-two (72) hours prior to the event, and must be by the person or persons responsible for the event. Registration is to be with the city mountain police department, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. To 4:00 p.m., on an application specified by the chief of police and shall include the organization sponsoring the event, the location, the date and time of the event, and security provisions. Registration shall not be accepted for events that include the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. Failure to register may result in a fine or forfeiture of the right of future registrations, or both. Registration does not exempt the person or persons registering the event from ensuring that the event complies with the requirements of this section. Failure to register shall be a violation of this subsection. 
(7)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-11 of this Code. 
(8)  Severability clause. A determination of the invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or part of this section shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 08-11, 10-7-08) 
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; buildings, Ch. 5; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 9; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; noise control, Ch. 15; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 17; parades, demonstrations and picketing, Ch. 18; solid waste, Ch. 24; signs constituting nuisance, § 23-9. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 16-1. - General enumeration. 
The following conditions are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Any surface closet or privy upon premises used in connection with a dwelling or place of business; 
(2)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(3)  Any dead or decaying matter, fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(5)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(6)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(7)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(8)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation unusual loud disturbances in or to multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; and 
(9)  All walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2001) 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; sewers, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 25. 
Sec. 16-2. - Complaint. 
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the mayor. The mayor, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue notice to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and issuing an order that the nuisance be abated within so many hours or days as the mayor shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2002) 
Sec. 16-3. - Abatement by city. 
In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the mayor, that it must be immediately abated, the mayor may issue an order to the chief of police directing him to cause the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and execution shall be issued against the owner, agent or tenant for the amount of the cost. The execution shall be enforced in the same manner as executions in favor of the city are levied and collected and shall be a lien on the property whereon the nuisance was abated until such time as fully satisfied. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2003) 
Sec. 16-4. - Failure to abate an offense. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to fail to abate a nuisance within the time specified after an order has been served upon him. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2004) 
Chapter 17 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 11; noise control, ch. 15; nuisances, ch. 16; parade and assembly, ch. 18. 
State Constitution reference— Limitations on special legislation, art. III, § VI, par. IV. 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. Title 16; adoption of ordinances, etc., O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Aiding arrests. 
No person in the city between the ages of eighteen (18) and fifty (50) years, upon being duly summoned by the police or any member of the city council to aid in suppressing an affray, breach of the peace, or other outrage shall refuse or neglect to arrest, or aid in arresting any offenders. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1015) 
State Law reference— Compensation of persons for injuries sustained while preventing crime or aiding officers of the law, O.C.G.A. § 28-5-100 et seq. 
Sec. 17-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent, loud, turbulent, quarrelsome, boisterous, indecent or disorderly manner or to disturb the good order, morals or dignity of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1001) 
Cross reference— Protection of sewage works from damage, § 22-3. 
State Law reference— Offenses against public order, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30 et seq. 
Sec. 17-3. - Permitting disorderly conduct in place of business. 
No person shall permit any disruption of order in any store or other place of business that caters to the public to the annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1002) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Maintaining a disorderly house, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 17-4. - Public disturbance. 
No person shall congregate in or around any public place, schoolhouse or public entertainment, in such a disorderly or rude manner as to become offensive to those attending the church, auditorium or public place, by loud talking, whistling or otherwise. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1003) 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings or processions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 17-5. - Sleeping in public places, on private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep on or at the foot of the stairway of any building, sidewalk or alleys of the city or on public grounds, or on the private premises of any person without the consent of such person or the persons having control thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1004) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 17-6. - Remaining in front of public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, after having been directed by any officer or member of the police force to move away therefrom, to remain in front of any church or other place of public worship during services therein, or in front of any depot, theater, concert hall, ballroom, clubhouse, cafe or lunch room, drug store, or other place, or on the public thoroughfares of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1005) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Unlawful assembly, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-33. 
Sec. 17-7. - Sleeping in parked automobile or truck. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in any parked automobile or truck in the city after 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1006) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Entering vehicle for criminal purposes, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-1. 
Sec. 17-8. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle or firearm, such as pistols, shot guns, rifles, machine guns, dynamite caps, cannons, artillery, or other explosives within the corporate limits of the city unless: in defense of person, or habitation; by an officer engaged in the discharge of his official duties; by person or persons engaged in military duties including military burials; or the discharge of small arms (pistols or rifles only) as part of a permitted ceremonial event. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1014; Ord. No. 2010-09, 8-3-10) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103 et seq. 
Sec. 17-9. - Occupying place of prostitution. 
No person shall occupy any house or any portion of a house to be used as a place of prostitution. 
(Code 1976, § 10-3001) 
State Law reference— Prostitution offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9 et seq. 
Sec. 17-10. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately-owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: 
(1)  The parking area is identified by at least one (1) sign as specified in this paragraph, and if the parking area contains more than one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces then by at least one (1) such sign for every one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces, each such sign containing the following information in easy to read printing: 
a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicles; 
b.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customer's use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; and 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted; and 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
c.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(Ord. of 4-4-89, § 1) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-29. 
Sec. 17-11. - Public indecency prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of public indecency when he or she performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
(1)  Exposure of the genitals; 
(2)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; 
(5)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
(6)  Urination or defecation; or 
(7)  Appears wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  When court appearance required, fines and penalties. 
(1)  Any person issued a citation or citations for violating any provision of subparagraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section 17-11 shall be summoned to, and shall appear in, the municipal court on the date for appearance as set forth on the citation. 
(2)  A citation issued for a violation of subparagraph (a)(7) of this section 17-11 shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) on the first offense and the violator shall not be required to appear in the municipal court, however, such violator must pay the fifty dollars ($50.00) fine within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the citation. The fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation of subparagraph (a)(7) shall be payable at the office of the municipal court clerk at city hall. For each subsequent offense by a violator of subparagraph (a)(7), the violator shall be summoned to, and shall appear in, the municipal court on the date for appearance as set forth on the citation. 
(3)  The fine for violating any provision of subparagraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section 17-11 shall be as determined by the judge of the municipal court of the city subject to the provisions for monetary fines as set forth in section 4.13 of the City Charter and section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(4)  The fine for a second or subsequent violation of subparagraph (a)(7) of this section 17-11 shall be as determined by the judge of the municipal court of the city subject to the provisions for monetary fines as set forth in section 4.13 of the City Charter and section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(5)  Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of subparagraph (a)(7). 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense under this section 17-11 if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state constitution. Any defense under this subsection must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, Pt. 1, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 17-12. - [Damage to property.] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage any real or personal property owned by the City of Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, Pt. I, 5-5-15) 
Secs. 17-13—17-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-13, Pt. I, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former Art. II, §§ 17-36—17-39, and adding a new Art. II. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 10-1007—10-1010; and Ord. of March 19, 1991. 

Sec. 17-36. - Responsibility of parents. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the custody of or control of any minor to permit, or by inefficient control, allow a violation of this ordinance by a minor in his or her custody. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, Pt. I, 9-5-06) 
Sec. 17-37. - Responsibility of proprietors. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager or other person having charge or control of any public or other place to permit, allow or encourage any minor to violate this article in or around such place. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, Pt. I, 9-5-06) 
Sec. 17-38. - Curfew; persons age 16 years of age or younger. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor sixteen (16) years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place in the city unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(3)  When the minor is departing or returning home from a school or church activity; 
(4)  When the minor is departing to or returning from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced places during the proscribed period; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(b)  Failure to comply with any of the requirements and provisions of this article shall constitute a violation and any parent or guardian, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days or any or all of these penalties, in the discretion of the municipal court judge. A fine and imprisonment not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and thirty (30) days may be ordered for violators at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, pt. I, 9-5-06) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; parks and recreation, ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25. 
Secs. 17-39—17-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 21. 

Sec. 17-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into premises or to signal an attempted robbery on protected premises, and with respect to such signal public police are expected to respond. 
False alarm means the activation of a burglary and or robbery alarm by other than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted on the premises. 
Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated indicating a burglary and or robbery is presently in progress on those premises. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 17-62. - Penalties. 
Any person or business violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and noncompliance and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 17-63. - Prohibitions. 
It is unlawful for anyone to activate any robbery or burglary alarm for the purpose of summoning police except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary or robbery, or for anyone notifying the police of an activated alarm and having knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system, or was apparently caused by maintenance or service to the alarm system, to fail at the same time to notify the police of such apparent malfunction or repair. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 17-64. - False alarm fees. 
For a police response to any false alarm, the municipal court shall fine and collect from the person or business having and/or maintaining a burglary and/or robbery alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by him fees as follows: 
(1)  For a first response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within a calendar year, a written warning and a copy of this article shall be given, but the person having or maintaining such burglary and or robbery alarm shall, within three (3) working days after notice to do so make a written report to the chief of police, or his appointed representative, and if applicable, on forms prescribed by him setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized serviceman, and such other information as may require to determine the cause of such false alarm and corrective action necessary. 
(2)  For a second response to premises after a first response within a calendar year period, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as for a first response and the chief of police or his appointed representative shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at the owner's expense by a certified person and to prescribe necessary corrective action. 
(3)  For a third and a fourth response to premises after a second response within a calendar year, one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as for a first response and the chief of police or his appointed representative shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person or business having or maintaining such alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this article, including the fee requirements for five (5) or more false alarm responses by the police within each calendar year. 
(4)  After a fourth response to premises within a calendar year, and for all succeeding responses within that calendar year, a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged, and if such false alarms are as a result of failure to take necessary corrective action prescribed by the chief of police, or his appointed representative, and may order the disconnection of such alarm system. It shall be unlawful to reconnect such alarm system until such corrective action is taken. No disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 17-65. - User fees. 
Any person or business which maintains an alarm system which has a direct connection to an alarm display panel located in the communications center of the department of public safety shall be charged a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month for such connection. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 17-66. - Requirements. 
The owner of each business, residence or structure equipped with an alarm system must provide the police department or their alarm company with a minimum of three (3) emergency phone numbers of persons who can be contacted in the case of an emergency or malfunction of the system. Listed persons must be able to enter the business, residence or structure and secure the system if a malfunction should occur or take appropriate action with the alarm company to secure the system within thirty (30) minutes of its reported failure. 
(Ord. of 8-7-90) 
Secs. 17-67—17-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION, SALE AND DISPOSITION OF FIREARMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ I—V of an ordinance adopted Sept. 4, 1990, as §§ 17-76—17-80 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. 

Sec. 17-76. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms shall have the meanings ascribed as follows: 
Dealer means any person regularly engaged in the business of selling firearms. 
Firearms means any pistol, revolver or derringer, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosive, and a firearm muffler or a firearm silencer, or any part or parts of such weapon. 
Identification means any driver's license, birth certificate, U.S. military identification card, baptismal or christening certificate, employee's identification card provided same shows age and home address of employee, and U.S. passport. 
Person includes an individual, partnership, association or corporation. 
(Ord. of 9-4-90(2), § I) 
Sec. 17-77. - Identification of purchaser. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in firearms or for any employee, servant or agent of such dealer to sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, any firearms unless the person obtaining the firearm shall furnish identification to the dealer setting forth the person's name, present address and age. No dealer in firearms, nor any employee, servant or agent of such dealer, shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of in any way a pistol, revolver or short-barreled firearm the barrel of which is less than fifteen (15) inches in length, to any person within the city unless there shall first have been compliance with each of the provisions of this section. For the purpose of this section, a dealer in firearms shall include any person engaged in the business of operating a pawnshop, or other place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. 
(b)  No dealer in firearms, or any employee, servant or agent of such dealer, shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, a pistol, revolver or short-barreled firearm less than fifteen (15) inches in length unless the prospective purchaser shall have first obtained a certificate of approval from the chief of police and submitted such to the dealer. 
(c)  The applicant shall file with the police department an application furnished by the department stating the applicant's name, any and all names by which the applicant may have been previously been known, sex, race, age, height, color of hair, color of eyes, present address, any and all addresses for the applicant for the past five (5) years; whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime of violence within the past five (5) years; whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony related to firearms, sex, alcohol or drug offenses within the past five (5) years; whether the applicant has been found guilty of the violation of any law governing the use of firearms within the past five (5) years; whether the applicant is presently a fugutive from justice from any police jurisdiction within the United States; whether the applicant is presently suffering from any mental illness, whether the applicant has been treated for any mental illness within the past ten (10) years, and if so, the location of the hospital or mental institution providing such treatment; and whether the applicant presently has a valid permit issued to O.C.G.A. section 16-11-129, and, if so the date of issuance and the county of issuance of such permit. The application shall also provide the name and address of the dealer from whom the purchaser will purchase the firearm and the date such application is completed by the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant shall provide a full set of fingerprints as may be required by the police department; furthermore, the applicant shall authorize the department to conduct a background history of any criminal record which the applicant may have related to his qualifications to purchase a firearm pursuant to this section. The applicant shall further authorize the police department to obtain such hospital or mental institution records as may be required to determine the applicant's qualifications for purposes of this section. 
(e)  After receipt of the application, the chief of police or his designee shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, including a search of the applicant's fingerprint records, and hospital or mental institution records, if any. 
(f)  The applicant shall pay to the police department a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for processing of the application, and this fee shall be paid at the time the application is delivered to the police department. 
(Ord. of 9-4-90(2), § II; Ord. of 6-7-94(2), § II) 
Sec. 17-78. - Waiting period. 
No dealer in firearms, or any employee, servant or agent of such dealer, shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, a pistol, revolver or short-barreled firearm less than fifteen (15) inches in length unless the prospective purchaser shall have first provided identification and registered with the dealer for purchase of the firearm fifteen (15) days prior to sale, transfer, or disposal of the firearm to the purchaser. 
This section shall not be construed to apply to noncartridge weapons. 
(Ord. of 9-4-90(2), § III) 
Sec. 17-79. - Conditions of sale. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall disapprove the disposition if the chief or his designee shall determine that any of the following conditions apply to the applicant: 
(1)  Such applicant has been convicted of a crime of violence within the past five (5) years. For the purpose of this subsection a crime of violence shall mean murder, manslaughter, rape, mayhem, assault, aggravated assault, assault with intent to rape, assault with intent to murder, assault with intent to rob, simple assault, simple battery, aggravated battery, robbery, burglary, kidnapping, or the crime of attempting to commit any of the aforesaid crimes. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of any felony related to firearms, sex, alcohol or drug offenses within the past five (5) years. 
(3)  The applicant has been found guilty of the violation of any law governing the use of firearms within the past five (5) years. 
(4)  The applicant is presently a fugitive from justice from any police jurisdiction within the United States. 
(5)  The applicant is presently suffering from any mental illness. 
(6)  The applicant fails or refuses to complete the application or fails or refuses to complete any part of the application process. 
(7)  The applicant is under twenty-one (21) years of age at the time the application is submitted to the police department. 
(b)  The issuance of a pistol permit to the applicant under the provisions of O.C.G.A. section 16-11-129 shall be prima facie evidence of good cause for the approval of the application by the chief of police or his designee. 
(c)  In the event the application is approved and the applicant elects to obtain a firearm from a dealer other than the dealer whose name appears upon the application, the applicant shall notify the chief of police of the name and the address of the dealer; and the chief or his designee shall promptly notify the dealer, in writing, of the applicant's eligibility to obtain a firearm or firearms as provided herein. 
(d)  If at any time during the period for which the applicant retains his eligibility to obtain a firearm the chief of police or his designee shall learn or have brought to his attention in any manner any reasonable ground to believe the applicant is not entitled to retain his eligibility to obtain a firearm, the chief of police or his designee may revoke the applicant's eligibility and shall promptly notify the dealer whose name appears upon the application of such revocation. The chief of police or his designee shall further confiscate from the applicant any firearm obtained in contravention of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  In the event an applicant's eligibility is revoked, or in the event the applicant's application is disapproved, the chief of police or his designee shall promptly notify the applicant of such disapproval or revocation and shall further notify the applicant that the applicant shall have the right to appeal the disapproval or revocation to the governing authority. After a hearing, the governing authority shall thereupon report its findings and recommendations to the chief of police that their findings either affirmed or overruled his action. After receiving the findings of the governing authority, the chief of police or his designee shall take the appropriate action as required by this section. 
(Ord. of 9-4-90(2), § IV) 
Sec. 17-80. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to apply to toy pistols, toy revolvers or toy weapons of any kind, or to antique weapons which are used only for display. This article shall further not apply to casual sales between bona fide gun collectors; nor shall this article apply to any marshal; deputy marshal, sheriff, prison or jail warden, deputy prison or jail warden, correctional officer, policeman or other authorized law officers. No person regularly engaged in the manufacture, repair of sale of firearms shall be required to make application to obtain firearms as provided by this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly provide false information on an application to obtain firearms as provided in this article. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) or thirty (30) days in a common jail or both. 
(Ord. of 9-4-90(2), § V) 
Secs. 17-81—17-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LOITERING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-8, Pts. I, II, adopted July 2, 2002, amended the Code with the addition of sections 17-81—17-83. In order to allow for the future expansion of article IV, the provisions of said ordinance have been designated article V, sections 17-101—17-103 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 17-101. - Generally. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when the person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances, which may be considered in determining, whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify him or herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 02-8, Pts. I, II, 7-2-02) 
Sec. 17-102. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the custody or control of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate section 17-101. 
(Ord. No. 02-8, Pts. I, II, 7-2-02) 
Sec. 17-103. - Responsibility of proprietors, managers, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager or other person having charge or control of any public or other place to permit, allow or encourage any minor to violate section 17-101 in such place. 
(Ord. No. 02-8, Pts. I, II, 7-2-02) 
Chapter 18 - PARADE AND ASSEMBLY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-04, adopted September 6, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-7 and 18-36—18-45, and adding a new ch. 18. Former ch. 18 pertained to parades, demonstrations and picketing, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 6-2002, 6-2004—6-2010; an Ord. of June 7, 1988; and Ord. No. 2011-01, adopted February 1, 2011. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4; health and sanitation, ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13; noise control, ch. 15; nuisances, ch. 16; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 17; parks and recreation, ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Operation of motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade and Assembly Ordinance of the City of Stone Mountain." 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
Assembly means a group of two (2) or more persons who are together for a common cause or purpose, who stand, walk, congregate, or assemble upon any of the sidewalks, streets, or public property of the city, who evidence their cause by signs, slogans, common dress, solicitation of money, support, or membership, public speech, or the distribution of written materials. 
Assembly permit is a permit as required by this chapter to assemble within the city. 
Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city. 
Parade permit is a permit as required by this chapter to conduct a parade within the city. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-3. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions, provided the police department is notified of each procession's time and route; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities; providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 

Sec. 18-4. - Permit and fee required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the office of the city manager and the appropriate fee has been paid. Fees for parades shall be that rate adopted by resolution of the city council and maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-5. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the office of the city manager on forms provided by the city. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than ten (10) days or more than sixty (60) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade; 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name of the organization, the address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
d.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
e.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
f.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals (no hoofed animals allowed) and vehicles which, will constitute the parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
g.  The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
h.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
i.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for the parade; 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas; 
k.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
l.  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the office of the city manager a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; 
m.  Any additional information which the city manager shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(3)  Late applications. The city manager, where good cause is shown therefore, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten (10) days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-6. - Standards for issuance. 
The office of the city manager shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of emergency equipment en route to an emergency call; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; and 
(7)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-7. - Notice of rejection. 
The office of the city manager shall act upon the application for a parade permit within seven (7) days after the filing thereof. If the city disapproves the application, then there shall be mailed to the applicant within seven (7) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the action, stating the reasons for the denial of the permit or communicate sooner if the date for the parade requires a quicker response. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-8. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city within five days after the notice of the action by the city is mailed as set forth in section 18-7. The council shall act upon the appeal within five days after its receipt and may grant or deny a permit by a majority vote of the members present. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-9. - Alternative permit. 
The office of the city manager, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action, file a written notice of acceptance with the city. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-10. - Contents of permit. 
Each application for a parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade route in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the city may require which is necessary to verify full compliance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-11. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade leader or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-12. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street not properly posted and in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-13. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-14. - Distribution of material during procession prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed from any vehicle participating in a parade or procession or other public demonstration in the public streets or public highways within the city limits any item, either perishable or otherwise, to any bystander or onlooker. It is also unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle participating in a parade within the city limits to allow or permit any item, perishable or otherwise, to be distributed to any bystanders or onlookers from the said vehicle. 
(b)  The term "vehicle" shall include any device which moves on wheels whether under its own power or otherwise. 
(c)  This prohibition shall apply to gratuities and to items offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
ARTICLE III. - ASSEMBLY 

Sec. 18-15. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any assembly unless an assembly permit has been obtained from the office of the city manager. There shall be no fee for this permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-16. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of an assembly permit shall file an application with the office of the city manager on forms provided by the city. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for an assembly permit shall be filed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the assembly. 
(2)  Contents. The application for an assembly permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the assemblage; 
b.  If the assemblage is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name of the organization and address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for its conduct; 
d.  The date when the assemblage is to be conducted; 
e.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals (no hoofed animals allowed) and vehicles which, will constitute the assemblage; the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
f.  A statement as to whether the assemblage will occupy all or only a portion of the sidewalks, streets, or public property of the city; 
g.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for the assemblage; 
h.  The time at which the participants will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas; 
i.  Such other information as the city may require which is necessary to verify full compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Late applications. The city manager, where good cause is shown therefore, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten (10) days before the date the assemblage is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-17. - Notice of rejection. 
The office of the city manager shall act upon the application for an assemblage permit within seven (7) days after the filing thereof. If the city disapproves the application, then there shall be mailed to the applicant within seven (7) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the action, stating the reasons for the denial of the permit or communicate sooner if the date for the assemblage requires a quicker response. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 18-18. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of an assemblage permit to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city within five (5) days after the notice of the action by the city is mailed as set forth in section 18-17. The council shall act upon the appeal within five (5) days after its receipt and may grant or deny a permit by a majority vote of the members present. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, 9-6-11) 
Chapter 19 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-03, adopted May 3, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 19, §§ 19-1—19-6, 19-10, 19-11 and 19-20, and adding a new ch. 19. Former ch. 19 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 4-4001—4-4004 and 4-4006; Ord. No. 96-9, adopted November 12, 1996; Ord. No. 97-6, adopted April 1, 1997; and Ord. No. 99-7, adopted August 3, 1999. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 11; parking at recreation facilities, § 13-60; noise control, ch. 15; curfew for minors, § 17-38 et seq.; parade and assembly, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Parks, historic areas, memorials, etc., and recreation, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; municipal recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITY RULES 

Sec. 19-1. - Hours. 
Unless otherwise provided by this section, parks and recreation facilities shall open at 7:00 a.m. and shall close at sunset, except that parks containing lighting for night use shall close at 10:00 p.m. Only those areas of parks and recreation facilities which are illuminated and in use at night shall be interpreted as being open. All other portions of such facilities not illuminated are considered to be closed. Applicable closing signs shall be conspicuously posted at all parks and recreation facilities and any deviation from the information contained on the signs must be approved in writing by the city. 
A park or a portion of a park that has been designated by the mayor and council to be used as a "dog park" shall be open beginning November 1 and continuing through March 31 on Mondays through Fridays from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and on Sundays and holidays from 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. The "dog park" shall be open beginning April 1 and continuing through October 31 on Mondays through Fridays from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and on Sundays and holidays from 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Holidays are to be defined as Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, Christmas, New Years and Easter. 
When the "dog park" is open until 8:00 p.m. the hours from 7:00 p.m. until 8:00 p.m. shall be designated as "quiet time" and owners shall not allow their dogs to bark excessively during this time. Owners who do not comply shall be instructed by the volunteer dog owner on duty to remove their dog from the dog park. The volunteer dog owner on duty shall be responsible for contacting emergency 911 when owners do not remove their dogs from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-11, 11-1-11) 
Sec. 19-1.1. - Dog park rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations are applicable to all designated dog parks within the corporate limits of the city and their purpose is to provide for orderly use of city dog parks to ensure public health, safety and the general welfare to the residents of the city. 
(1)  Park users, dog owners and dog handlers assume all risk related to use of the dog park. 
(2)  Each dog owner or dog handler is legally and financially responsible for the actions of their dog or dogs in the dog park. 
(3)  Dogs must at all times be under the control of a responsible adult and obedient to the owner's or handler's commands. 
(4)  No aggressive dogs are allowed in the dog park. "Aggressive dog" means any animal that constitutes a physical threat to persons or other animals of such severity as to cause physical injury. 
(5)  Dogs that bark excessively or dogs that become aggressive must be leashed and removed from the dog park immediately. 
(6)  Children younger than twelve (12) years of age are not allowed inside the off-leash dog exercise area of the dog park unless accompanied by an adult. Children under six (6) years of age are prohibited in the dog park. 
(7)  Dogs under six (6) months of age, un-neutered male dogs and female dogs in heat shall not be permitted in the dog park. 
(8)  Dogs must be legally licensed, have current vaccinations and shall wear a visible license tag. 
(9)  Choke, prong, pinch and spike dog collars must be removed from the dog once inside the fenced area of the dog park. 
(10)  The dog owner or dog handler must carry a leash or lead at all times while in the dog park. 
(11)  Dogs must never be left unattended. 
(12)  Animal waste must be removed immediately and deposited in suitable containers. 
(13)  Dog owners and dog handlers must stop dogs from digging and must fill any hole created by their dog(s). 
(14)  There is a limit of three (3) dogs per visit per dog owner or dog handler. 
(15)  No food, drinks or dog chews are allowed within the fenced area of the dog park. 
(16)  No littering is allowed in the dog park. 
(17)  Climbing on or over the fencing in the dog park is not permitted. 
(18)  The city public works department shall have the authority to close access to the dog park for the purpose of maintenance, weather related occurrences and for special events. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, Pt. I, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 19-2. - Using parks for golf practice, putting greens, driving ranges. 
No person shall use any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes as a field for golf practice, putting green or driving range. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-3. - Motor vehicles in parks. 
(a)  A motorized vehicle means a self-propelled, wheeled conveyance that does not run on rails. A motorized vehicle shall not include a wheelchair used by a person with disabilities as an auxiliary aid. A wheelchair means a device designed solely for use by a mobility-impaired person for locomotion that is suitable for use in an indoor pedestrian area. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or nature in or on any city park, bicycle path, or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as an auxiliary aid in or on any city park, bicycle path, or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit the use of motorized vehicles for maintenance purposes or motorized vehicles using marked roads, driveways or parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-4. - Permit required for organized games, assemblages or gatherings, erection of booths or sale of articles. 
(a)  The city clerk shall oversee scheduling of all city owned parks and public places for organized games, assemblages or gatherings. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed to erect any booth or stand or to sell any article within the limits of any of the public parks without approval from the city council. 
(c)  Application. All persons desiring to reserve a park shall make application to the city clerk. Applications shall be submitted no less than seventy two (72) hours prior to the reservation date(s) and shall be made by the person or persons responsible for the reservation. All applications must be approved by the city clerk and chief of police and must be accompanied by the required fees. 
(d)  Limited reservations. Reservations shall be limited to one (1) reservation per month per person or group per park for no more than three (3) consecutive days. For the purpose of this chapter, "group" is defined as a collection of individuals who have regular contact and frequent interaction, mutual influence, common feeling of camaraderie, and who work together to achieve a common set of goals; this includes individual teams or team members of a league or other affiliation. Reservations shall not be accepted earlier than six (6) months in advance of the date for city residents or three (3) months in advance of the date for all non-residents. 
(e)  Refusal or revocation of permit. The city reserves the right to refuse or revoke permits. Such a determination shall be based on health, safety and welfare of the public and protection of city property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-07, 8-2-11) 
Sec. 19-5. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess any alcoholic beverages on public property or within the vicinity of any parks or recreation facilities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-6. - Drug free zones defined. 
City parks, or any portion thereof, are hereby declared a drug free zone. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-7. - Animals in parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who harbors, possesses or is in charge of a domestic restrained or unrestrained animal (such as dogs, cats, etc.) to bring said animal onto any city owned athletic field, playground, and/or outdoor basketball court. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, graze or walk a horse or other type hoofed animal within municipal parks. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors, or is in charge of any animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal while in the municipal park. Animal excrement shall be removed from the park and disposed of in a sanitary means. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to an animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal when in police or rescue activities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-8. - Special prohibitions. 
(a)  Paint. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess paint, in any form, in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes. 
(b)  Glass containers. No person shall possess a glass container in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes. 
(c)  Bicycles on athletic fields. No person shall ride or walk a bicycle or other non-motorized vehicle in or on any athletic field owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as an auxiliary aid on such fields. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any bill, sign or notice on any tree, building or fixture in any of the parks of the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute handbills or dodgers or scatter or place any paper, books, refuse or trash of any kind in or about any of the public parks of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-9. - Closing of athletic fields. 
The city may close to the public athletic fields for maintenance purposes. Such closed fields shall be posted and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter a closed field. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-10. - Public address systems and outdoor entertainment. 
No public address systems, loud speakers, amplifying devices or outdoor entertainment shall be used in city parks without first making application to the city police department. Applications shall be submitted to the police department no less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the event and shall be made by the person or persons responsible for the event. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-11. - Firearms; firecrackers; air guns; slingshots; explosives; destructive substances; dangerous missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to handle or discharge any firearm, firecracker, air gun, slingshot or other explosive, noisy or destructive article or substance, or throw any stone or other missile in, about or across any of the parks belonging to or in the care of the city. This section shall not prohibit law enforcement officers from using firearms or other weapons in the performance of their duty. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-12. - Fires safety regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in any park or other facility owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes except for fires contained in permanently mounted grills or personal grills. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2016-07, Pt. I, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 19-13. - Vegetation—damage or removal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, cut, damage or remove any tree, tree limb, shrubbery, flowers, rock, mulch or other vegetation/natural fixture located in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to personnel employed or engaged by the county to maintain city parks and recreational areas or an authorized group of volunteers involved in a city-approved project for the enhancement of a park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-14. - Artifact or treasure hunting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to search any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes for historic artifacts or for the purpose of locating lost or abandoned personal property of another, unless such person specifically is authorized by the owner of that personal property to make such search on the owner's behalf. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any historic artifacts or lost or abandoned personal property of another from any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes unless such person specifically is authorized by the owner of that personal property to recover such personal property on the owner's behalf. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig in or otherwise disturb the ground in a park or other area owned by the city for recreational purposes, except as permitted by the city. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit a person from visually searching for and reclaiming his/her own lost property in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes, either by himself/herself or by someone specifically authorized by the owner of the lost personal property to act on his/her behalf. 
(e)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel engaged in the lawful execution of their duties or to persons employed or engaged by the city when performing their duties in any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-15. - Commercial activity. 
Unless approved by the city council it shall be unlawful for any person in any city park to: 
(1)  Sell or offer for sale any merchandise; 
(2)  Operate or attempt to operate a concession; or 
(3)  Engage in any commercial or charitable activity in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-16. - Native wildlife. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to remove or disturb any living or dead native creatures in city parks, including mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, and reptiles, or the parts or progeny thereof, such as nests, eggs, or antlers. 
(b)  Fishing activities in city park lakes or streams shall be allowed from the shore of a body of water 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 19-17. - Pollution or disturbance of springs, creeks, or ponds. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any spring, branch, pond or other water within the confines of any of the parks belonging to the city by wading by persons or animals, throwing sticks, stones, refuse or trash in or by washing the person or objects in such waters. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 20 - PERSONNEL POLICY AND PROCEDURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-05, adopted July 6, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 20, §§ 20-1, 20-11—20-14, 20-21—20-28, 20-31—20-35, 20-41—20-48, 20-51—20-54, 20-61—20-63, 20-71—20-76, 20-81—20-83, 20-91—20-93, 20-101—20-106, 20-111—20-113, 20-121—20-126, 20-131, 20-141—20-145, 20-151, 20-152, 20-161, 20-171, 20-181—20-188, and 20-191—20-200; and adding a new ch. 20. Former ch. 20 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of July 3, 1990; December 3, 1991; April 7, 1992; July 7, 1992; December 1, 1992; May 3, 1994; Ord. No. 96-4, adopted April 9, 1996; Ord. No. 96-10, adopted December 3, 1996; Ord. No. 96-11, adopted December 3, 1996; Ord. No. 01-4, adopted April 3, 2001; Ord. No. 02-7, adopted May 7, 2002; Ord. No. 04-16, adopted December 7, 2004; Ord. No. 06-11, adopted May 2, 2006; Ord. No. 08-02, adopted March 4, 2008; Ord. No. 08-06, adopted June 3, 2008; and Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted January 5, 2010. 
Charter reference— Rules and regulations, § 4.15. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - ESTABLISHMENT 

Sec. 20-1. - Establishment. 
A system of personnel administration is hereby established for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-2—20-10. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-11. - Purpose. 
(a)  The general purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of human resource administration that meets the program needs of the people of the city and provide fair and equitable working conditions for city employees that will encourage career employment. This chapter shall provide a means to recruit, select, develop and maintain a responsive work force and shall include policies and procedures for employee recruitment, hiring and advancement, training and career development, job classification, salary administration, fringe benefits, disciplinary action and grievance handling. All appointments and promotions shall be based upon an objective evaluation of merit and fitness to perform the work required. 
(b)  Discrimination against any person in recruitment, selection, appointment, training, advancement, retention or other personnel action in the city because of political opinion or affiliation, religious belief, race, color, sex, national origin, age or physical disability, if such age or physical disability is not related to employment performance, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-12. - Personnel administration generally. 
(a)  Mayor and council. The mayor and council shall receive and act upon recommendations of the city manager for amendments, additions to, and changes in the rules and regulations. The establishment of all personnel policies are subject to the approval of the mayor and council and shall not become effective until such approval is given. However, once policies are approved, the responsibility for implementation and operation will be delegated to the city manager. 
(b)  Personnel director. The city manager shall serve as the personnel director for the city. The personnel director shall be responsible for implementing, carrying out and enforcing the approved rules and regulations of the personnel system. He is the executive head of the personnel department and shall direct all of its activities and appoint its employees. He may delegate such duties and responsibilities as he deems appropriate to personnel department staff members or other city department heads, but he still remains accountable for complying with all rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-13. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-14. - Positions covered. 
All employees of the city. For the purpose of this chapter the following personnel are not considered employees of the city and are not subject to these provisions: 
(1)  All officials elected by popular vote; 
(2)  Members of appointed boards and commissions; 
(3)  Individuals employed by the city council in their professional capacities to conduct temporary or special inquiries, investigations and examinations on behalf of the mayor and council; 
(4)  The city attorney and any employee of his office; 
(5)  Municipal court judges; and 
(6)  City manager. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 2013-04, pt. I, 3-5-13) 
Sec. 20-15. - Departmental regulations. 
Each city department head is authorized to prepare such individual departmental personnel rules and regulations as may be necessary in the accomplishment of the operation of the department. Such departmental rules and regulations may not be in conflict with any provision of this chapter and must be approved in writing by the city manager. The city manager will review all proposed departmental regulations to insure that they are consistent with the rules and regulations of the city and advise the appropriate department head in writing of his findings. The city manager shall discuss with the mayor and council, with counsel by the city attorney, any proposed regulations about which he has questions. Departmental regulations which have been approved by the city manager shall be displayed in a public place in the department at least five (5) days prior to their effective date. Each employee shall be furnished a copy of all departmental regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-16—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 

Sec. 20-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the classification plan is to group all positions into categories or classes on the basis of a systematic plan for recognizing similarities and differences in job duties and responsibilities. The classification plan provides a complete inventory of all classified positions in the city service and an accurate description and specifications for each class of employment. The plan standardizes titles, each of which is indicative of a broad range of duties and responsibilities and has the same meaning throughout the classified service. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-22. - Composition of plan. 
The classification plan shall consist of: 
(1)  A grouping, in classes, of positions which are approximately equal in difficulty and responsibility, which call for the same general qualifications, and which can be equitably compensated within the same range of pay under similar working conditions; 
(2)  Class titles, descriptive of the work of the classification which identify the job; and 
(3)  Written specifications for each class of positions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-23. - Use of classification titles. 
Classification titles are to be used in all personnel, accounting, budget, and financial records of the city. No person will be appointed to or employed in a position covered by this article under a title not included in the classification plan. Other job titles may be used as a working title in the course of departmental routine to indicate authority, status in the organization, or administrative rank, but must be considered working titles only and not official classification designations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-24. - Use of classification specification. 
The classification specifications are descriptive and not restrictive. They are intended to be interpreted in their entirety and in relation to others in the classification plan. Particular phrases or examples are not to be isolated and treated as full definition of the class. Specifications are deemed to be descriptive and explanatory of the kind of work performed and not necessarily inclusive of all duties performed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-25. - Administration of the plan. 
The city manager is charged with the responsibility for the maintenance of the classification plan so that it will reflect the duties performed by each employee in the classified service and the class to which each position is allocated. It is his duty to see that the classification plan is initiated by assigning each position currently existing to an appropriate classification. It is also the duty of the city manager to examine the nature of new positions as they are created, and to allocate them to an existing class or to recommend the creation of new classifications in conformity with this chapter. The city manager shall also be charged with the responsibility of recommending to the mayor and council changes in the classification plan as are made necessary by changes in the duties and responsibilities of existing positions and periodically reviewing the entire classification plan and recommending to the mayor and council appropriate changes in the classification plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-26. - Allocation of classification titles to position. 
In initially implementing the classification plan, the city manager shall use the classification specifications approved by the mayor and city council and accompanying this article. Whenever a new position is established, or duties of an old position changed, department heads shall submit in writing a comprehensive job description describing in detail the duties of such a position. The city manager shall, thereupon, investigate the actual or suggested duties and assign the position an appropriate classification. The city manager shall, prior to notifying the respective department head and employee of the classification assigned insure that funds are available to fund the designated classification. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-27. - Reclassification request. 
Any employee who considers his or her position improperly classified shall first submit a request through channels to his or her department head who shall review such request as to its justification. If the department head finds that there is merit to the request, he shall immediately transmit a recommendation to the city manager. If the department head finds that the request is not justified, he shall advise the employee of that decision but shall also advise the employee that the request may be sent to the city manager with the notation that the department head does not consider the request justified. The city manager shall take appropriate action in connection with all reclassification requests received. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-28. - Status of employees upon reclassification. 
Upon reclassification of a position from one (1) class to another class of the same level, a lower level, or to a higher level, the method of filling the position shall be determined in accordance with the rules regarding transfers, demotions, or promotions, as may be appropriate. However, when the incumbent of a position, through diligent and intelligent application to his work, develops his position by assumption of more difficult additional responsibilities and duties so that it warrants a higher classification, the department head may recommend to the city manager that the employee be given status in such higher classification without posting the position as a job vacancy. The city manager may approve or disapprove such recommendations. An employee who is reclassified to a position having a lower pay range shall not be reduced in salary unless the employee's present salary is above the maximum salary at the pay grade of the class to which he is reclassified, in which case the employee's salary shall be reduced to the maximum salary for the new class. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-29, 20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPENSATION PLAN 

Sec. 20-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the compensation plan is to establish and maintain a pay system for city employees which is equitable and uniform, which provides comparable pay for comparable work, and which will allow the city to attract and retain employees and to compete in the job market with other private and public employers in the area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-32. - Composition of plan. 
The compensation plan includes the basic salary schedule as adopted by the mayor and council and subsequent amendments thereto, and the schedule of salary ranges consisting of minimum and maximum rates of pay and intermediate steps for all classes of positions included in the classification plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-33. - Maintenance of compensation plan. 
The compensation plan is intended to provide fair compensation for all classes in the classification plan with regard to range of pay for other classes, general rates of pay for similar employment in private establishments and other public jurisdictions in the area, cost of living data, the financial condition of the city, and other factors. In maintaining this plan, the city manager will from time to time make comparative studies of all factors affecting the level of salary ranges and will recommend to the personnel committee such changes in salary ranges as appear to be pertinent. After reviewing the recommendations of the city manager, the personnel committee of the council shall make recommendations to the mayor and full council for changes in the compensation plan as the committee deems appropriate. Upon approval by the mayor and council, the compensation plan may be changed and the salaries of all city employees affected will be appropriately adjusted to reflect the salary changes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-34. - Use of salary ranges. 
Salary ranges are intended to furnish administrative flexibility in recognizing individual differences among positions allocated to the same class, in providing employee incentive, and in rewarding employees for meritorious service. The following general provisions shall apply to salaries established in connection with appropriate salary ranges: 
(1)  New appointments. The entrance salary for all new employees shall be at the minimum level (step 1) of the class to which the new employee is appointed, except in those cases where unusual circumstances appear to warrant appointment of an employee at a higher rate. Any department head desiring to appoint an applicant at a salary above the minimum shall submit in writing an explanation enumerating the reasons why the applicant should be appointed above the minimum. With appropriate justification, the city manager may approve an appointment above the minimum entrance level. However, in no case may an employee be appointed at a beginning salary in excess of step 3 of the compensation plan. A city employee who terminates his or her employment with the city also terminates all length of service and is not automatically entitled to be rehired at a rate higher than the entrance level for the position. 
(2)  Salary upon promotion, demotion, or transfer. 
a.  Promotion. An employee who is advanced to a classification calling for a higher pay range than the previous classification shall have his salary raised to the minimum rate of pay for the new classification or two (2) pay steps, whichever is greater. One (1) additional step may be granted upon completion of the probation period. The department head must submit the appropriate personnel action forms for this increase to be given. An employee who has been promoted may not participate in annual performance increases until twelve (12) months have passed since the date of promotion. 
b.  Demotion. An employee who is demoted shall be reduced in salary to the pay grade of the position to which he is demoted and shall be placed in the same step order within the new grade as he occupied in the former position. However, in no case will an employee who is demoted after receiving a promotion in the previous year be reduced in pay below the pay he was receiving at the time of the promotion. 
c.  Transfer. "Transfer" shall mean lateral reassignment of an employee from one position class to another position class with the same salary range. When an employee is transferred, the employee shall be paid at the same step rate he received prior to his transfer. Completion of the probationary period and scheduled merit or cost of living increases shall not be affected by an employee transfer. 
(3)  Salary range adjustments. In accordance with recommendations made by the city manager or because of other considerations, the mayor and council may adjust the total wage structure of the pay plan. 
(4)  Performance based increases. All employees of the city shall be periodically (not less than once each year) appraised regarding their individual job performance. 
a.  Annual appraisal. The performance of all employees, supervisory and nonsupervisory, shall be appraised at least annually between September 1 and October 31. 
b.  Probationary review. The performance of all employees, supervisory and nonsupervisory, shall, upon their entering a new position, be appraised during the second, fourth and fifth months of the probationary period. 
c.  Probationary period. Six (6) months is the designated probationary period for all jobs. When the employee's performance proves to be marginal, the department head may request extension of the probationary period by an additional six-month interval. Such request will be supported by appropriate performance appraisal documents and submitted to the city manager for review. Only one (1) such six-month extension of the probationary period shall be granted. Employees whose performance fails to reach an acceptable level of performance shall be returned to their former level/position, if available, reassigned (if a job vacancy exists that they are qualified for), or dismissed under the provisions of the merit system. 
d.  Supervisory appraisals. Supervisors shall be appraised by their department head on three (3) key factors: setting and tracking goals; managing subordinates (including affirmative action); and achieving results (including resource management.) 
e.  Nonsupervisor appraisals. Nonsupervisory personnel shall be appraised by their immediate supervisors on forms issued by the city. The supervisors shall carefully evaluate all their employees' performance for the past year using job related criteria, position descriptions, on the-job performance, related personnel records, and standards of judgment that reflect a fair assessment of each employee's performance. 
Upon completion of the appraisal, supervisors shall meet with each employee to discuss the appraisal, employee's career aspirations, areas of needed improvement and training or self-help opportunities that the employee might pursue. 
The employee shall sign the appraisal form acknowledging an understanding of the evaluation, but not necessarily agreement. 
Note: The grievance process may not be used if the employee disagrees with the appraisal. 
The appraising supervisor shall forward a copy of the signed form to his/her immediate supervisor for review, discussion and signature. 
The appraisal shall be sent to the personnel department for inclusion in the employee's file. 
The performance appraisals shall be used by the department heads to determine if an increase is warranted. No pay increase will be approved unless required performance appraisal has been completed and forwarded to the personnel department. 
(5)  Maximum rate exceptions. The maximum rate in the range for any classification may not be exceeded with the exception that an employee's salary range at the time of adoption of this chapter shall not be reduced if it exceeds the maximum rate of the range to which his/her position is allocated under the new classification system. Such an employee's salary shall be frozen until such time as the employee is promoted or the salary range for his/her position is increased to exceed the employee's present salary. There is no provision in this plan for longevity increases to carry an employee beyond the maximum rate for the classification assigned to the employee's position. 
(6)  Pay for part-time workers. Whenever an employee works for a period of less than the regular established number of hours per week for the position held, the amount of pay shall be proportioned to the time actually employed. The payment of a separate salary from two (2) or more departments for duties performed by a single employee is permissible if the total salary received is not in excess of the maximum rate of pay for the employee's classification. Employees may be hired on an irregular or temporary basis with approval of the City Manager. Such employees will be paid on an hourly basis for the time actually worked. 
(7)  Probationary increases; new employees. Newly hired employees may be granted a one-step increase following successful completion of probation. Such increases are not automatic and must be requested by the department head, supported with appropriate performance appraisal documents and approved by the city manager. Such increases will be granted effective with the next pay period following receipt of request and performance appraisal documents. No increases will be retroactive. Newly hired employees shall not be eligible for participation in annual performance increases until twelve (12) months or more following the date of expiration of their probationary period. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-35. - Extra remuneration. 
(a)  Overtime. The normal workday and work period shall be established for each department independently in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act by the department head with the approval of the city manager. The workday and work period established may vary from department to department because of different work requirements. Payment for all hours established as the normal work period for a particular department shall be considered regular pay and shall be paid as straight time. Compensation for hours worked beyond the prescribed normal work-period hours shall be considered as overtime hours. Compensation for overtime hours shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1½) times the normal hourly pay rate. 
(1)  The city manager shall define supervisory and nonsupervisory employee categories, including categories exempt and non-exempt from the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(2)  Records to be maintained and submitted to personnel for overtime pay shall be as prescribed by the city manager. 
(3)  Extra remuneration. Employees may be given compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay provided there is an agreement or an understanding between the employee and the supervisor prior to performance of the overtime. Employees may be given compensatory time at a rate of one and one-half (1½) hours for each hour worked beyond their regularly scheduled work applicable under the Fair Labor Standards Act. Employees must use all compensatory time accrued within ninety (90) days after the end of the calendar year in which such compensatory time was earned. However, when work exigencies preclude the use of properly requested and approved leave to take compensatory time, such compensatory leave time may, upon the request of the department head and approval of the city council, be taken in the following calendar year. Employees may accrue a maximum of forty (40) hours of compensatory time per calendar year. Employees' compensatory time is authorized for ordered work or to work hours performed by employees which are in excess of eighty-five (85) hours per fourteen-day cycle for police personnel and forty (40) hours per seven-day cycle for civilian personnel. 
(b)  Uniform allowance. For job categories where employees are required to wear a prescribed type of clothing or uniform in connection with their employment, the mayor and council may establish uniform allowances which will be paid to employees in those classifications under a prescribed uniform allowance plan, or may provide that the city provide and pay for necessary uniforms. 
(c)  Court compensation for police officers. Police officers required to attend court within the county at times when they would have been otherwise in an off-duty status shall receive a flat fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per diem. Police officers required to attend courts outside the county while in an off-duty status will not receive the flat fee compensation, but will be permitted to retain the witness fees and mileage payable by those courts. If in on-duty status, the officer is required to turn the witness fees over to the clerk of the council promptly, but may retain the mileage payments if the officer used his/her privately owned vehicle. This compensation plan will be used in lieu of the overtime provisions of this plan, and police officers will not be entitled to overtime payment for court attendance while in an off-duty status, unless time required in court attendance would result in higher overtime pay than the flat fee allowance provided herein. In such case, the officer would be paid the higher rate, but in no case shall be receive both. 
(d)  Reimbursement for expenses for official travel. All city employees required to travel in connection with their official authorized duties will be compensated for travel expenses in accordance with the prescribed travel expense compensation policies of the city. These policies should be made available in written form to any employee who may be requested to travel in connection with city employment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-36—20-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECRUITMENT AND EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 20-41. - Eligibility for employment. 
Individuals shall be recruited for employment with the City from a geographic area as wide as is necessary to obtain a sufficient number of well qualified candidates for various positions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-42. - Equal opportunity statement. 
Selection for city positions will be made without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, political affiliation, marital status, non-disqualifying physical or mental handicap, age, membership, or non membership in an employee organization, personal favoritism or other non-merit factors. Discrimination in the employment of any person who is an applicant for a position covered by this chapter is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-43. - Notification of available positions. 
The city shall prepare recruiting notices to publicize vacancies and to obtain candidates for vacant positions. All vacancies shall be posted at city hall. In addition, various public media shall be used to bring notices of vacancies to as many qualified persons as possible. Job vacancy notices will be posted for all vacancies in all departments of the city. Media advertising of vacancies may not be required of all vacancies, but shall be utilized as deemed necessary to reach a sufficient number of qualified persons. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-44. - Method of making application. 
Each applicant for a position within the city shall make application on a standard application form available at the city hall. Applications for employment shall be accepted only when a vacancy exists. Each candidate will be requested to designate the type of position or positions for which he/she is making [an] application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-45. - Evaluation of applicant. 
The city manager shall establish whatever reference and investigation requirements shall be deemed necessary to determine the reputation, competence, honesty, stability, dependability and other necessary data on each applicant and promotional candidate for each position. For positions within the police department or other designated positions, such investigation will include at a minimum fingerprinting, physiological testing and a check of criminal conviction records. Applicants for positions designated as physically demanding may be required to undergo a physical examination at the city's expense prior to employment. All applicants for all jobs are required to undergo drug and alcohol testing at the city's expense prior to employment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-46. - Examination program and procedures. 
The city manager may initiate and install a suitable examination program for any class or classes of employment. Examination programs may be conducted in cooperation with other governmental agencies if deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-47. - Disqualification of applicant. 
The city manager shall remove from consideration the application of any applicant who: 
(1)  Does not possess the minimum qualifications for the position for which the application is made; 
(2)  By reference check evidences unsatisfactory employment or personal conduct to a degree so as to demonstrate unsuitability for employment; 
(3)  Has made any false statements or practiced deception in his application; 
(4)  Is found to be physically or mentally unqualified for the position for which the application is made; 
(5)  Does not reply to a mail inquiry within ten (10) calendar days or does not return a telephone inquiry within two (2) calendar days; 
(6)  Fails to accept employment or to report to duty within the time prescribed in an employment offer; or 
(7)  Has been employed previously by the city and has been removed for cause or did not resign in good standing, and is not recommended for re-employment by the head of the department in which the applicant was previously employed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-48, 20-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - APPOINTMENT 

Sec. 20-51. - Types of appointment. 
The following types of appointment may be made under the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the rules established: 
(1)  Orientation period: Full-time and part-time employees are considered to be in an orientation period during their first six (6) months of employment. This period of time is for the employee to become familiar with the job duties and work requirements and for the supervisor to evaluate the employee's suitability for the job. At the end of this period, the employee will be evaluated and if satisfactory will be considered a regular employee. Temporary or contract employees who have worked with the City for five (5) months or more prior to becoming a regular employee will not go through an orientation period, will not be eligible for the six-month review and will be reviewed at the same time as other regular employees. 
(2)  Regular, full-time employees: Employees of the city who are not temporary or hired on a contract basis and who regularly work at least forty (40) hours per workweek are considered regular, full-time employees. The regular employee is subject to all rules and regulations and receives all benefits and rights as provided by the City Code, personnel ordinances, resolutions and rules and regulations. 
(3)  Regular, part-time employees: Employees of the city who are not temporary or hired on a contract basis and who regularly work fewer than forty (40) hours per workweek are considered regular, part-time employees. Part-time regular employees are not eligible for employee benefits unless specifically noted. The part-time regular employee is subject to all rules and regulations as provided by the City Code, personnel ordinances, resolutions and rules and regulations. 
(4)  Temporary employees: Individuals who work with the city pursuant to an agreement with an employment agency and who are employees of the agency and not the city are temporary employees. Individuals hired by the city for a specific period of time or until the completion of a particular project may also be temporary employees. Temporary employees are not eligible for employee benefits unless specifically noted. Temporary appointments may not be made for a period to exceed six (6) months, and employees in this status have no guaranteed employment continuation privileges under this plan. 
(5)  Non-funded appointment: An employee in this category is one appointed to work for the city in a position funded entirely or in part from a source other than city funds such as federal or state grant contracts. Such an employee is subject to all rules and regulations and is entitled to all benefits of this plan, except as limited by the conditions of the grant under which the position is funded. An employee in this category has no guarantee of employment continuation under this plan beyond the expiration of the grant, and will be informed in writing at the time of employment of this limitation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-52. - Probationary status. 
(a)  Purpose. The probationary or working test period is an integral part of an employee examination process. It shall be utilized to observe closely the employee's work, to secure the most effective adjustment of the new, promoted, or regular employee to his position, and the rejection of any employee whose performance does not meet required work standards. 
(b)  Duration. The probationary period shall be six (6) months. However, if an extension of the probationary period is requested by a department head, at least thirty (30) days before expiration of the original probationary period, such an extension may be granted by the personnel director or city manager for a period of an additional six (6) months beyond the end of the normal probationary period. Any employee who is continued in probationary status beyond the original six (6) months' period shall be notified in writing of this continuation by the personnel director or city manager. 
(c)  Evaluation. Periodically during the probationary period at times prescribed by the personnel director, the department head or other designated supervisory person shall prepare a written evaluation of the probationary employee's performance and his willingness and ability to perform his duties satisfactorily. During the probationary period, the employee's supervisor will be responsible for counseling with the employee when he is not performing satisfactorily and is not meeting probationary test requirements. 
(d)  Dismissal. The department head, with concurrence from the city manager, may remove any employee on probationary status who is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily or whose habits and dependability do not merit his continuance in the employment of the city. Such an employee may be removed without prior notice and without the right of appeal. The department head will advise the employee, in writing, of such removal and shall immediately report such removal to the personnel director, stating his reasons. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-53. - Method of filling vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled by reemployment, promotional appointment, original appointment, transfer or demotion. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-54—20-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CHANGE OF EMPLOYMENT STATUS 

Sec. 20-61. - Promotion. 
(a)  Promotion policy. Vacancies in positions above the lowest rank in any employment category may be filled by the promotion of employees of the city, but non-city employees may also be considered. The personnel director shall, in each case, post vacancy notices as prescribed in section 20-43 for all categories of employment above entrance level positions in-house for five (5) working days prior to advertising. This procedure will allow any interested employee who desires to be considered for promotion to be given adequate consideration. 
(b)  Application for promotion. Any regular employee who desires to be considered for promotion shall submit his request for consideration to be promoted to a specific position to the department head. 
(c)  Basis of awarding promotion. When any vacancy is to be filled from a promotion list, the selection of the employee to be promoted will be made by the department head after consultation with the city manager. If the city manager deems it necessary, he may interview the candidate for promotion for the purpose of evaluating the candidate's qualifications. The city manager, in coordination with respective department heads, may establish appropriate tests and examination procedures to be used by the city manager as a guide in evaluating the qualifications of employees under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-62. - Transfer. 
(a)  Definition of transfer. A transfer is the movement of an employee from one (1) position to another position in the same classification or to a position in another classification having the same pay range. 
(b)  Initiation of transfer requests. Transfers may be initiated in the following ways: 
(1)  An employee may request a transfer by submitting a written request for transfer to another position through his department head to the personnel director. As vacancies occur in other departments to which he would be eligible to transfer, his name will be submitted to the department head for consideration. 
(2)  An employee may be transferred without his consent upon the written recommendation of the department head or department heads concerned, with the approval of the personnel director. Employees may be transferred in this manner without the right of appeal since there would be no change in pay or other employment status, and the city must reserve the right to utilize employees in positions to meet operational needs. 
(c)  Status of transferred employee. The transfer of an employee from one position to another position should not change the status (probation or regular) which the employee has at the time of his transfer nor shall he suffer loss of any of the benefits and privileges afforded regular employees. 
(d)  Rights of transferred employee. A regular employee who was selected for transfer at his request may be permitted to transfer back to the former position or a comparable position if the employee is unable to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position to which transferred at an acceptable level of competence as determined by the department head. If no vacancy exists to which the employee may be returned, every effort shall be made to place the employee in another position for which he may be qualified. If an acceptable position cannot be found, the employee may be separated. Employees who have not completed their probationary period prior to transfer may be terminated during the probationary period just as any other probationary employee without the right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-63. - Demotion. 
(a)  Definition. A demotion is the movement of an employee to a classification having a lower pay range than the pay range of his previous classification. A demotion can result from the reclassification of the employee's present position or the movement of the employee to a new position. 
(b)  Reasons for demotion. The following are reasons for demotion: 
(1)  When an employee does not perform the duties and responsibilities of his position at an acceptable level of competence as determined by his department head; 
(2)  When an employee is insubordinate or uncooperative or acts in a manner to lower discipline or morale within the city service or when he acts in a manner deemed not in the best interest of the city service, such employee may be demoted as a form of disciplinary action; 
(3)  When an employee voluntarily requests such demotion; 
(4)  When an employee would otherwise be laid off because his position is being abolished due to lack of work or lack of funds, or because it has been reclassified to a higher classification for which the incumbent is not qualified; or 
(5)  When an employee becomes physically incapacitated and is unable to perform the duties of the position. 
(c)  Demotion recommendation. When a department head determines that a demotion is necessary, appropriate, and in the best interest of the city, he may recommend to the personnel director that an employee be demoted. The recommendation shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons why it is necessary for the department head to recommend demotion and why demotion is being recommended rather than an alternative personnel action. The personnel director, with the approval of the city manager, will initiate demotion procedures if deemed appropriate. 
(d)  Notification of demotion. The personnel director shall notify a department head when a demotion recommendation has been approved, and it will be the responsibility of the department head to notify the employee of the demotion in writing, stating the reason(s) for the demotion, the effective date, and the employee's right of appeal from such demotion under article X. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-64—20-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE 

Sec. 20-71. - Hours of work. 
The work week and the hours of work shall be uniform with occupational groups and in accordance with the needs of the city and the reasonable needs of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-72. - Attendance. 
Each department head shall be responsible for the attendance of all persons within his department and shall keep attendance records on forms provided by the personnel office. Leave shall be authorized in units of days, half-days or quarter-days only. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-73. - Holidays. 
(a)  Official paid and unpaid holidays for full-time employees of the city are established by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Holidays which occur during annual or sick leave shall not be charged against annual or sick leave. 
(c)  All full time employees will be paid for a normal work day for each paid holiday established by resolution of the mayor and council. Department heads are required to schedule paid leave for full time employees who are required to work on paid holidays within thirty (30) days of the paid holiday. Department heads are required to schedule unpaid leave for full time employees who are required to work on unpaid holidays within thirty (30) days of the unpaid holiday. Full time employees required to work on paid or unpaid holidays will be compensated at the normal rate of pay. No paid holiday leave accrues during leave without pay, disability leave, military leave, or absence while on worker's compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10; Ord. 2013-01, pt. I, 1-8-13) 
Sec. 20-74. - Annual (vacation) leave. 
(a)  Annual leave is a fringe benefit. Employees are encouraged to use their vacation time. 
(b)  Eligibility. All full-time employees in the personnel system shall be entitled to accrue annual leave. 
(c)  Rate of accrual. Regular full-time employees accrue leave for a month provided that their employment date is on or before the tenth of that month. Employees under part-time, provisional, temporary or emergency appointments shall not be eligible for annual leave. 
Annual leave is accrued per the following schedule for persons employed under a full-time appointment: 

 
(d)  Request for leave. A request for leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor. Leave may be taken only after approval by the appropriate department head so that the department can function without hiring additional help. 
(e)  Stipulations governing annual leave. 
(1)  Unused annual leave not to exceed thirty (30) days may be carried into the next calendar year. At the end of December of each year, the city will authorize payment to any employee who has accumulated annual leave in excess of the maximum accrual amount. Such payment shall be at the employee's normal hourly rate of pay and shall only be made to the employee's deferred compensation plan. 
(2)  An employee separated from the city service shall be paid for all unused annual leave up to a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
(3)  Annual leave may be used in one-hour increments. 
(4)  Any employee who separates from the city and is reemployed at a later date shall be treated as a new employee in regard to rate of accrual for annual leave. 
(5)  An employee must be in pay status for a minimum of fifteen (15) working days in order to earn leave for that calendar month. For purposes of this section, the term "in pay status" shall mean that the employee is working his or her regular work schedule or is on approved leave or approved holiday. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-75. - Sick leave. 
(a)  As used in this section, "sick leave" shall mean paid leave that may be granted to an eligible employee who through sickness, injury or disability becomes incapacitated to a degree that makes it impossible for him or her to perform the duties of his or her position, or who is quarantined by a physician because of exposure to a contagious disease. An employee may use accrued sick leave in the case of: 
(1)  Personal illness, injury or disability. 
(2)  Medical, dental or eye examination for which arrangements cannot be made outside of regular working hours. 
(3)  When the employee is required to care for sick or injured spouse, child, including foster child, or other close relative (mother, father, grandmother, grandfather, brother, sister, or a relative living with the employee). 
(4)  Quarantine restriction. 
(5)  Pregnancy. 
(b)  The employee shall report any illness prior to his or her scheduled work time, if possible. If not, he shall see that the illness is reported within thirty (30) minutes of the scheduled beginning work-time. 
(c)  Sick leave is a benefit granted to employees to assure that employees are not penalized for illness, injury or disability, and is to be used strictly in accordance with the above reasons. Any use of sick leave for vacation or other use is prohibited, and shall subject the abusing employee to disciplinary action including termination and forfeiture of pay for such time used in violation of these policies. 
(1)  Eligibility. All regular full-time employees are entitled to earn sick leave. 
(2)  Rate of leave accrual. Regular full-time employees accrue sick leave at the rate of one (1) day per month (twelve (12) sick days per year.) Regular full-time employees accrue sick leave for that month provided, their employment date is on or before the tenth of the month. Employees under part-time, provisional, temporary or emergency appointments shall not be eligible for sick leave. An employee must be in pay status for a minimum of fifteen (15) working days in order to earn leave for that calendar month. For purposes of this section, the term "in pay status" shall mean that the employee is working his or her regular work schedule or is on approved leave or approved holiday. 
(3)  Certification by physician. A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by the city manager to substantiate a request for sick leave for the following reasons: 
a.  Any period of absence consisting of three (3) or more consecutive working days. 
b.  To support a request for sick leave during a period when the employee is on vacation. 
c.  If absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually, the employee shall be notified that a certificate will be required at the next absence. 
(4)  Stipulations governing sick leave. 
a.  Sick leave may not be accumulated in excess of one hundred twenty (120) working days. 
b.  No sick leave in excess of that accumulated may be granted. For an extended illness, an employee may use his annual leave or the employee may use sick leave donated to him by another employee. When all sick leave is exhausted, an employee may be granted leave without pay for the duration of the illness. 
c.  An employee who is separated from the city shall forfeit all unused sick leave; no employee shall be paid for unused sick leave. 
d.  Sick leave may be used in one (1) hour increments, but no less than one (1) hour. 
e.  Each eligible employee shall be responsible for reporting to the personnel officer, at the end of each pay period, any sick leave used by him or her. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-76. - Other types of leave. 
(a)  Military leave. The city complies with all relevant state and federal laws concerning military leave obligations. Employees who have reserve obligations or who are called to active duty should inform their supervisor as early as possible. Any employee, other than a temporary employee, who is a member of any force of the organized militia or of any reserve force or reserve component of the armed forces of the United States will be allowed leave of absence for ordered military duty without loss of pay for a period not exceeding a total of eighteen (18) calendar days in any one (1) federal fiscal year. This means that if there is a difference between military pay for ordered military duty and the employee's salary, the city will pay the difference between regular compensation and the amount received as base pay from military service. If the governor declares an emergency and orders an employee to active military duty as a member of the National Guard, that employee shall be paid for up to thirty (30) days in one (1) federal fiscal year. All other military leave is unpaid. An employee may elect to take annual leave instead of time off without pay for unpaid military leave. Time during which an employee is on ordered military duty shall not constitute an interruption of continuous employment. No employee shall be subjected directly or indirectly to any loss or diminution of time, service, increment, vacation, holiday privileges, or any other right or privilege by reason of such absence or be prejudiced with reference to continuance in employment, reemployment, reinstatement, transfer, or promotion by reason of such absence. 
(b)  Workers compensation. An employee who is temporarily disabled because of injury or illness sustained directly in the performance of his work may be covered by the provisions of the state workers compensation act. An employee who receives workers compensation payments may elect to use annual and/or sick leave to pay the difference between workers compensation payment and their regular pay but in no case shall the total (workers compensation and annual/sick leave pay) received by the employee exceed their regular pay. 
(c)  Temporary disabilities (not covered by workers compensation.) A temporarily disabled employee shall be allowed to exhaust his sick and vacation leave accumulations. Further extensions of leave (either with or without pay) must be specifically authorized by the city manager after recommendation by the department head. 
(d)  Leave of absence without pay. The city manager, upon recommendation of the department head, may grant a permanent employee leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed six (6) months. 
(1)  Leave without pay shall be granted only when it will not adversely affect the interest of the city government. 
(2)  Failure to return to work at expiration of approved leave is regarded as absence without leave and constitutes abandonment of the job. 
(3)  An employee will be required to pay the city to continue health and dental insurance while in leave without pay status. 
(4)  An employee who wishes to return before the leave of absence period has expired shall give his department head at least one (1) week's notice. If such written notice is submitted, the employee must be permitted to return to work. 
(5)  No sick leave, annual leave, nor credit toward merit increases will be earned by an employee in leave without pay status. 
(6)  An employee shall return from leave without pay to the same step of his previous salary grade and in the same or equivalent class where employed when leave began. 
(e)  Funeral leave. Funeral leave of up to three (3) working days or twenty-four (24) hours will be granted with pay for an employee absent from duty as a result of death in the immediate family. For purposes of this section, "immediate family" shall mean spouse, child, father, mother, grandparents, grandchildren, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister or any other relative who is domiciled in the employee's household. 
Funeral leave of up to one (1) working day will be granted with pay for an employee absent from duty as a result of death of any other relative not stated above. 
Funeral leave of up to two (2) hours will be granted with pay for employees absent from duty to attend funerals of people other than relatives. 
Employees are expected to take no more funeral leave than is necessary. However, if more leave is required than is provided for in the above; annual leave, if approved, may be used. 
(f)  Civil leave. An employee who is summoned for jury duty or subpoenaed as a witness in a court case shall be granted leave with pay for the length of such service. The employee shall notify his department head of such required service as soon as summoned or subpoenaed, and shall exhibit such document as proof. The employee shall report for service only as required, and shall return to work as soon as he or she is dismissed from service in court. Failure to abide by these requirements shall subject the employee to disciplinary action, and to forfeiture of pay for all time other than that actually required in court. 
(g)  Severe weather and other leave. Under certain adverse weather conditions and other circumstances recognized by the city, the city manager may grant paid or unpaid time off. These instances occur on a case by case basis and the city reserves the right to authorize time off on a discretionary basis. In questionable instances of adverse or inclement weather, employees should first call into the office to see if a phone message regarding closing has been posted and secondly be guided by those same attendance instructions affecting DeKalb County employees as may be published by local radio or television stations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-77—20-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SEPARATION. 

Sec. 20-81. - Methods of separation. 
An employee may be separated from the service of the city government by any of the eight (8) methods as described below: 
(1)  Resignation. An employee may resign by submitting a written resignation to the department head stating the reasons for resigning and the effective date. Notice of resignation should be provided to the department as far in advance as possible, but a minimum of two (2) weeks' notice is required for an employee to resign in good standing unless the department head agrees to accept a shorter notice because of extenuating circumstances. 
(2)  Abandonment of position. Failure to report to work without valid reason and without authorized leave for three (3) consecutive work days shall be cause for separating an employee from the payroll and reporting him as having abandoned the position. The same rule shall apply when an employee fails to return to work within three (3) days of the expiration of authorized leave. Employees who abandon their positions may be denied future employment with the city. 
(3)  Lay-offs. Adverse economic conditions, business and operational needs, and the best interests of the city and its citizens may on occasion necessitate that the city reduce job positions. When the city determines that lay-offs are necessary, the lay-offs will generally be conducted in accordance with the procedures contained in this policy, unless exceptional circumstances exist. The department head will make a recommendation to the city manager as to the positions within the department which the department head recommends reducing. The city manager will have the final authority in choosing which positions to reduce. The department head and city manager may consider the following criteria in determining which positions to reduce: (1) demonstrated current and past performance, including corrective/disciplinary actions; (2) transferability of skills to other positions and promotional potential; (3) length of service; and (4) other business and operational factors underlying the need to reduce job positions. This is not an exhaustive or inflexible list of factors, and the department head and city manager should consider the overall best interests of the city and the department in choosing which positions to reduce and which employees to retain. 
(4)  Disability. An employee may be separated for disability when he cannot perform the required duties because of a physical or mental impairment. Action may be initiated by the employee, his legal representative or the city personnel director with the approval of the city manager; but in all cases, it must be supported by medical evidence acceptable to the city manager. In disability or potential disability cases, the city may require the employee to have an examination at its expense and performed by a physician of its choice. When a disability does occur and impairs the effectiveness of an employee or others, the following action shall be taken: 
a.  If the disability is correctable, the employee shall be allowed a specified time, as determined by the city manager and the department head based upon the physician's recommendation, to have it corrected. If he fails to take steps to have the disability corrected within this specified time, he shall be subject to disciplinary action or lay-off. 
b.  If, in the opinion of the examining physician, the disability cannot be corrected, the city manager shall attempt to place the employee in another position which he can perform satisfactorily. If that cannot be accomplished successfully, the department head shall take steps to separate the employee from the City service through retirement or lay-off. 
(5)  Loss of job requirements. An employee unable to perform the job adequately because of loss of required licensing, certification or other qualifying factor shall be separated by lay-off. If the employee is re-certified, re-licensed or satisfactorily achieves the qualifying factor and a vacant position is available, he may be considered for re-employment. 
(6)  Death. Separation shall be effective as of the date of death of any employee covered by this chapter. All compensation due including payment for time worked, payment for any accrued annual leave and payment for any outstanding compensatory time shall be paid to the designated beneficiary or beneficiaries of the estate of the employee except for such sums which by law must be paid to the surviving spouse. 
(7)  Retirement. When an employee meets the conditions set forth in the retirement plan regulations of the city, he may elect to retire and receive all benefits under the retirement plan. 
(8)  Dismissal. Any employee whose work is unsatisfactory over a period of time may be dismissed by his department head. Dismissal normally takes place only after an employee has received an oral warning, a follow-up written reprimand which has been discussed with the employee, and where suspension has been shown to be ineffective. However, dismissal need not be preceded by prior disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 2012-06, pt. I, 11-6-12) 
Sec. 20-82. - Rights of employees. 
An employee separated for any reason is entitled to receive notice, in writing, of his separation and the reasons therefore. All separated employees shall receive payment for any accrued annual leave to which they may be entitled. Any employee who is separated in good standing will be entitled to be considered for future employment with the city. Any employee whose separation was not in good standing shall not be considered for re-employment in the city service. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-83—20-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION 

Sec. 20-91. - Types of disciplinary action. 
Whenever an employee's performance, attitude, work habits or personal conduct at any time falls below a desirable level, the supervisor shall inform the employee promptly and specifically of such lapses and give counsel and assistance in an attempt to correct deficiencies. If improvement is not evident after a reasonable period of time, more severe disciplinary action may be required. In some instances, a specific incident may justify severe disciplinary action. Except in extreme cases, disciplinary action in the form of dismissal will not be taken until reprimand(s) and/or suspensions have been used. A department head, subject to the appeal rights of the employee shall have the following alternatives for disciplinary action: 
(1)  Oral reprimand. An employee may be called in for private conference regarding unacceptable behavioral patterns or work performance standards. An oral reprimand shall be documented and placed in the employee's personnel file. If there is no recurrence of the violation which resulted in the oral reprimand within twelve (12) months of the issuance of the oral reprimand, the documentation shall be removed from the employee's personnel file. 
(2)  Written reprimand. A written reprimand may be given to an employee when: 
a.  An oral warning has not resulted in the desired improvement, or 
b.  When initial action required greater discipline than an oral warning. 
A copy of the written reprimand shall be filed in the employee's personnel file. If there is no recurrence of the violation which resulted in the written reprimand within twenty-four (24) months of the issuance of the written reprimand, the documentation shall be removed from the employee's personnel file. 
(3)  Suspension. A department head may suspend without pay an employee in his department for up to five (5) days. A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for the suspension shall be furnished to the employee. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. With prior approval of the city manager, the length of the suspension may be extended to not more than ten (10) days. Documentation regarding suspension shall become a part of the permanent personnel record of the employee and shall not be removed from the file. 
(4)  Demotion or reduction in salary. A department head may reduce the salary of an employee within a pay grade assignment or demote the employee for cause to a position in a lower graded class. A written statement of the reasons for such action shall be furnished to the employee. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file where they shall become a part of the permanent record. 
(5)  Dismissal. A department head may dismiss an employee as outlined in section 20-81(8). The employee shall be furnished notice of the dismissal in writing, stating the reasons and his right to answer the charge. The employee may also be notified that he has no re-employment rights in the city service as provided in this article. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file, where they shall become a part of the permanent record. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-92. - Standards of conduct. 
The city endeavors to employ responsible individuals and believes that the vast majority of employees are responsible citizens who understand and respect the rights and property of their fellow employees and that of the city. However, when large groups work together, reasonable rules are necessary for the orderly conduct of the operation. To this end, the city has in effect and will establish from time to time such reasonable rules as it considers necessary to ensure the orderly and efficient conduct of its business, to assure the safety of its employees and property, and to comply with applicable laws. During working hours employees are expected to comply with rules established by the city. Failure to do so may result in discharge or other appropriate disciplinary measures. 
The violation of any of the following rules will result in disciplinary action ranging from an oral correction to discharge: 
(1)  Habitual tardiness or absenteeism. 
(2)  Failure to report immediately to the supervisor any job-related accident or injury or unsafe working condition. 
(3)  Failure to report an off-the-job accident or injury which may affect the performance of your job. 
(4)  Smoking in restricted areas. 
(5)  Gambling during work or on city property. 
(6)  Working on personal business or projects on city time. 
(7)  Creating or contributing to unsanitary or disorderly housekeeping conditions. 
(8)  Failing to notify the city promptly when you will be absent from work or late to work. 
(9)  Soliciting employees while either the person being solicited or the person doing the soliciting is on work time. This applies to selling of any type; solicitation of memberships, pledges, or subscriptions; circulating petitions, or collecting money. 
(10)  Conduct which endangers you or another employee. 
(11)  Unauthorized use of city tools, equipment, telephones or other city property. 
(12)  Failure to use safety equipment required by the city or to comply with safety rules. 
(13)  Distribution of literature or printed material of any kind in the work area or during work time or posting or removing notices, signs or other written materials. 
(14)  Remaining on or coming onto city work premises during off-duty hours for purposes other than to work without advance approval (employees may report early and/or leave late due to transportation arrangements). 
(15)  Sleeping, loafing on the job, engaging in horseplay, throwing anything that may harm another, playing jokes or otherwise distracting or startling others, acting in a disorderly manner or being away from your work station unnecessarily. 
(16)  Refusal or failure to carry out instructions fully or to perform work assignments as required by supervisory personnel. 
(17)  Gross negligence or abuse resulting in the damage or destruction of tools, machinery, equipment, products, materials, or other property belonging to the city or to others. 
(18)  Removing city property from your work site without written authorization. 
(19)  Operating or tampering with city equipment which you have not been authorized to use or repair. 
(20)  Restricting work production, encouraging or persuading others to restrict work production or supporting an interruption of work. 
The first violation of any of the following may result in immediate discharge. 
(1)  Obtaining materials or tools through fraudulent orders or misrepresentations. 
(2)  Bringing and/or consuming alcohol, drugs or narcotics at work or working on the job under the influence of alcohol, drugs or narcotics. From time to time there may be city-sponsored events where alcoholic beverages may be served and employees are expected to conduct themselves in an orderly manner. 
(3)  Carrying explosives or unauthorized weapons on a work site. 
(4)  Deliberate action causing damage or destruction or waste of tools, machinery, equipment, product, materials or other property belonging to the city, a city official or to a fellow worker. 
(5)  Giving false information in making application for employment or pursuant to any city inquiry or investigation. 
(6)  Immoral or indecent conduct on a work site, including abusive or threatening language to any employee or the making of false or malicious statements or defaming another employee, city official or the city. 
(7)  Fighting or attempting bodily injury to others on a work site except in clear cases of self-defense. 
(8)  Stealing or hiding any property of other employees, persons, city officials, cities or the city. 
(9)  Failure to return to work from an authorized leave-of-absence. 
(10)  Being absent three (3) consecutive working days without calling in. 
(11)  Divulging confidential information to an unauthorized person or making any disclosure of confidential information regarding the city to any person, agency, publication, radio or television station without authorization from the city (see confidential information). 
(12)  Abusive conduct toward a fellow employee, city official or member of the public. 
Please remember these are only examples of violations which may result in disciplinary action or immediate discharge. Other situations of a similar nature may arise and these too may result in various degrees of discipline or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-93. - Appeal rights. 
Any employee who has been suspended without pay, demoted, reduced in pay or dismissed shall have the right to appeal such action as provided in article X of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-94—20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 20-101. - Policy. 
Grievances should be adjusted informally if possible. Both supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort to resolve problems as they arise. However, there may be grievances which will be resolved only after formal appeal and review. No employee shall be disciplined or discriminated against in any way because of use of the grievance procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-102. - Definition. 
A grievance is a wrong, real or imagined, considered by an employee as grounds for complaint. A formal grievance is a written complaint made by an employee concerning the interpretation of these rules and regulations, departmental work rules or disciplinary action affecting his employment with the city, including, but not limited to, separation from employment as provided in this chapter. It is desirable for all grievances to be settled informally and both supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort to resolve problems as they arise. However, there will be grievances which will be resolved only after a formal appeal and review. Accordingly, this article provides for both informal and formal grievance procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-103. - Informal employee complaint. 
An employee who has a problem or complaint should first try to get it settled through discussion with his immediate supervisor without undue delay. If, after this discussion, the employee does not believe the problem has been satisfactorily resolved, he shall have the right to carry the problem through channels to the department head if the department head is not the employee's immediate supervisor. Every effort should be made to find an acceptable solution by informal means at the lowest possible level of supervision. However, after carrying the problem or complaint to the head of the department in which he is employed, if the employee is not in agreement with the decision reached by discussion, he shall then have the right to file a formal grievance in writing within five (5) working days after receiving the informal decision of the department head. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-104. - Steps in formal grievance procedure. 
An employee who has been unable to resolve a grievance or complaint to his satisfaction using an informal procedure may initiate formal grievance action in the following manner: 
(1)  Departmental hearing. An employee may submit a formal grievance or complaint in writing to the department head within ten (10) working days after the occurrence of the act or actions in which the grievance is based, or within five (5) working days after informal discussion has failed to satisfactorily resolve the complaint or grievance. A copy of such appeal shall be transmitted by the department head to the city manager to be used as a basis for any future appeal which may be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this plan. Such written appeal shall state the nature of the grievance, the supervisor or supervisors through whom the employee has attempted to resolve the grievance on an informal basis and the relief that the employee desires in making the appeal. A department head shall respond with a formal written decision to any employee grievance within five (5) working days after he personally receives the grievance appeal. 
(2)  City manager hearing. An employee who has filed a formal grievance appeal at the department level and who is dissatisfied with the decision at the departmental level may file a formal written appeal through the department to the city manager within five (5) working days after receipt of the departmental decision. The same written format used for the departmental appeal will be used in filing an appeal with the city manager. The city manager will be required to render a decision, in writing, to the employee within five (5) working days after he personally receives the employee's appeal. 
(3)  Personnel hearing officer. The mayor and city council hereby establish the personnel hearing officer (PHO). The PHO shall be an attorney who is a member in good standing of the state bar and is appointed by the mayor and city council after consultation with the city manager and city attorney regarding the PHO qualifications and duties. Employees who are subject to dismissal from employment pursuant to section 20-81(8); loss of income through disciplinary suspension; demotion; or who claim illegal discrimination or harassment in violation of federal law, state law, or this Code shall have the right to due process through the managerial chain of command up to and including an administrative review in the form of an appeal hearing before the appointed PHO. The PHO is interested in the fair treatment of employees, with proper recognition and concern for the efficient and effective operation that local government services provide to the citizens of the city. The PHO shall exhibit mature reasoning, prudent stewardship of public funds, evidence of good judgment, and impartial and nonpolitical performance of these duties. 
a.  Appeals to the personnel hearing officer. An employee who is not satisfied with the decision rendered by the city manager in connection with a formal grievance appeal may, within five (5) working days from receipt of such decision, file a formal written appeal with the PHO. The PHO has final authority within city government to hear grievance cases brought by employees who exercise their right to appeal adverse actions which are described in section 20-104(3). The PHO shall determine if management's decision is supported by the evidence, lies within the lawful discretion of management, and is consistent with City past practice and recognized general management procedure, based on facts, circumstances, and the employee's previous record. 
b.  Criteria for review. In reviewing appeals cases, the PHO shall be guided by the following criteria. It shall be the burden of the appellant to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the adverse action or practice in question: 
1.  Does not substantially comply with sound management principles and is not consistent with the policies and procedures of city. 
2.  That the factual basis upon which the adverse action was taken is not true and correct or was substantially inaccurate in all relevant and material aspects. 
3.  That the adverse action is not reasonable, given the severity of the offense. 
4.  That an illegal discrimination or harassment practice exists in the work place which affects the appellant and which has not been properly addressed or terminated by the management. 
c.  Appeal hearings. In reviewing the action taken by management, the PHO shall confirm or rescind the adverse action in question. The PHO is not authorized to substitute an alternative form of discipline. Decisions made by management may be reversed if the PHO finds the appellant has met his or her burden of proving any of the criteria for review set out in the previous subsection. The PHO may provide management with supplementary observations, comments, and recommendations regarding alternative levels of discipline for consideration by management. The PHO shall adopt procedures for the conduct of appeal hearings. Meetings, admissibility of information, and rules of evidence may be informal as compared to formal judicial proceedings. The PHO's decision shall be the final decision of the city. 
d.  Types of cases. Issues heard by the PHO will include suspensions, demotions, dismissal from employment pursuant to section 20-81(8) and claims of illegal discrimination or harassment. The PHO shall not hear appeals involving temporary records such as corrective interview documentation, performance evaluations, and notices of reprimands or similar documentation temporarily held in the employee's personnel file. 
e.  Appointment of personnel hearing officer. The mayor shall make a nomination to the city council for appointment of one (1) attorney as the primary PHO and one (1) or more alternate hearing officers shall be similarly appointed in case the primary PHO is not available when needed to conduct a hearing. The PHO shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire city council and may be removed by majority vote of the entire city council. The initial appointment shall be for a two-year term and shall be subject to replacement or reappointment at the end of the term. 
f.  Conduct of hearings. The PHO shall conduct public hearings and render decisions to confirm or overturn management decisions adversely affecting an appellant. All testimony before the PHO shall be rendered under oath or affirmation, by oral testimony or depositions and with the right of cross-examination. All decisions made by the PHO shall be entered into the minutes of the PHO meeting, which shall be open to inspection by the public during regular office hours. 
g.  Amendments to policies and procedures. The PHO shall be authorized to make recommendations to the city manager as to amendments, additions to, and changes in the city employment policy and procedures. 
h.  Appeal hearings and record keeping. The PHO shall hold appeal hearings as soon as necessary when properly petitioned by a City personnel system employee who has a qualified reason for requesting a hearing. All such hearings shall be open to the public. The city manager shall set the date, time and place of the meeting, providing proper notification to the affected parties. The time and place of each appeal hearing; names of the persons present; and all official acts of the PHO shall be recorded in the minutes. An agenda, including all items to be presented to the PHO, shall be prepared by the city manager prior to each appeal hearing. The minutes shall be transcribed and presented for approval or amendment by the PHO. Upon approval, these minutes shall be open to inspection by the public, employees and department heads. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-105. - Administrative procedures. 
In connection with the grievance procedure steps set forth hereinabove, the following administrative procedures and regulations shall apply: 
(1)  The time limit specified in all grievance steps may be extended to a definite day by mutual agreement of the employee and the reviewer or reviewing body concerned for good and valid cause. Unless extended by mutual agreement, the time limits specified shall be met by all parties at each step. Failure by the employee to meet any time limit specified shall constitute a withdrawal of the grievance. Failure by the city or the department head involved in the action, the city manager, or the PHO to respond within the time limit specified shall constitute agreement with the employee, and shall result in a finding for the employee. 
(2)  The employee will be entitled to be assisted by or represented by any person of his choosing at the employee's own cost in preparing and presenting his appeal at any level of the grievance procedure. The city may also be represented by its appointed city attorney or other person of its choosing. 
(3)  The employee shall be assured freedom from reprisal for using the grievance procedure. A regular employee may use the grievance procedure as an appeal route for any act or action affecting his employment unless such appeal is specifically prohibited under the rules and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-106. - Status of grieving employee. 
The employment status of any employee utilizing formal grievance procedure will not be changed as a result of the initiation of grievance procedures. A disciplinary action which has been taken against an employee in the form of dismissal or suspension will not be changed as a result of an employee's initiating a grievance appeal nor shall it be changed while the appeal is in process. At the completion of the grievance process action taken which changes an employee's status may be initiated in accordance with the decision rendered in connection with the grievance appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-107—20-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - WORK SCHEDULES, ATTENDANCE, HOURS OF WORK 

Sec. 20-111. - Work schedules. 
Work schedules for all employees shall be determined on a departmental basis by the department head. The schedule showing the beginning and ending times for the specified shifts in departments where shift scheduling is required must be posted in a conspicuous location in the departments. The normal workday for departments not involved in shift scheduling is 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., with a one-hour period for lunch away from the work station, and with two (2) breaks daily, not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes each, as scheduled by the department head. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-112. - Work week. 
Employees on a regular full-time appointment shall work forty (40) hours per week except in those departments where city regulations have established a different work week for the department. All work weeks shall be in compliance with the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-113. - Attendance of employees. 
Regular and punctual attendance at work shall be required of all city employees. All departments will establish and post specific regulations concerning notification to the department by employees when they will be unable to be in attendance at the designated time and place. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-114—20-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 20-121. - Dress standards. 
Employees who are required by departmental regulations to wear a uniform will at all times, when on duty wear said uniform as specified by departmental regulations. The wearing of authorized uniforms for other than official duty, travel to or from such duty, or other specific wearing of the uniform is prohibited except where authorized by departmental regulations. All employees are expected to adhere to the principles of good taste and propriety in the selection of their clothing which will be worn for performing duties for the city. A guide for such consideration will be the acceptable standards of dress expected by the majority of those citizens served by the representative departments. Consideration will also be made concerning the type of service provided, including safety measures for bodily protection of the employee. The following clothing is not appropriate attire: shorts, halters, tank tops, jeans with holes, low neckline front or back, flip flops and slippers or clothing that has words, pictures, scenes, etc., that would be disruptive to the work environment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-122. - Outside employment. 
No employee may engage in paid outside employment if such outside employment interferes with efficient performance of his duties and/or presents a conflict of interest. When outside employment creates a conflict of interest situation between the employee and the city, resignation from one of the positions held will be expected. Failure to comply with this regulation will constitute grounds for dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-123. - Pecuniary interest. 
Employees of the city shall not have financial interest in the profits of any contract, service or other work performed by the city; nor shall they personally profit directly or indirectly from any contract purchase sale or service between the city and any person or company. Any employee subject to these rules and regulations who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in service and shall be subject to dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-124. - Political activity. 
(a)  No employee of the city shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, favored or discriminated against with respect to employment in the personnel system because of his political opinions or affiliations. 
(b)  No person shall use or promise to use any official authority or influence to secure an appointment or advantage in appointment to a position in the personnel system or an increase in pay or other advantage in employment. 
(c)  No employee in the personnel system shall solicit, take part in soliciting, pay or promise to pay any assessment for political purposes, subscription, contribution or service. 
(d)  No employee in the personnel system shall hold an elective office in the city government. Any employee seeking elective office shall take a leave of absence without pay from date of announcement through the duration of the campaign. If elected, the employee shall be separated form city service. 
An employee seeking elective office in the county, state or federal government shall be required to take a leave of absence without pay from the date of announcement through the duration of the campaign. 
(e)  Use of official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with an election or nomination for office, or affecting the result thereof shall constitute grounds for dismissal. 
(f)  Directly or indirectly coercing, attempting to coerce, commanding or advising any other officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute any part of his salary or compensation or anything else of value to any party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purposes is prohibited and shall result in dismissal. 
(g)  No employee in the city service will actively participate in local political party management or in local political campaigns or campaigning while on duty. This shall not be construed to restrict the rights of an employee covered by this chapter to vote in any election when qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-125. - Gifts and gratuities. 
An employee shall not accept gifts, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns or individuals with whom he has official business. These limitations do not prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally, nor do they prohibit employees from accepting social courtesies which promote good public relations, nor do they prohibit employees from obtaining loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that inspectors, contracting officers and enforcement officers guard against relationships which might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. Violations of this policy will result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-126. - Use of safety belts by city employees. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "passenger vehicle" means every motor vehicle used by city employees during the course of their employment with the city, including trucks, but shall not mean vehicles which are not equipped with seat belts by the manufacturer of such vehicle. 
(b)  Each occupant of a passenger vehicle shall, while such passenger vehicle is being operated in the course of the business of the city and on a public road, street or highway of this state, be restrained by a safety belt approved under Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. 
(c)  The requirements of subsection (b) above shall not apply under the circumstances set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-8-76.1(c)(1) through (9). 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-127—20-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - EMPLOYMENT OF RELATIVES 

Sec. 20-131. - Nepotism. 
(a)  In recognizing that there are situations where romantic, familial or other personal relationships between employees can adversely impact the conduct of the city's activities, the city has a policy perspective on such relationships. 
Basically, the city recognizes the right of individuals to privacy in their personal relationships and the city will only involve itself where such relationships have the potential to adversely impact the city's activities. 
It is not possible to outline all the scenarios which would cause concern to the city, but some of the more obvious include: 
-  Where one employee has access to sensitive, confidential information or to information not generally available to all employees. 
-  Where one employee is a manager or supervisor of the other involved employee. 
The city will treat any situations of this nature on a case-by-case basis. However, employees should be aware in advance that a likely outcome of such relationships is that one (1) of the employees involved may have to terminate employment to avoid potential adverse impact on the city's activities. 
(b)  Relatives of elected officials of the city and relatives of the city manager shall not be eligible for employment with the city. For purposes of this section, relatives shall mean spouse, children, parents, grandparents, grandchildren, brothers, sisters, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, nieces, nephews and the immediate family of a spouse. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-132—20-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - RECORDS AND REPORTING 

Sec. 20-141. - Personnel transactions. 
Department heads must comply with procedures administered by the city manager. All appointments, separations and other personnel transactions shall be made on forms designated by the personnel director. A separate file folder shall be prepared and maintained for each employee in a central file location and shall contain the original or [a] copy of all pertinent documents. This central file location shall be the official personnel file of the city, and records or documents kept in other locations or departments which are not copies of originals maintained in the central file, or originals at other locations or departments for which there are not copies in the central file shall not be considered as official personnel documents. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-142. - Types of records maintained. 
The city personnel director shall be charged with the responsibility of maintaining a complete personnel record file on each employee of the city. This personnel file will contain the employees application for employment, a chronological record of the employee's work history within the city service, a record of any commendations or disciplinary action taken against the employee, a record of all in-service training completed by the employee, a copy of all performance evaluations prepared on the employee and any other information received in connection with the employee's city employment. All information in the employee's personnel file shall be kept confidential except for verification of employment, salary and span of service. However, any employee or any person designated in writing by the employee will be entitled to review the employee's complete personnel file during the normal operating hours of the city personnel department. Personnel files may not be removed from the city personnel department and must be reviewed in the presence of the city manager or an employee of the personnel department. This provision will not prohibit the employee's supervisor, department head, the city manager, the mayor or any member of the personnel department from having access to those records in connection with the normal discharge of duties, nor shall it prohibit the city personnel committee from having access to the personnel file of any employee under review by said group. Any file removed from the personnel department for administrative action must remain under the custody of the personnel director or his designated representative or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-143. - Public inspection. 
Any requests for public inspection of an employee's personnel records shall be made in writing, pursuant to the Georgia Open Records Act. Only those portions of an employee's personnel file required by state law to be made available for public inspection shall be reviewed. As provided hereinabove, all personnel records shall be reviewed only in the presence of the city manager or an employee of the personnel department, and only during normal operating hours of the city personnel department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-144. - Employee performance appraisal. 
The personnel director shall be charged with the maintenance of an effective performance appraisal system for all employees of the city. The performance appraisal program is designed to require each supervisor to effectively and objectively evaluate the performance of each employee on a regular basis and to advise the employee of his progress and strengths and weaknesses in carrying out the assigned duties and responsibilities. An employee will be evaluated in accordance with the provisions of the compensation plan, and it shall be the responsibility of the personnel department to maintain a roster of employees who are due performance appraisal during probationary periods and to establish the dates that performance based increase reviews are to be conducted. The personnel department will further advise the departments that appraisals are due and follow up to ensure that each employee is appraised of his performance as scheduled. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-145. - Attendance reports. 
Each department head shall prepare and submit regular attendance reports on the form and schedule designated by the personnel director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-146—20-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - CLEARANCE PROCEDURE FOR TERMINATING EMPLOYEE 

Sec. 20-151. - Exit interview. 
An exit interview shall be conducted by the personnel director or his designated representative after receiving notification of the termination of an employee. The exit interview should include the following: 
(1)  Disbursement of employee's last paycheck, showing any and all deductions that may be required; 
(2)  Discussion of the employee's insurance program, his choice to drop or convert his insurance plan, and cost of same to him; and 
(3)  Discussing the reasons for the employee's termination as well as the employee's views concerning employment with the city. This information will be most beneficial to the personnel director in making evaluations of the city's personnel program. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-152. - Turn-in of property and equipment. 
At the time of separation and prior to final payment of a terminating employee, all records, assets and other items of city property in the employee's custody shall be transferred to the department head or his designated representative and notification to this effect shall be forwarded to the city personnel department for inclusion in the employee's personnel file. Any funds due, because of the shortage in accounting for city property shall be withheld from the employee's final compensation or collected through other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-153—20-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - COMPLAINTS BY PRIVATE CITIZENS 

Sec. 20-171. - Complaint procedure. 
Any private citizen who has a complaint to lodge against any employee of the city should make the complaint in writing to the head of the department in which the person is employed within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the incident which resulted in the complaint. The department head will be charged with the responsibility of investigating the complaint, taking any action that he might deem appropriate in connection with the complaint, and notifying in writing the citizen lodging the complaint of his findings and any action that has been taken. If the private citizen is not satisfied with the action taken by the department head regarding the complaint against an employee, he may request that the city personnel committee review the complaint and the action taken by the department head. Such request must be made in writing and filed with the city manager within ten (10) calendar days of the date of receipt of the notification of the action taken by the department head. The city personnel committee will review complaints appropriately filed with the committee by private citizens, take any action the committee deems appropriate and notify the citizen in writing within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the complaint of the disposition of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-172—20-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - SEXUAL HARASSMENT 

Sec. 20-181. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all city employees. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-182. - Introduction. 
The purpose of this directive is to establish city policy concerning allegations of sexual harassment; to prohibit sexual harassment; to establish proper reporting procedures for reporting instances of sexual harassment and to define instances, happenings and occurrences of sexual harassment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-183. - Policy. 
The city condemns and will not condone sexual harassment. If an employee feels that unwelcome sexual advances, language or other forms of sexual harassment are interfering with the employee's productivity or comfort at the workplace or feels that any term or condition of employment depends on sexual favors, the employee is encouraged to immediately report the incident to the employee's immediate supervisor. It should be understood that a claim of sexual harassment may bypass the normal grievance procedure and that the claim can be expressed privately to the employee's department head. If the claimant feels that reporting to the employee's immediate supervisor or department head may adversely affect the employee's employment, the claim may be expressed to the city clerk or city manager. Any complaints of sexual harassment will be handled in an expeditious and fair manner and any violation of this policy may result in discipline up to and including termination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-184. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this article, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context, shall have the following meanings: 
Employee. All city personnel. 
Sexual harassment. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when: (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or (3) such conduct has a purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. Sexual harassment is not gender specific, and does not require that the victim suffer physical or psychological injury or economic loss. Examples of sexual harassment include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Sexual comments of a provocative or suggestive nature, or about a person's body or body parts; 
(2)  Sexual oriented jokes or innuendos which degrade men or women; 
(3)  Suggestive or demeaning looks or leering; 
(4)  Creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment; 
(5)  Touching, pinching or patting; 
(6)  Insulting or suggestive sounds; 
(7)  Cartoons, pinups, calendars, pictures, etc. of naked men or women or of a sexual nature; 
(8)  Repeated flirtations or sexual comments; 
(9)  Turning work discussions into sexual topics; 
(10)  Repeated insults against men or women; 
(11)  Making acceptance of unwelcomed sexual conduct or advances or requests for sexual favors of any nature a condition of employment, employment decisions or continued employment; and 
(12)  Conduct of a sexual nature that has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-185. - Reporting procedure. 
(a)  An employee who believes he or she has been sexually harassed shall contact the immediate supervisor. An employee may also contact the city clerk or city manager. A report documenting the complaint will be prepared and forwarded to the city manager. 
(b)  In order not to discourage victims from reporting incidents, an offended employee is not required to first complain to his or her immediate supervisor, who may be the alleged harasser. 
(c)  Allegations of unwelcomed sexual harassment shall be reported immediately by the offended employee. A victim's voluntary submission to sexually harassing behavior has no bearing on a determination of welcomeness. 
(d)  Complaints and the identities of the involved personnel shall be kept as confidential as possible recognizing that the complexity and breadth of a thorough investigation normally preclude any guarantee of absolute confidentiality. 
(e)  No employee complaining of harassment or participating in any investigation of harassment will be retaliated against in any way. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-186. - Department heads and supervisory personnel. 
(a)  Department heads and supervisory personnel shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for reporting instances of sexual harassment on appropriate City forms; 
(2)  Take immediate action to limit the affected employees from any further work contact during an investigation while making certain that no corrective step punishes or adversely affects the complainant or alleged harasser; 
(3)  Deal immediately with problematic conduct of which they are aware even in the absence of a complaint; and 
(4)  Be responsible for initiating immediate disciplinary action if the situation warrants. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-187. - Investigation. 
(a)  Any complaint of sexual harassment shall result in a prompt and thorough investigation of the complaint. 
(b)  The procedures and methodology used to build a reliable and factual record with as many specifics as possible shall be thoroughly documented. Investigators should avoid legal or conclusory terminology. This is not a criminal investigation and phrases such as probable cause should not be used. 
(c)  The complainant shall be interviewed and should be encouraged to put the complaint in writing. The sequence of events, the time and location of incidents, language used in conversations, and physical actions should be described and transcribed as exactly as possible. The investigator should encourage the complainant to be forthright in describing lewd, embarrassing, or horrific language and incidents, and also ask the complainant what he or she did in response without insinuating that the victim is to blame in any way. Witnesses or physical evidence should also be identified. 
(d)  Witnesses shall be interviewed. 
(e)  The alleged harasser shall be interviewed and given an opportunity to respond to the charges, rebut any accusations and to present his or her version of events. The rights of the accused must be respected. 
(f)  If an investigation uncovers harassment from other individuals or situations independent of the complaint, separate but integrated investigations and remedial action should be initiated. 
(g)  Both the complainant and the alleged harasser will be notified of the outcome of the investigation. 
(h)  A detailed report of the investigation shall be given to the department head as soon as it is completed in order that prompt and appropriate remedial actions may be taken to correct the situation. 
(i)  In the event that an investigation is inconclusive, the alleged harasser will be warned that sexual harassment will not be tolerated and is a serious violation of city policy. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-188. - Training. 
(a)  All city personnel shall receive a copy of this sexual harassment policy. Each employee shall acknowledge, in writing, receipt and understanding of the policy. 
(b)  All city department heads and supervisors shall receive training on recognizing and remediating sexual harassment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 20-189—20-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE 

Sec. 20-191. - Purpose 
The city is committed to providing a safe work environment and to fostering the well-being and health of its employees. That commitment is jeopardized when any city employee illegally uses drugs on or off the job, comes to work under their influence, possesses, distributes or sells drugs in the workplace, or abuses alcohol on the job. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-192. - Policy. 
(a)  It is a violation of city policy for any employee to use, possess, sell, trade, offer for sale, or offer to buy illegal drugs or otherwise engage in the illegal use of drugs on or off the job. 
(b)  It is a violation of city policy for any employee to report to work under the influence of or while possessing in his or her body, blood, or urine illegal drugs in any detectable amount. 
(c)  It is a violation of city policy for any employee to report to work or remain at work with an alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater (An employee found to have an alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater but less than four one-hundredths (0.04) shall not perform nor be permitted to perform, any safety-sensitive function for at least twenty-four (24) hours. Before an employee can return to work, he/she must undergo a return to duty test with a result of less than two one-hundredths (0.02). Documentation of this test constitutes a written warning that the city's policy has been violated, and the next occurrence will result in termination of employment. 
(d)  It is a violation of the city policy for any employee to use prescription drugs illegally, i.e., to use prescription drugs that have not been legally obtained or in a manner or for a purpose other than as prescribed. (However, nothing in this policy precludes the appropriate use of legally prescribed medications.) 
(e)  It is a violation of city policy to use of alcohol during the eight-hour period immediately following an accident, or until he/she undergoes a post-accident test. 
(f)  Violations of this policy are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-193. - Employee assistance. 
The city offers resource information on various means of employee assistance in our community, including, but not limited to, drug and alcohol abuse programs. Employees are encouraged to use this resource file which is located in city hall. In addition, we will distribute this information to employees for their confidential use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-194. - General procedures. 
An employee reporting to work visibly impaired will be deemed unable to properly perform required duties and will not be allowed to work. If possible, the employee's supervisor will first seek another supervisor's opinion to confirm the employee's status. Next the supervisor will consult privately with the employee to determine the cause of the observation, including whether substance abuse has occurred. If, in the opinion of the supervisor, the employee is considered impaired, the employee will be sent home or to a medical facility by taxi or other safe transportation alternative, depending on the determination of the observed impairment, and accompanied by the supervisor or another employee if necessary. A drug test may be required. An impaired employee will not be allowed to drive. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-195. - Opportunity to contest or explain test results. 
Employees and job applicants who have a positive confirmed test result may explain or contest the result to the city within five (5) working days after the city contacts the employee or job applicant and shows him/her the written positive test result as it was received from the laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-196 - Confidentiality. 
The confidentiality of any information received by the employer through a substance abuse testing program shall be maintained, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-197. - Pre-employment drug testing. 
All job applicants for the city will undergo testing for the presence of illegal drugs as a condition of employment. Any applicant with a confirmed positive test will be denied employment. Applicants will be required to submit voluntarily to a urinalysis test at a laboratory chosen by the city, and by signing a consent agreement will release the city from liability. If the physician, official, or lab personnel has reasonable suspicion to believe that the job applicant has tampered with the specimen, the applicant will not be considered for employment. 
The city will not discriminate against applicants for employment because of a past history of drug abuse. It is the current abuse of drugs preventing employees from performing their job properly that the city will not tolerate. 
Individuals who have failed a pre-employment test may initiate another inquiry with the city after a period of not less than six (6) months; but they must present themselves drug-free as demonstrated by urinalysis or other test selected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-198. - Employee testing. 
The city has adopted testing practices to identify employees who use illegal drugs on or off the job or who abuse alcohol on the job. It shall be a condition of employment for all employees to submit to substance abuse testing under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When there is reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee is using illegal drugs, or abusing alcohol. "Reasonable suspicion" is based on a belief that an employee is using or has used drugs or alcohol in violation of the employer's policy drawn from specific objective and particularly facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts in light of experience. Among other things, such facts and inferences may be based upon, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Observable phenomena while at work such as direct observation of substance abuse or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being impaired due to substance abuse; 
b.  Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or a significant deterioration in work performance; 
c.  A report of substance abuse provided by a reliable and credible source; 
d.  Evidence that an individual has tampered with any substance abuse test during his or her employment with the current employer; 
e.  Information that an employee has caused or contributed to an accident while at work; or 
f.  Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs while working or while on the employer's premises or while operating the employer's vehicle, machinery, or equipment. 
(2)  When employees have caused or contributed to an on-the-job injury that resulted in a loss of work time, which means any period of time during which an employee stops performing the normal duties of employment and leaves the place of employment to seek care from a licensed medical provider. The city may also send employees for a substance abuse test if they are involved in on-the-job accidents where personal injury or damage to city property occurs. 
(3)  As part of a follow-up program to treatment for drug abuse when an employee has involuntarily entered a rehabilitation program because of a positive confirmed test result. The frequency of such testing shall be a minimum of at least once a year for a two year period after completion of the rehabilitation program. Advance notice of testing shall not be given to the employee. 
(4)  When a substance abuse test is conducted as part of a routinely scheduled employee fitness-for-duty medical examination that is part of the employer's established policy or that is scheduled routinely for all members of an employment classification or group. 
(5)  Random testing is conducted without individualized suspicion of a violation of the city's substance abuse policy. Selection is made by neutral criteria so that all employees eligible for testing have an equal opportunity of being tested. 
Employees with a confirmed positive test result may, at their option and expense, have a second confirmation test made on the same specimen. An employee will not be allowed to submit a second specimen for testing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-199. - Alcohol abuse. 
The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on city premises is prohibited. An employee whose normal faculties are impaired due to the consumption of alcoholic beverages, or whose blood alcohol level tests four one-hundredths (0.04) or higher while on duty/city business, shall be guilty of misconduct and shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination. Failure to submit to a required substance abuse test is misconduct and shall subject the employee to discipline up to and including termination. 
It is the responsibility of the city's supervisors to counsel employees whenever they see changes in performance or behavior that suggest an employee has a substance problem. Although it is not the supervisor's job to diagnose personal problems, the supervisor should encourage such employees to seek help and advise them about available resources for getting help. Everyone shares responsibility for maintaining a safe work environment, and co-workers should encourage anyone who has a substance problem to seek help. 
The goal of this policy is to balance our respect for individuals with the need to maintain a safe, productive, and drug-free environment. The intent of this policy is to offer a helping hand to those who need it, while sending a clear message that the illegal use of drugs, and the abuse of alcohol are incompatible with employment at the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 20-200. - Disciplinary action. 
Any employee found in violation of this section shall be subject to dismissal in accordance with section 20-81(8). 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 21 - POLICE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; city marshal, § 4.17. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; streets designated for emergency vehicles only, § 13-33; enforcement of truck routes, § 13-84; enforcement of bicycle ordinance, § 13-138; enforcement of skates, skateboards and scooters ordinance, § 13-166; alarm systems, § 17-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest of persons, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq.; law enforcement officers and agencies, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 21-1. - Patrol powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the city shall have the authority to patrol over any street, alley, path, sidewalk, or park, in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dance halls, service stations or any other establishment in the city. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)  An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residential section or public place within the city limits if he has reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a city ordinance, a personal injury or damage to property, or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1001) 
State Law reference— Searches and seizures, O.C.G.A. § 17-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 21-2. - Distribution of firearms. 
Firearms, ammunition and other armaments of the city shall be strictly controlled by the chief of police or the top ranking officer in the absence of the chief of police. Only sworn POST-certified officers employed by the city shall be issued a firearm, ammunition or any other armament of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § I, 4-3-01) 
Sec. 21-3. - Use of police vehicles and personnel for transportation. 
Transportation of elected officials in police vehicles is prohibited without the prior approval of the mayor and city council at a regular or special called meeting. Transportation of elected officials utilizing public safety personnel is prohibited without the prior approval of the mayor and city council at a regular or special called meeting. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § I, 4-3-01) 
Chapter 22 - SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; sewer fees, § 6.15. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 5; environment and land development, Ch. 8; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; solid waste, Ch. 24; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 25; subdivision regulations, Ch. 26; construction noise, § 15-9; nuisances enumerated, § 16-1; drainage under land subdivision regulations, § 26-81; sewerage facilities under land subdivision regulations, § 26-83. 
State Law reference— Acquisition and construction of water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; grants for water and sewer services, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2; public utilities, O.C.G.A. Title 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
City manager means the city manager or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer ) means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2001) 
Sec. 22-2. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(c)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within sixty days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2002) 
Sec. 22-3. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently uncover or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2015) 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct, § 17-2 et seq. 
Sec. 22-4. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city shall, bearing proper credentials and identification, be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city manager or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the city manager or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees; the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 22-38. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2016) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 22-5. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter except section 22-3 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2017) 
Sec. 22-6. - Stormwater quality management code adopted. 
The city does hereby adopt the stormwater quality management code of Dekalb County, Georgia as codified in Chapter 22.5 of the Code of Dekalb County, Georgia. The city council further grants, pursuant to its authority to enter into intergovernmental agreements, to the public works department of Dekalb County the authority to enforce said stormwater quality management code within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, 10-1-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-8, adopted Oct. 1, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 22-6 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 22-7—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 22-31. - Sanitary sewer. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground- water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2005) 
Sec. 22-32. - Unpolluted drainage. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city manager. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city manager, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2006) 
Sec. 22-33. - Prohibited discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters of wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the wastes and discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cup, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2007) 
Sec. 22-34. - Restricted discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city manager that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, material of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius); 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city manager for such materials; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city manager as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Material which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; or 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs; and 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2008) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, Ch. 24. 
Sec. 22-35. - Authority of city manager. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which water contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 22-34, and which, in the judgement of the city manager, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city manager may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 22-40. 
(b)  If the city manager permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2009) 
Sec. 22-36. - Interceptors required. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city manager they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2010) 
Sec. 22-37. - Preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2011) 
Sec. 22-38. - Control manhole. 
When required by the city manager, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city manager. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2012) 
Sec. 22-39. - Standards. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.) Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2013) 
Sec. 22-40. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2014) 
Chapter 23 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-10, adopted October 4, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 23, §§ 23-1—23-14, and adding a new ch. 23. Former ch. 23 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-12, adopted November 2, 2004. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; signs to be posted, § 3-10; lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments, § 3-54; lighted electric advertising signs on distilled spirits, wine or malt beverage establishments, 3-84; buildings, ch. 5; environment and land development, ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, ch. 25; subdivision regulations, ch. 26; zoning, app. A. 
State Constitution reference— Power of General Assembly to provide by law for the control and regulation of outdoor advertising devices adjacent to certain highways, Art. III, § VI, Par. II. 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising near certain highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Findings. 
The mayor and city council find that signs provide an important medium through which persons may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, the number, size, design characteristics, and locations of signs in the city can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and to the city's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. The mayor and council find that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing signs in the city limits of Stone Mountain. 
(2)  Protect the property values by preserving the aesthetic qualities of the unique natural environment that distinguishes the city. The preservation of such environment from excessive and obtrusive signs is a matter of critical importance to the city. 
(3)  Promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs do not create traffic hazards or hazards due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment. 
(4)  Promote the efficient transfer of general public and commercial identification or information by improving the legibility and effectiveness of signs through the control of their number, location, size, appearance, illumination, and animation. 
(5)  Provide fair and reasonable opportunities for the identification of businesses which are located in the city, and to provide for the identification of the availability of products, goods, or services so as to promote the economic vitality of businesses that are located within the city. 
(6)  To insure the protection of free speech rights under the state and United States Constitutions within the city. 
(7)  To establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent and aesthetic characteristics of those districts. 
(8)  To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances. 
(9)  To place reasonable controls on nonconforming signs that are by definition contrary to the public health, safety and welfare while protecting the constitutional rights of the owners of said nonconforming signs. 
(10)  To prohibit all signs not expressly authorized by this chapter, to provide for the maintenance of signs and to provide for the enforcement of the provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-3. - Affected signs. 
This chapter shall apply to any sign located within the city limits of Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-4. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, the word "person" includes a firm, organization, partnership, trust or corporation, and the word "city" shall mean the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
Abandoned sign shall mean a sign that exists when the business activity or firm which such sign advertises is no longer in operation, has moved from the registered business address, or does not have a current occupational tax certificate. 
Animated sign shall mean a sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or uses movement or a change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. This includes signs that rotate or revolve to display a message in more than one (1) direction. 
Area of a sign/sign area shall mean the total area upon which a message is displayed on any sign consisting of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Announcement sign shall mean a sign used to announce entrance or exit information, business hours, menus offered, off-street parking or similar information. This definition does not include advertisements. 
Awning shall mean a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework, 
Banner shall mean a piece of fabric or similar material which is permanently or temporarily attached to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or mounted to allow movement caused by the atmosphere. 
Canopy sign shall mean a sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any roof or roof-like structure which is extended over a sidewalk, walkway or vehicle access area. 
Commercial message means sign copy which identifies, advertises, or directs attention to a business, or is intended to include the purchase of goods, property, or service, including without limitation, any sign copy naming a brand of goods or service or otherwise proposing a commercial transaction. 
Electronic sign shall mean a sign whose message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control, including the device known as a commercial electronic variable message sign. 
Facade shall mean the exterior wall of a building facing any street which provides direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
Freestanding or ground sign shall mean any sign supported by uprights or braces or resting upon a foundation in the ground that is not supported or suspended from any building, or any sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
Illegal sign shall mean any sign that was erected in violation of the law, as they existed at the time the sign permit was issued, signs that were not built in conformance with the issued permit, or signs installed without a permit unless otherwise authorized by this chapter. 
Internally illuminated sign shall mean a sign that has light cast through the sign face from an internal light source. 
Lot shall mean a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Political campaign sign means any temporary sign or other graphic erected during an election or initiative/referendum campaign to publicize candidates running for office or ballot issues. 
Portable sign shall mean any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or in the bed of a pick up truck or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an "A" or "T" frame sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
Public service sign means a temporary, noncommercial sign devoted to religious, charitable, cultural, governmental or educational purposes. 
Sign shall mean a device, structure or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" shall include the structure upon which a sign face is located. Any device, structure or representation for visual communications which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others that is wholly located within a completely enclosed building and is located a minimum of three (3) feet away from any opening or exterior window or and seasonal holiday decorations shall not be included within the definition of "sign" and regulated as such. 
Subdivision sign shall mean any ground sign placed at or within seventy-five (75) feet of the intersection of two (2) roads, at least one (1) of which is a public road, with the other road being the main thoroughfare into and out of a commercial or residential subdivision. 
Substantial damage means damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of the value of the sign and/or sign structure at the time of destruction. 
Temporary sign means a temporary sign explicitly authorized by this chapter for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
Umbrella signs shall mean any sign, logo, design or other visual communication located on the fabric covering of an umbrella. 
Wall sign shall mean a sign fastened, placed, or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of a structure itself, whether front, rear, or side of the structure. 
Window sign shall mean any sign displayed or located on the interior of a business premises that is either attached to or is located within three (3) feet of an exterior window, and is intended primarily to be viewed from the exterior of the premises. For the purpose of this chapter, glass in exterior doors are considered to be windows. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-5—23-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGN CLASSIFICATIONS 

Sec. 23-11. - Non-compliant signs. 
Any sign existing as of the effective date of this chapter or thereafter erected which does not have a permit issued by the city, pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, or any sign so reclassified pursuant to section 23-13, is hereby deemed to be an illegal sign and such sign and the person or persons responsible for such sign shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-12. - Compliant signs. 
(a)  Any permitted sign which complies with the provisions of this chapter, and any subsequent amendment hereto, is hereby deemed to be a legal sign. Any proposed alteration to or relocation of such sign shall require a new permit pursuant to article IV unless the proposed alteration is specifically exempt from such permit requirement pursuant to section 23-32. 
(b)  Any legal sign which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter solely due to the enactment of an amendment hereto shall, upon the effective date of such amendment, become a non-conforming sign and subject to the provisions of section 23-13. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-13. - Signs made non-conforming by this chapter. 
For the purposes of this section, the phrase "approved and lawfully erected under previous sign restrictions" shall mean any sign for which, prior to adoption of this chapter, a sign permit had been obtained and which otherwise met all of the rules and regulations applicable to such sign on that date. 
Signs which, on the effective date of this chapter, were approved and lawfully erected under previous sign restrictions and which or have become nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this chapter may continue in existence, as "nonconforming signs," subject to the following restrictions: 
The owner of the sign shall secure a permit for the continuation of the sign, subject to the restrictions of this section. Such permit shall be obtained within ninety (90) days of the notice of nonconformance. There shall be no charge for this permit. Failure to secure such permit within ninety (90) days shall result in waiver of the protection afforded nonconforming signs by this section and such signs shall be illegal and subject to removal by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
No change shall be made in the size of any nonconforming sign, nor shall any structural changes be made in such a sign unless the sign is brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. However, the repair of a nonconforming sign is permissible under this chapter. 
Signs, which are, afforded the protection of this section, but which thereafter become abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days shall lose their protection under these nonconforming sign provisions and shall thereafter become illegal signs. For the purposes of this section, the sign shall be deemed abandoned if: 
(1)  No business, trade or pursuit is actively engaged in the conduct of commerce on the business premise for which the sign is related; or 
(2)  The sign structure is not utilized for any advertising purpose. 
Any nonconforming sign declared to be unsafe by the enforcement officer shall be removed or rendered safe and brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Any permitted non-conforming sign and/or sign structure substantially damaged must be repaired or rebuilt within forty-five (45) days of date of damage. Any permitted non-conforming sign not repaired or rebuilt within this time is required to be rebuilt or repaired to be in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter or shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-14—23-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 23-21. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Except as may be hereinafter specifically permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or use within the city, when visible from any public way, any of the following signs: 
(1)  Off-premises signs except with the written permission of the property owner and meeting all other requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  Signs or portions of signs that move by any means or signs that give the appearance of movement in any manner; 
(3)  Roof signs or signs where any portion of the sign extends above the roof of the building where the sign is located; 
(4)  Any vehicle sign larger than four (4) square feet where the sign projects beyond the manufacturer's profile of the vehicle and is displayed in public view under such circumstances as to indicate that the primary purpose of said display is to attract the attention of the public rather than to serve the business of the owner thereof in the manner which is customary for said vehicle; 
(5)  Any sign which emits a sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke, bubbles, or vapor; 
(6)  Any sign or sign structure which obstructs the view of, or may be confused with, a traffic directional/safety sign; 
(7)  Any sign, other than a traffic directional/safety sign, in any street right-of-way except yard sale signs not larger than three (3) square feet as provided in article VI; 
(8)  Any sign painted on or attached to trees, other natural features, other sign posts, or utility poles; 
(9)  Abandoned or dilapidated signs; 
(10)  Any sign towed behind a vehicle or mounted in the bed of a vehicle except during city sponsored or permitted events; 
(11)  Any sign which exhibits statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature; 
(12)  Any sign which is portable or not securely attached to a building or to the ground except as provided herein; 
(13)  Inflatable signs of any type; 
(14)  Internally illuminated signs or signs which contain a visible light source; 
(15)  Any sign which requires a permit and does not meet the requirements of this article; or 
(16)  Any sign which is displayed or erected for which a permit has been denied; 
(17)  Neon signs except as provided in section 23-32 of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the other enforcement provisions of article VIII of this chapter, prohibited signs are subject to impoundment without notice to the owners thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-22—23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN PERMITS 

Sec. 23-31. - Permit required. 
No sign or sign structure shall be erected, displayed, relocated, or altered, unless specifically exempted pursuant to section 23-32 or until the required fees have been paid and a sign permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-32. - Signs exempt from permit. 
A permit is not required for the following types of signs: 
(1)  Any legal notice or public safety sign issued and required to be posted by any federal, state, county or municipal government or an official sign as so designated by resolution of city council. 
(2)  Any street or road name sign, traffic directional safety sign or historical marker where the sign face does not exceed four square feet per sign face and does not contain any commercial copy or graphics. The city shall have the authority to limit the number, location and color of such signs. 
(3)  Yard sale signs subject to the following: 
a.  No sign shall be placed within right-of-way; 
b.  Sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in size; 
c.  Signs shall not be placed more than twenty-four (24) hours before the date of the sale; 
d.  All signs must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after date of sale; 
e.  Signs shall not exceed four (4) days of total display time; 
f.  Signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from edge of pavement 
(4)  Any real estate sign or sign system with changeable information which conforms to a each of the following: 
a.  Size shall be rectangular in shape and not exceed sixteen (16) square feet; 
b.  The quantity shall be limited to one per street frontage of the affected premises; 
c.  A free standing sign shall be mounted so that its top edge is no higher than six feet above grade; and a facade mounted sign shall be mounted so that its top edge is no higher than the roof line; 
d.  Sign shall not be illuminated; 
e.  Signs offering tenant space at a commercial center shall not be free standing but may be placed as a tenant panel on a permitted directory sign or on the facade of the tenant space being offered. 
(5)  Campaign signs no larger than forty (40) square feet placed upon private property with the express permission of the property owner or four (4) square feet if placed on the right-of-way a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement. 
(6)  Any project sign for work under construction located on the construction site which conforms to each of the following; 
a.  Size shall be rectangular in shape and not exceed forty (40) square feet; 
b.  The quantity shall be limited to one (1) per affected premises; 
c.  A free standing sign shall be mounted so that its tip edge is no higher than six (6) feet above grade; and a facade mounted sign shall be mounted so that its tip edge is no higher than the roof line; 
d.  Sign may not be erected prior to issuance of a city building permit and must be removed prior to the issuance of a city certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  Any public utility sign not exceeding one (1) square foot provided it is placed on the utility's equipment. 
(8)  Any temporary sign, displayed in or on a window, which does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total window pane area which does not contain fluorescent colors. 
(9)  Any sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in area containing only non-commercial copy or graphics and which is not legible from any street right-of-way. 
(10)  One (1) neon sign per premises not to exceed two (2) square feet in area; (example "Open" sign). 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 2015-10, Pt. I, 9-1-15) 
Sec. 23-33. - Sign alterations exempt from permit. 
A permit is not required prior to engaging in sign alterations if such alterations involve only: 
(1)  The changing of copy on a sign permitted for changeable copy; 
(2)  The painting or refinishing of the surface of a sign face or sign structure of a permitted sign so as to keep the appearance of such sign as approved on the date such sign received a permit; or 
(3)  The changing of any tenant panels on a permitted directory sign provided such tenant panel matches the approved tenant panel design. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-34—23-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMANENT SIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 23-41. - Sign illumination. 
(a)  Illuminated signs shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Illumination shall be by an externally located steady stationary light source, shielded and directed solely at the sign; 
(2)  Light sources to illuminate signs shall be designed to minimize their visibility from any street right-of-way, reduce glare hazardous to pedestrians or vehicle drivers and avoid creation of a nuisance to adjacent properties; 
(3)  The intensity of the light shall not exceed twenty (20) foot candles at any point on the sign face; and 
(b)  Signs shall not have light-reflection backgrounds but may use light-reflecting lettering. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-42. - Free standing signs. 
(a)  The area and quantity of any free standing sign for which a permit is required shall conform to the following requirements. The total number of signs for any individual development may not exceed the total number allowed as noted below: 
(1)  A residential development shall be allowed two (2) free-standing signs per entrance. No sign face shall exceed forty (40) square feet. Such signs shall be constructed of brick, rock, stucco, or similar material. 
(2)  Commercial, institutional, or industrial development approved for more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of gross floor area shall be allowed no more than two (2) free standing signs. Each sign shall have no more than one hundred sixty (160) square feet of sign face divided among not more than four (4) sign faces containing copy. No single sign face shall exceed forty (40) square feet. 
(3)  A commercial, institutional or industrial development approved for two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less of gross floor area shall be allowed one (1) free-standing sign. Said sign shall have no more than eighty (80) square feet of sign face divided between not more than two (2) sign faces containing copy. If an applicant in this category shall waive the right to have a free-standing sign, the applicant shall be permitted to exceed the size limitations of section 23-43 by fifty (50) percent. No single sign face shall exceed forty (40) square feet. 
(b)  The maximum height of any free-standing sign above the average grade elevation of the nearest public way or within a twenty-foot radius of the sign shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
(c)  The bottom edge of the sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height from the lowest grade elevation at the base of the sign. 
(d)  The maximum width of any free standing sign shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(e)  The maximum depth of any free standing sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the width. 
(f)  The area of the sign structure for any free standing sign shall not exceed the area of the sign face by more than one hundred (100) percent. 
(g)  All free standing signs fronting on a street right-of-way shall be required to be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the edge of the adjacent street pavement. However, if conditions exist so as to make this impractical, this setback may be reduced by the city, provided such reduction does not create a hazard to motorists or pedestrians and that no portion of the sign is located in the right-of-way. 
(h)  Free-standing signs shall be separated by a distance of not less than two hundred (200) foot intervals along each street frontage of the premises. In the event that a street frontage of less than two hundred (200) feet exists for any premises, only one (1) sign shall be permitted along that frontage, notwithstanding that a greater number of signs may appear to be permitted by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-43. - Facade and wall signs. 
(a)  The total area of facade or wall signs shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the area of the facade upon which they are placed with the maximum size of any one (1) sign limited to forty (40) square feet. 
(b)  No more than one (1) sign per tenant may be placed on any one (1) facade or wall of any one (1) building. However, in a single tenant building that is otherwise entitled to a free standing sign the owner can elect to install not more than two (2) facade or wall signs in lieu of the free standing sign. 
(c)  Facade or wall signs must be contained within any single wall panel, window, door or other architectural component upon which they are placed. 
(d)  Tenant facade or wall signs must be located on the facade or wall of the tenant space being identified. 
(e)  On multi-tenant buildings the owner must submit an overall sign program for the entire building prior to the issuance of a permit for any facade or wall sign. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-44. - Window/door signs. 
Window/door advertising signs are allowed only in nonresidential zoning districts. Temporary window signs may be installed without a permit, but they must be installed in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. Window advertising signs may be intended for either advertising purposes or for information purposes. 
A window advertising sign is intended to promote the goods and services offered for sale at the business premises on which the sign is located. For purposes of administering this chapter, window advertising signs shall include public service signs and political campaign signs. 
Such signs must be placed inside and may be taped to the window/door or frame, or may be otherwise attached or placed in the window area in order to display a message. 
No more than fifty (50) percent of the windows/doors of a business premises shall be used to display window advertising signs. 
No sign shall exceed more than fifty (50) percent of the pane(s) on which it is erected. Area of the pane shall be the area which encloses the individual pane. Each individual pane is considered an area of which not to exceed more than fifty (50) percent in signage. However for the purpose of this chapter any framed window area consisting of a single window pane that is divided by grids or muntins creating the appearance of smaller panes or a larger framed window area filled with smaller panes separated by muntins the total framed area shall be considered a single pane in the calculation of the fifty (50) percent coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-45—23-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL SIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 23-51. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Temporary business signs. Businesses which have submitted a complete application for a permanent sign in accordance with article IV for a sign which identifies the business may be issued a permit for a temporary sign to identify the business. Such temporary business signs shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Only one (1) sign per premises with no more than two (2) sign faces. Any single sign face not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(b)  Tax exempt organization temporary signs. Tax exempt organizations conducting a fund raising event within the limits of the city may be issued a permit for a temporary sign to identify the event. Such tax exempt organization temporary signs shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Only one sign per premises with no more than two (2) sign faces. Any single sign face not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(2)  Sign to be constructed of one-half-inch duroply, or a material of equal durability, mounted on four (4) by four (4) wood posts or other sign supports to achieve the same rigidity. 
(3)  The signs must be placed on the premises of the event with no portion of the sign in any right-of-way or easement. 
(4)  Tax exempt organization temporary signs shall not be illuminated. 
(c)  Temporary message boards. Businesses which have a permitted permanent sign in accordance with these regulations may be issued a permit for a temporary message board sign on public property conforming to the following: 
(1)  Only one (1) sign per premises with no more than two (2) sign faces. Any single sign face not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(2)  Sign to be constructed of one-half-inch duroply, or a material of equal durability, mounted on four (4) by four (4) wood posts or other sign supports to achieve the same rigidity. 
(3)  Signs are to be displayed only during hours that the business is open to the public. 
(4)  Signs shall not be placed to block or restrict the passageway on public property to less than five (5) feet in width or block the ingress/egress to any building. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 2015-10, Pt. I, 9-1-15) 
Sec. 23-52. - Real estate and project signs. 
(a)  Real estate signs or project signs not meeting the requirements of section 23-32 shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The total area of a free standing real estate or project sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and twenty (20) square feet per sign face. The maximum height for a free standing real estate or project sign shall not exceed five (5) feet above the average grade within a twenty-foot radius of the sign and the lower edge shall not exceed four (4) feet in height from the lowest grade at the base of the sign. 
(c)  Real estate signs offering tenant space at a commercial center shall not be free standing but may be placed as a tenant panel on a permitted directory sign on the facade of the tenant space being offered. 
(d)  The total area of a facade real estate or project sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
(e)  The number of real estate or project signs placed on any one premises shall be limited to: 
(1)  One (1) real estate sign per street frontage inclusive of those allowed by section 23-32. This sign may be double faced provided the faces are not separated by more than fifteen (15) inches. 
(2)  One (1) project sign inclusive of those allowed by section 23-32. 
(f)  Real estate or project signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-53. - Special event signs. 
(a)  Special event signs may be erected only with approval of the city council. 
(b)  Special event signs may announce only events that are sponsored by a public entity or a tax-exempt organization. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-54. - Directory signs. 
If visible from any street right-of-way the number, location and area of directory signs shall be within the limits established by section 23-43. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-55. - Gasoline filling stations. 
(a)  Petroleum product pumps and dispensers which are within view of a public way shall be permitted to display only information required by law, the brand name and type of product being dispensed, and one (1) additional sign mounted on the pump or dispenser not to exceed one (1) square foot in size. Canopy signs are not allowed. 
(b)  Premises from which retail petroleum products are dispensed by pump shall be permitted one (1) additional sign with a maximum area of ten (10) square feet announcing the price per gallon of the products. In lieu of the one (1) additional sign permitted above, the price per gallon may be: 
(1)  Displayed on each individual pump structure with characters not exceeding six (6) inches in height; or 
(2)  Displayed by increasing by ten (10) square feet the area allowed by section 23-42 for a single free-standing sign. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-56. - Flags. 
(a)  The official flags of the federal, state, county, or municipal governments are not deemed to be signs, provided that no such flag shall exceed forty (40) square feet per face and is kept in good condition. 
(b)  All banner flags not exceeding ten (10) square feet per face are not deemed to be signs provided that no more than two (2) flags per premises are displayed at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-57. - Changeable copy. 
(a)  No more than one (1) sign per street frontage of any premises shall contain changeable copy. 
(b)  The area of changeable copy shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per sign face. Copy height shall be eight (8) inches maximum and four (4) inches minimum. 
(c)  Changeable copy shall be limited to announcing: 
(1)  Motion pictures or entertainment at a theater whose primary function is to provide musical or dramatic events; or 
(2)  Gasoline prices as described in section 23-55. 
(3)  Other notices or information items. 
(d)  Changeable copy shall be securely fastened to the sign face and neatly maintained to appear as initially designed and placed. 
(e)  Special event signs as described in section 23-53 are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-58. - Park signs. 
All signs in publicly owned parks shall comply with the provisions of this chapter except as follows: 
(1)  Temporary signs are allowed at facilities rented by the public for a private event (family reunion, picnic, or similar events of non-commercial nature.) Such signs are allowed only for the period of the event. 
(2)  Temporary advertising signs as part of a fund raising event conducted by a youth association. Such signs can only be displayed during the regular sports season(s). 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-59. - Banners and streamers. 
For businesses with permitted permanent signage, banners and streamers are allowed on a temporary basis, not to exceed thirty (30) days unless otherwise extended by city council. For the purpose of this chapter a banner or streamer is a temporary flag, bunting or other flexible sign characteristically hung on a building, or otherwise suspended down or along its face intended to display a message of temporary significance. No more than one (1) banner, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet, can be displayed at any one (1) time and not more than four (4) banners per business at one (1) location in a twelve-month period. Streamers shall not be displayed for more than thirty (30) days and not more than twice per year for the same business at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-60. - Umbrella signs. 
Signs located on the fabric covering of outdoor umbrellas shall be limited to not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total umbrella panel area. For the purpose of calculation a panel will be the fabric area between two (2) umbrella ribs. The sign area shall be considered all graphics, art work, lettering, and all other designs adjacent to or surrounding the graphics, art work, lettering. For example: an umbrella with eight (8) panels could have signs/graphics on each of the panels but the total area on each panel of the sign/graphic could not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the panel area. However, this twenty-five (25) percent panel coverage limit may be combined. For example an umbrella with eight (8) panels could have signs/graphics on four (4) of the individual panels covering fifty (50) percent of each of those four (4) panels with the remaining four (4) panels being blank. For the purpose of this chapter graphics or letters on the fringe of the umbrella not over three (3) inches in height shall not be considered signs. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-61—23-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 23-71. - Clerk responsible for administration. 
The city clerk or their designee shall administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-72. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any application for a sign permit shall be submitted to the city clerk or their designee on a sign permit application supplied by the city. 
(b)  The following information shall be submitted with an application for a sign permit: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, city occupational tax number and signature of the owner or duly authorized lessee of the premises granting permission for the construction, operation, maintenance, or displaying of the sign or sign structure; 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, city occupational tax number and signature of sign contractor, if any; 
(3)  Legal description and/or street address of premises or property upon which the sign is to be located; 
(4)  The approximate value of the sign to be installed, including the installation cost; 
(5)  Type of sign for which a permit is being sought; 
(6)  A scaled drawing showing the front and side elevations of the sign as proposed; 
(7)  Any freestanding sign exceeding fifteen (15) square feet of sign area shall comply with the requirements outlined in section 3108 of the Standard Building Code. 
(8)  For free standing signs, a survey showing property lines, proposed sign location, a landscaping and lighting plan or a written statement stating there will be none and any existing site improvements. 
(9)  For facade signs, a scaled drawing showing the entire facade or tenant space facade, the proposed sign location, and any existing facade signs. 
(10)  Proof of liability insurance in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($1,000,000); and 
(11)  Such other information as the city may require which is necessary to verify full compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-73. - Fees. 
(a)  A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) non-refundable application fee shall be paid at the time of application submission. 
(b)  When re-inspection is required by section 23-76 a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per re-inspection shall be charged. 
(c)  An additional fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be imposed for each sign or sign structure installed prior to receiving approval. This fee shall be in addition to any penalties described in article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-74. - Issuance of permit. 
Upon compliance with the provisions of this article, the city clerk or their designee shall make a decision to issue, deny or issue with conditions a permit for such sign within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-75. - Expiration of permit. 
A sign permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of its issuance as noted on the permit. Failure to notify the city clerk or their designee that the sign and all items required by the permit have been completed within such ninety-day period shall result in the expiration of such permit and a new sign permit application must be submitted with the appropriate application fee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-76. - Sign inspection and notice of compliance. 
(a)  Upon notification that the sign is complete, the city shall conduct an inspection for the purpose of verifying that the sign is in compliance with the requirements of the permit and all other provisions of this article at which time the city shall issue a final notice of compliance. 
(b)  Prior to the inspection of free standing signs the permittee or sign contractor shall locate and identify on the site all property lines adjacent to the sign for the purpose of verifying the sign location in relationship to such property lines. 
(c)  If the sign fails to pass the required inspection, the applicant shall correct any items not in compliance within ten (10) calendar days or the permit shall be deemed invalid and the sign and any sign structure shall be impounded pursuant to section 23-83. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-77—23-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 23-81. - Authority. 
The city clerk or their designee shall have the authority to enter upon the premises subject to this article for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-82. - Violation notice. 
When a sign requiring a permit under article IV of this chapter is erected, relocated, or altered without a sign permit, the city clerk or their designee shall hand-deliver, fax or mail the notice (to the address stated on the business license) to its owner, agent or business representative indicating that they must correct the violation within five (5) calendar days of the hand delivered or faxed notice or seven (7) calendar days of the mailed notice or be subject to the enforcement action of sections 23-83 and 23-84. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-83. - Impoundment of signs. 
(a)  The city shall have the authority to remove and hold any sign or sign structure subject to impoundment by the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city shall have the authority to remove any prohibited sign without notice. 
(c)  The owner of an impounded sign or sign structure may recover same upon the payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each sign plus the costs of removal. In the event it is not claimed within ten (10) days from the date of impoundment, the city clerk shall have authority to dispose of such sign or sign structure without compensation to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-84. - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision of this article is subject to the penalty provisions of Code of Ordinances, City of The City of Stone Mountain. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-85—23-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - APPEALS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 23-91. - Appeal. 
Any aggrieved person, sign owner, applicant, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality who alleges that the city acted erroneously in enforcing this article may appeal the decision of the city. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the decision or determination. The appeal shall be reviewed by a committee consisting of the city clerk, code enforcement officer and the city attorney. The decision of this committee shall be rendered within thirty (30) calendar days from date of filing and shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-92. - Variance. 
Recognizing that the strict application of the requirements of this article may work an undue hardship on certain applicants, variances from the strict application of the design and performance provisions of this chapter may be granted by the city council. Each application for a variance under this section shall be in accordance with the variance procedures as contained in the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Secs. 23-93—23-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT 

Sec. 23-101. - Minimum requirements. 
The standards and provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted as being the minimum requirements necessary to uphold the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-102. - Other city requirements. 
Whenever this chapter imposes a more restrictive standard than required by any other city ordinance or requirement, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever any other city ordinance or requirement imposes a more restrictive standard than required by this chapter, the provisions of such city ordinance or requirement shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 23-103. - Statutes, regulations and easements. 
(a)  Whenever this chapter imposes a more restrictive standard than required by statutes, regulations or easements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(b)  When the provisions of any statute, regulation or easement impose a more restrictive standard than required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute, regulation or easement shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-4-11) 
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, adopted April 3, 2007, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 24, §§ 24-1—24-7, in its entirety. Former ch. 24 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 4-2001—4-2006; an Ord. of October 2, 1990; an Ord. of September 17, 1991; and Ord. No. 96-7, adopted October 1, 1996. 
Note— The city provides trash disposal services through agreements with commercial collectors. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; nuisances, ch. 16; sewers, ch. 22; restricted discharges into sewers, § 22-34. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal services, Art. IX, § II, Par. III. 
State Law reference— Placing waste materials in cave or sinkhole, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-145; waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; state grants for construction of solid waste handling systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-38; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; securing loads on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, metals, cardboard, plastic, paper and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
ARTICLE II. - FEES 

Sec. 24-2. - Classifications. 
(a)  For purposes of payment of fees to the city for its services in collecting solid waste under the provisions of this chapter, the following classifications of users of such services are hereby established: 
(1)  Class 1. Residential solid waste collection services not to exceed one cubic yards of garbage and refuse per week. 
(2)  Class 2. Commercial property solid waste collection services less than two cubic yards of solid waste per week. 
(3)  Class 3. Commercial property solid waste collection services more than two cubic yards of solid waste per week. 
(4)  Class 4. On call solid waste collection services. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-3. - Initial classification. 
Each property listed on the official real property tax digest will be assigned a service classification by the city manager. Written notice of the classification established shall be given to each property owner at the address of record on the tax digest. Notification shall be by first class mail. Property owners shall have thirty (30) days from the date of mailing to appeal the classification. If the notification is returned undeliverable, then the city manager shall post a notice on the property, and the property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of posting to appeal the classification. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-4. - Appeals. 
The city manager shall conduct field surveys for the purpose of determining whether properties remain in the proper classification. The city manager shall conduct a field survey upon receipt of an appeal from the owner that the property is not in the proper classification. In such event, the field survey shall be conducted for not less than one (1) week, the survey week to be determined by the city manager; provided, however, that no property owner shall be entitled to have a field survey conducted more often than annually. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-5. - Determination of fees. 
(a)  Fees, deposits and services for the classifications shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council and a public record maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Fees shall, from and after the date the same become due, be a lien upon all the real and personal property of the debtor equal in rank to liens for city ad valorem taxes. The issuance, recording and enforcement of the liens and executions shall be in the manner provided for the issuance, recording and enforcement of liens and executions for city ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 08-01, Pt. I, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 24-6. - Billing, payment. 
(a)  For class I service, one-half (½) of the fees shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by August 15 in each year. The remaining one-half (½) of the fees shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by November 15 of each year. All fees remaining unpaid as of the close of business on December 31 of each year shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(b)  For all other classes of service, the property owner shall be invoiced at the address of record on the real property tax digest. Fees are due and payable on the last day of the month for service for the following month and shall become delinquent if not paid on or before the fifteenth of the month. 
(c)  Home occupations shall pay a surcharge in addition to the fee for class 1 service. The surcharge shall be paid prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate. For new home occupations, the surcharge shall be prorated for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. 
(d)  All fees remaining unpaid at the end of each calendar month shall accrue interest at a rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(e)  All fees remaining unpaid as of the close of business on December 31 of each year shall bear interest at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-4, but in no event shall an interest payment for delinquent fees be less than one dollar ($1.00). 
(f)  Tenants occupying properties with classifications 2 and 3 may receive sanitation service when the service to the property owner has been terminated due to non-payment. A refundable deposit will be required with an application for service established by tenants. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, Pt. I, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 08-01, Pt. I, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 24-7. - Deposits. 
Each property, except for properties classified as class 1 or class 4, shall pay a deposit fee equal to one month's service prior to the establishment of service. Upon termination of service the deposit fee shall be applied to any unpaid invoices, penalties and interest, and any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-8. - Exclusions. 
No exclusions are granted. All property within the corporate limits of the city is subject to the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-9. - Revocation of certificate of occupancy. 
The certificate of occupancy shall be revoked for any property that has solid waste collection service terminated due to non-payment of fees. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-10. - Termination of service. 
Service may be terminated without notice for non-payment of fees. A fee will be required to resume service based upon classification. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, Pt. I, 2-5-08) 
Secs. 24-11—24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WASTE MANAGEMENT AND LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 24-21. - Title; application of article. 
This article shall be known as the city's solid waste ordinance. It shall apply to the preparation, storage, collection and disposal of all solid waste and shall prohibit unsanitary conditions in the corporate limits as presently or hereafter established. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-22. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning indicated herein. Unless the context requires otherwise, words used in the present tense include the future, and all definitions shall be applicable equally to the singular and the plural, and to the male and the female, form of such terms. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Ashes. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
Building material. Any material defined as, but not limited to, lumber, brick, block, stone, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor tile, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of the construction of or repairs or additions to structures or accessory structures or the demolition of such. 
Business trash. Any accumulation of paper, cardboard, packaging materials, rags, or accumulations other than garbage or household trash, which result from the operation of stores, offices, and similar business or commercial enterprises. 
City manager. The city manager of the city, his duly authorized representative or in his absence the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
Commercial property. Any property occupied by a hotel, motel, restaurant, business, governmental or public agency, public institution, school, church, nonprofit organization, charitable institution, or person or entity not exclusively residential in nature, except that properties occupied by multi-family dwellings, condominiums or town homes may be classified as commercial property. 
Container. A refuse receptacle with a lid that is impervious to water. 
Disposal site. An area, location, tract of land or facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, or other waste. 
Garbage. The by-product resulting from the growing, harvesting, processing, handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of animal or vegetable food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction for the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects, or animals. 
Hazardous refuse. Materials which constitute a hazard to health or safety, such as poison, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, radioactive materials, and highly flammable substances. 
Household trash. Waste accumulation usually attendant upon housekeeping, such as paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage. 
Industrial establishment. Any establishment involved in the manufacture or assembly of a product or any part thereof. 
Industrial waste. All waste, including solids, semisolids, sludge, and liquids, created by or resulting from the operation of factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter. All discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, appliances, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Loading and unloading area. A space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Multiple family dwelling (multifamily). A building designed for or occupied by two (2) or more families, such as apartments, duplexes, and triplexes. 
Person. Any natural person, whether owner, agent, or tenant; any corporation, partnership, association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary, occupant, lessee, tenant, or representative of any of same. 
Refuse. Solid waste accumulations consisting of any combination of ashes, building material, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, and other waste or discarded materials of all kinds. 
Refuse receptacle. A container approved by the director as acceptable for the temporary reception and storage of refuse pending transportation to a permanent disposal site. 
Scavenge or scavenging. The unauthorized and uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Solid waste collection services. Services established annually by resolution of the mayor and city council including but not limited to: curbside garbage collection, recycling, yard waste collection, household debris collection, front end dumpsters, compactor systems. 
Tree, shrubbery and lawn trimmings. Waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, grass clippings or other natural waste. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-23. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of city manager. The city manager shall have charge of the administration of this article. The collection, transportation, and disposal of all materials regulated by this article shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. The city manager is authorized, with the approval of the governing body, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations concerning said waste collection, conveyance and disposal, and respecting the size, type, specifications, number and location of all containers and fees charged for special collections. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law, but shall not be contrary to anything in this article, but supplementary thereto. 
(b)  Exclusive authority. Nothing in this paragraph or anywhere in this article shall be construed as surrender by the city of its legal authority to franchise commercial collectors of refuse, or to become the sole and exclusive hauler of all refuse, including commercial and industrial, in the city. 
(c)  Receptacles and containers required. Every person in possession, charge or control of any building or premises upon which refuse is accumulated or produced shall be required by this article to provide and keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the solid waste collection crews of the city, or to the private collectors, as the case may be, receptacles and containers approved by the city manager as suitable for the storage of all such refuse which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The city manager shall determine the type, size, specifications, number and location of said receptacles and shall determine whether said receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. 
(d)  Standardized residential containers. The city reserves the right to require containers for residential class service to be standardized to one (1) set of specifications. The city reserves the right to be the exclusive provider of standardized containers either directly or through contracts with private providers. 
(e)  Standardized locations. Containers equal to or greater than two (2) cubic yards must: 
(1)  Be located on concrete pads; 
(2)  Be accessible via a paved driveway; 
(3)  Be in a location that allows the collection vehicle to be off any public road; 
(4)  Be screened from view on all four sides; 
(5)  Be in a location that has no overhead obstruction to the collection vehicle; 
(6)  Be located on the property behind a setback line established by the rear exterior wall of the primary building. 
(f)  Variance from standardized locations. The city manager shall have the authority to issue a variance from the requirements of section 24-23(e)(1), section 24-23(e)(2), section 24-23(e)(4) or section 24-23(e)(6) when it can be demonstrated that special circumstances exist such that the enforcement of the requirements would be an unnecessary hardship on the owner. A variance shall be in writing and include the special circumstances that serve as the basis for the variance. The variance may be revoked by the city manager upon ninety (90) days written notice if the basis for the variance changes. 
(g)  Receptacles and containers to be safe. All receptacles and containers shall be maintained in good serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this article or to the rules and regulations of the city manager, or which has ragged or sharp edges or other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents or the public generally, shall be replaced promptly by the user. If any such container, after request, has not been replaced, the director shall have the right to suspend further collection of refuse from such container until such time as the container is brought into compliance with this article. Receptacles and containers must be stored behind a setback line established by the rear exterior wall of the primary building and screened from view on all four sides. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-24. - Pre-collection practices. 
The following practices and procedures shall be followed by persons within the corporate limits of the city in order to facilitate the collection of solid waste. 
(1)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers satisfying the requirements of this article and of the rules and regulations of the city manager. Containers shall be maintained at all times with tight fitting lids or covers, and secured in such manner as to prevent the overturning by the elements or by dogs or other animals. 
(2)  Garbage. Garbage placed in containers for collection shall be enclosed in paper or plastic bags. Household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash may be combined with garbage. 
(3)  Injurious trash items. Waste material with potential for inflicting injury, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes, shall be securely packaged or wrapped in such a manner as will prevent injury to the collection crews or other persons. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to material placed in mechanically handled containers. 
(4)  Hazardous refuse. Hazardous refuse as defined in this article will not be collected by the solid waste collection service of the city. No person shall place any items of hazardous refuse in any refuse receptacle or other container for collection by the city. Federal and state hazardous waste laws shall be observed by all persons, and any violations will be reported to the applicable state or federal authorities. 
(5)  Building materials. Building materials will not be collected by the solid waste collection service of the city. The owner of the premises and the contractor, builder or person doing the repairs, remodeling construction or demolition shall be jointly and severally required to haul away and legally dispose of all such debris. 
(6)  Tree removal. The city will remove trees cut by the owner or occupant upon the required fee being paid. Trees must be cut so that no section exceeds fifty (50) pounds in weight or four (4) feet in length. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees and stumps left by or resulting from the operation of commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors, building contractors, lawn services, or other commercial workmen. When a tree is cut from private property by anyone other than the owner, such party shall remove and legally dispose of all wood and limbs. The owner, tenant, or other persons in possession of the property shall be responsible to see that such tree trimmer or other person outlined above complies with this provision. 
(7)  Tree trimmings, shrubbery cuttings and vegetation removal. Tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings must be cut in lengths of four (4) feet or less and not more than two (2) inches in diameter. They must be bundled, not exceeding twenty (20) pounds, and placed in an orderly manner adjacent to an alley or on a street curb where alleys are not available so that it can be readily handled. No other materials shall be mixed with the bundles. 
(8)  Other. Only grass clippings, leaves, pine straw and/or pine cones shall be placed in tied paper bags up to thirty (30) gallons in capacity at the designated location for pick up service. Broken bags shall not be collected. Co-mingled materials will not be picked up. 
(9)  Ashes. It shall be unlawful to deposit hot ashes in garbage containers. Ashes or clinkers shall not be placed or deposited upon streets, sidewalks or any city property or right of way. 
(10)  Pet litter. Pet litter must be placed in securely tied plastic bags not to exceed ten (10) pounds in weight and placed in the container. 
(11)  Household furniture and furnishings. Upon request, the city shall collect discarded or junked household items such as: sofas, chairs, beds, yard furniture, clothing, swings, and other such items. The date of pick up along with charge shall be provided when service is requested. 
(12)  Appliances. The city will pick up four (4) or less household appliances such as stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, and air conditioners at no charge each calendar year. A fee will be charged for the collection of junk appliances exceeding four (4) per year. 
(13)  Disposable diapers. Disposable diapers must be placed and tied securely in plastic bags and placed in a container. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-25. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Residential. Garbage and household trash accumulated by residents shall be stored in refuse receptacles complying with the requirements of the city manager as to size, shape, and materials, and shall be placed at such locations convenient for servicing by the solid waste collection service of the city and approved by the city manager for weekly pick up. All additional solid waste will be picked up for an established fee. 
(b)  Commercial. Refuse accumulated by commercial establishments shall be stored in containers meeting the requirements of the city manager as to size, shape, and materials, and such receptacles compatible with the collection equipment and methods of the city's solid waste collection service. The provisions of this paragraph apply to private solid waste collection as well as to city collections. 
(c)  Issuance of permits. The city clerk of the city shall not issue a building permit for industrial, commercial or multifamily dwellings until the city manager gives his approval to proposed plans for the storage and collection of solid waste. 
(d)  Location of containers. The city will not collect solid waste from industrial, commercial, or multifamily dwellings unless the solid waste is placed in approved containers and located at a place approved by the city manager. 
(e)  Multifamily units. All multifamily units of ten (10) or more units serviced by the city shall be containerized with plastic or metal containers furnished by the city. 
(f)  Containerizing trash. All commercial and industrial users shall containerize all solid waste generated by the establishment, including outside as well as inside debris from the premises. 
(g)  Disabled residents. Service for disabled residents will be handled on a case by case basis. Requests for side yard or rear yard collection of class 1 service must be approved by the city manager, and may require certification by a licensed physician. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-26. - Wheeled garbage containers. 
(a)  Inspections. Where a wheeled garbage container is furnished by the city, it shall normally be the only container authorized for garbage collection and shall be subject to inspection by the solid waste division. Should additional containers be needed, they may be obtained for a fee by contacting city hall. 
(b)  Placing for collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the city as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container shall have said container at the curb or designated location not earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day before, and not later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated garbage pick up days. 
(c)  Removal after collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the city as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container for curbside service shall return said container to the side or rear of building no later than 11:00 p.m. on designated garbage pick up days. 
(d)  Vacating dwelling. Wheeled garbage containers furnished by the city shall not be removed from the premises to which they are delivered. 
(e)  Loss or damage to container. The fee for replacement for lost or damaged containers furnished by the city shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-27. - Commercial establishments. 
(a)  General. Commercial establishments shall store refuse in containers meeting the requirements of this article and of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager so as to eliminate wind driven debris and unsightly litter in and about the establishment. Any spillage or overflow shall be cleaned up immediately by said establishment. 
(b)  Loading and unloading areas. All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash and refuse. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers, not less than the number required by the city manager for that establishment, in said area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to insure that all refuse is placed in the proper container and that the area is kept clean and free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-28. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any litter, refuse, garbage or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any other public property, nor upon any private property except with the written consent of the owner or occupant thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any litter, refuse, trash, trees, grass, refuse receptacles, containers, or garbage on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, street gutter, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(3)  Appliances. No person shall leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing the door. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been created, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(4)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents or remove such container from its location. 
(5)  Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. No person shall: 
a.  Throw or deposit any refuse on any public or private street or to scatter such refuse or litter on any public or private property. 
b.  Throw or deposit any refuse, trash or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water or beach area. 
(6)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any of the streets of the city to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle in such manner as to prevent said loose material from being deposited on the streets or adjoining areas. 
(7)  Accumulation of litter. No owner of any property in the city shall allow litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, filth, carrion, and debris to accumulate thereon. If any owner shall fail to remedy said conditions within three (3) days after notice to remedy the same from the city manager, solid waste division of the public works department, code compliance officer or the police department, said condition shall be a violation of this article and punishable hereunder. Notice shall be accomplished by posting a warning notice in a conspicuous place on the property and mailing a copy of same to the owner of record on the tax digest. The owner shall have three (3) business days from the date of notice to remove or have removed all debris. If not accomplished in allotted time, the city shall dispose of the debris and charge the owner/manager the fee necessary to pay for such removal. Such fees shall be subject to the provisions of § 24-5(b). 
(8)  Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, drop, dump, or otherwise leave any litter on the premises of another without the consent of such other person, and without complying with the other provisions of this article or the rules and regulations of the city manager adopted pursuant hereto. 
(9)  Ownership of refuse. All refuse, including refuse deposited in refuse containers provided by the city, shall be and shall remain the property of the owner or occupant until the same has been placed in city vehicles. The city has no responsibility or liability for any injuries or damage resulting from said refuse. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-29. - Disposal of tires. 
(a)  Segregation required. No passenger tires (cars and pickup trucks), or truck tires, or farm tractor tires shall be mixed or mingled with other garbage, trash, litter or waste. 
(b)  Preparation. Pickup by the city of said tires shall be done only in accordance with the city's special pickup policy. Persons desiring the city to pick up tires shall separate passenger tires (cars and pickup trucks), other truck tires, and farm tractor tires into three (3) separate piles. Such persons shall then call the solid waste division of the city and make arrangements for pickup by city forces. 
(c)  Fees. The fees for collection of tires shall be set according to the provisions of section 24-5. 
(d)  Disposal of waste tires. 
(1)  As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
a.  Waste tire generator: Any dealer in automobile, motorcycle, heavy equipment or truck tires, filling station, garage or other business that sells new or used tires and which retains the customer's used tire after replacement. No more than twenty (20) waste or used tires may be retained at his/her place of business. 
b.  Waste tire: Any automobile, motorcycle, heavy equipment or truck tire retained by a waste tire generator after having replaced a customer's tire with a new or used tire. 
c.  Permitted disposal facility: Any facility which is permitted by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division for the treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste. 
d.  Recapping facility: Any facility which remanufactures waste tires for reuse. 
e.  Waste tire hauler: Any person, firm or corporation which transports waste tires for hire. 
f.  Scrap tire sorter. Any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retread casings from scrap tires. 
(2)  All waste tire generators and waste tire haulers shall dispose of all waste tires at a permitted disposal facility or recapping facility. All waste tire generators shall remove or cause to be removed all waste tires from their business premises at least once each month. 
(3)  Each waste tire generator and waste tire hauler shall be required to keep adequate records to document their company or person removing the tires, the date removed, the number of tires removed, and the final disposal site of said tires. The business premises of each waste tire generator and the records required above shall be subject to inspection by the public works solid waste division inspectors at any time said business is open to the public. 
(4)  Persons engaged in sorting mixed tires shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division and shall insure that the scrap tires are transported to a scrap tire end user or recycler, processor or disposal facility approved by the environmental protection division. Said sorter shall have no more then three thousand (3,000) tires at his/her business at any time. 
(5)  The scrap tire portion of the rules for solid waste management, as such law presently exists (O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4.19) is hereby adopted in its entirety. In the event of a conflict with the Code of Ordinances of the city, the more stringent regulations shall take precedence. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the requirements of this section. Every person, firm or corporation convicted in municipal court of the city for violation of this section shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum fine as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 24-30. - Enforcement. 
(a)  General. It is the principal objective of this article to attain a clean and litter-free community and encourage recycling of selected material through education and voluntary compliance. Enforcement procedures shall be utilized only where other means fail. 
(b)  Solid waste management plans. A solid waste management plan must be submitted with every application for a building permit that exceeds one thousand (1,000) square feet of new construction. The inspection department shall obtain the approval of the city manager of said solid waste management plan. 
(c)  Monitoring by employees. Solid waste collection employees, inspection department employees, city policemen, and other city employees shall be alert to observe violations of the provisions of this article, including, but without limitation, loose trash and garbage, waste, litter, containers not in compliance, or any other thing or matter which may be in violation of this article or of the rules and regulations of the director. An employee observing such violations shall report the same to his or her supervisor, who in turn shall cause the information to be conveyed to the code compliance office. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. The violation of any provision of this article, or of the rules and regulations of the city manager promulgated hereunder, or the failure to do any act or meet any standard required thereby, or the failure to comply in any way with any requirement of this article or said rules and regulations, shall constitute an offense to be tried in the municipal court of the city, and punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(e)  Prima facie case. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, wagon, wheelbarrow, or other conveyance in violation of this article or the rules and regulations promulgated by the director hereunder, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(f)  Presumption. Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article or of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager hereunder is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this ordinance. 
(g)  Specific penalties cumulative. Where any paragraph of this article contains specific remedies or punishments, said specific remedies or punishments shall not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other remedies and punishments provided herein or otherwise provided by law for the violation of or noncompliance with this article or the rules and regulations of the director. 
(h)  Additional penalties. In addition to all punishments and penalties provided anywhere in this article, otherwise by law, the municipal court judge of the city may impose the following additional or alternative sentences, either as a direct sentence, or as a condition to probation: 
(1)  The municipal court judge may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile, any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of the sentence; or 
(2)  The municipal court judge may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public area, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of the sentence. 
(3)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(i)  Action in emergencies. Nothing contained in the foregoing paragraphs or elsewhere in this article shall require intermediate measures where the violation is of such nature or degree as to constitute an immediate, clear and present danger to the health and safety of the public. The failure to take the steps provided herein shall not constitute a defense to any proceeding to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(j)  Non-repealer. This section is not intended to repeal or modify in any way any other ordinance of the city relating to the abatement of or punishment for nuisances, junk, weeds, or other matters affecting the health and safety of the public. All remedies provided herein are supplemental to and in addition to all other remedies provided by the codes and ordinances of the city and by state laws. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, pt. I, 4-3-07) 
Chapter 25 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; franchises, § 6.14; roads, § 6.16. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings, ch. 5; environment and land development, ch. 8; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 13; streets designated for emergency vehicles only, § 13-33; use of skates, skateboards, etc., on streets and sidewalks, § 13-168; nuisances enumerated, § 16-1; sleeping in public places, § 17-5; curfew for minors, § 17-38; parade and assembly, ch. 18; sewers, ch. 22; signs, ch. 23; subdivision regulations, ch. 26; requirements for streets under land subdivision regulations, § 26-75 et seq.; certain utilities under land subdivision regulations, § 26-84; street access under zoning ordinance, app. A, § 6-6. 
State Law reference— Obstructing highways, streets, sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; eminent domain, O.C.G.A. Title 22; highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. Title 32; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; obstructing, encroaching on or injuring public roads, leasing of property by department of transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1; legislative authority required for municipal grant of right to obstruct street, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal streets, alleys and sidewalks generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; state grants for street-lighting facilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Condemnation of property for streets, etc. 
The city shall have the right to condemn any public or private property in the city, widen any street, cut trees, or move any obstruction that may interfere with the improvement of streets, roads or sidewalks in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1001) 
Sec. 25-2. - Public hearing required before renaming city streets. 
If the city council initiates any action with respect to changing the name of any city street, it must hold a public hearing and publish notice of that hearing in a newspaper having local circulation at least fifteen (15), but not more than forty-five (45) days, prior to the hearing date. The time of the hearing shall be included in the public notice. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, 11-12-96) 
Secs. 25-3—25-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I, adopted June 2, 2015, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 25-26—25-31, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to excavations and derived from Code 1976, §§ 4-1002—4-1007. 

Sec. 25-16. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Stone Mountain (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. 36-35-3 and O.C.G.A. 32-4-92(10), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.3), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-17. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.4), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-18. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia; 
Codified ordinances means the Code of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia; 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way; 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way; 
Director means the City Manager of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear and immediate danger to life, health, property or interruption of utility services that requires immediate attention; 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city; 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. A utility shall be required to make sure at least one (1) of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations; 
FCC means the federal communications commission or any successor thereto; 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two (2) or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city; 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than fifty (50) percent at one (1) time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than fifty (50) percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility; 
Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday excluding legal holidays observed by the city; and 
Working time means the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. local time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.5), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-19. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the director within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.6), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-20. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). if the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.7), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-21. - Incomplete registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.8), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-22. - [Acceptance of the registration.] 
Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.9), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-23. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one (1) year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.10), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-24. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate, or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit issued in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.11), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-25. - Permit procedure. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director upon application made on forms prescribed by the director. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  Proof of liability insurance or self-insurance in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death of any one (1) person, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death of any two (2) or more persons resulting from one (1) occurrence, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. Such insurance shall cover all work done by such person upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way located within the municipality and shall be maintained during all periods such work is being done; 
(8)  Proof of workers' compensation to ensure compliance with the Georgia Workers' Compensation Act; 
(9)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(10)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.12), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-26. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.13), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-27. - Issuance of permit. 
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuance of the permit will be consistent with this article; 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.14), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-28. - Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.15), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-29. - Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application; 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.16), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-30. - Revocation for cause. 
If the director decides there is reason or cause to revoke a permit then the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to revoke the permit. The following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The city shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for the proposed revocation and a period of time to cure the reason or cause for the proposed revocation. The period of time shall be no less than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the notice is received by the utility; and 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure the reason or cause within the time period allowed in the notice, the city may revoke the permit and issue a stop work order to the utility. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.17), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-31. - [Expiration of permit.] 
If work is not begun within six (6) months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.18), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-32. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Stone Mountain municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.19), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-33. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically set forth in the permit, no utility may occupy the city right-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.20), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-34. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.21), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-35. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.22), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-36. - [Blasting or excavating.] 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given forty-eight (48) hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.23), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-37. - [Cost of damage.] 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.24), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-38. - [Replacement or repair.] 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after twenty (20) working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.25), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-39. - [Construction site.] 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.26), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-40. - [Cessation of work.] 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.27), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-41. - [Completed construction.] 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I, § 25.28, 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-42. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.29), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-43. - [Violation.] 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.30), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-44. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.31), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-45. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the city charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility, by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.32), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-46. - Compliance. 
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.33), 6-2-15) 
Sec. 25-47. - Appeal of administrative decisions and notifications. 
All appeals of administrative decisions of the director shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the city council. All other notifications shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, Pt. I(§ 25.34), 6-2-15) 
Secs. 25-48—25-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE AND CLEANLINESS OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 25-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 25-51, prohibiting playing ball on streets, derived from Code 1976, § 6-2021, was repealed by an ordinance adopted Mar. 19, 1991. 
Sec. 25-52. - Use of nails and tacks restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive any nails or tacks into the telephone, telegraph or electric light poles, or into any house or store situated on any sidewalk or street of the city, except with the prior permission of the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2022) 
Sec. 25-53. - Driving through street barricade. 
No person shall drive any vehicle into or upon any alley or street that has been barricaded by an employee of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2023) 
Sec. 25-54. - Removing barricades forbidden. 
No person, other than an employee of the city shall remove any barricade which has been erected by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2024) 
Secs. 25-55—25-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 25-76. - Assembly on streets or sidewalks. 
No persons shall assemble or remain assembled on the streets and sidewalks in sufficient numbers or in any manner as to constitute an obstruction to free passage thereon if requested to disperse by any officer of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2001) 
Sec. 25-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-13, Pt. I, adopted October 7, 2008, amended the Code by repealing former § 25-77. Former § 25-77 pertained to display of goods, and derived from the Code of 1976, § 6-2011; Ord. No. 97-2, adopted February 4, 1997; and Ord. No. 05-14, adopted July 5, 2005. 
Sec. 25-78. - Placing or leaving objects on streets and sidewalks. 
No brick, stone or wood or other substances obstructing the free passage of persons and vehicles shall be placed or left to lie in any of the alleys, streets and sidewalks or other routes of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2012; Ord. No. 97-2, § 2, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 25-79. - Construction near sidewalk. 
Before building or remodeling in close proximity to the sidewalk, a passageway shall be constructed so as to leave the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2013) 
Sec. 25-80. - Sheds and awnings. 
No person shall erect over any sidewalk or street any wooden shed or awning or any wooden shed for the support of an awning or erect upon any street or sidewalk any post for the support of any awning. If any person shall violate this section then each day that the above forbidden structure shall remain after notice shall constitute a separate violation. This shall not be construed to prevent the erection over the sidewalk of cloth or metal awnings supported upon metallic frames firmly suspended from the building, and at least seven (7) feet above the level of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2014) 
Sec. 25-81. - Encroachments on streets. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to notify all persons about to erect any building, sidewalk, wall or fence near the street or any public way or alley not to encroach upon such street or public alley, and if in the opinion of the mayor any such obstruction is being, or has been, constructed on any street or public alley, the mayor shall cause a survey of the line of the street or alley to be made by a competent surveyor. If such survey shall show that the street or alley is obstructed by any building, sidewalk, wall or fence, the owner shall be required to pay the costs of the survey and shall be required to remove all obstructions at once. Every person who shall be found to have encroached on any street or public way or alley by any such building, sidewalk, wall or fence and refuses or neglects to remove the same upon notice from the city manager within ten (10) days from the date thereof, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2015) 
Chapter 26 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Environment and land development, Ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 12; sewers, Ch. 22; signs, Ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 25; zoning, App. A. 
State constitution reference— Planning and zoning, Art. IX, § II, Par. IV. 
State Law reference— Sales of subdivided lands, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia." 
(Code 1976, § 8-2001) 
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein are defined as follows: 
Alley means a street which affords only secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic. 
Block means a track of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities or counties. 
Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the housing or shelter of persons, animals or goods. Where roofed structures are separated from each other by party walls having no opening for passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a separate building. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade of the lot at the front of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the average height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, and to the deck line in the case of a mansard roof. 
Building official means the authorized building inspector for the city. 
Building line (setback) means the line established by law past which a building shall not exceed as determined by front, side, and rear yards herein. 
Building permit means a written permit issued by the building inspector authorizing construction, renovation, or repairs to a structure. 
Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the predominant use of the lot on which it is situated. 
City means the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia. 
City council means the mayor and city council of the City of Stone Mountain. 
City engineer means the city engineer of the City of Stone Mountain or person designated by the city council to serve in this capacity. 
Condominium means the ownership in fee simple title of a single unit in a multi-unit structure and undivided ownership, in common with other purchases, of the common elements of the structure and including the land and its appurtenances. 
Construction plans means the maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of the improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the design standards of this chapter as a condition of the approval of the plat. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one (1) end open to traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Double frontage lot means a lot having frontage on two (2) streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Drainage easement means an area set aside for the purpose of transporting stormwater. Maintenance of these easements are the responsibility of the private property owner. 
Driveway means an accessway connecting one (1) or more dwelling units and/or their parking spaces with a street. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons in a county. 
Engineer means a registered, professional engineer, licensed by the state. 
Grading means any land-disturbing activity including clearing and grubbing, stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Improvements guarantee means a guarantee in the form of a bond or certified check to insure completion of required subdivision paving improvements. 
Health department means the county health department which is duly authorized to perform health services in the county. 
Land use plan means a development plan or any part thereof adopted by the city council which indicates the general location for the various physical classes of public works, places, and structures and depicting the general planned physical development of the city. 
Large lot (estate) subdivision means a subdivision consisting of ten (10) or more lots or building sites for the purpose of constructing single-family residential structures. All lots included as part of such subdivisions shall be a minimum of 1.75 acres in land area. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one principal building or use, and any accessory building and use incidental to it. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no portion of the right-of-way of a street or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot area means the computed ground area inside the lot lines. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage means the computed ground area occupied by all buildings within a lot. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lines. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot or double frontage lot. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum front yard setback line. 
Nonresidential subdivision means a subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Owner means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient (fifty-one (51) percent) proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
Parcel means a general term including all plots of land shown with separate identification on the official tax appraisal maps. 
Person includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations, associations, organizations, trusts, companies, governmental bodies and all other legal entities. 
Planning commission means the Stone Mountain Planning Commission. 
Plat, final, means the map or plan of record for subdivision and any accompanying material, as required in this chapter. 
Plat, preliminary, means the preliminary drawing or drawings, described in this chapter, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for approval. 
Public improvement means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which city responsibility is established. 
Public street means a street over which the general public has acquired the right of use. 
Public utilities means water, gas, sanitary and storm sewer, electrical and communications lines and facilities. 
Resubdivision means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by any or all of the following: a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or other special use. 
Right-of-way width means the distance between property lines measured at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
Shoulder means that portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or back of curb to the inside edge of the ditch or gutter or original ground surface. 
Sidewalk means the portion of the right-of-way which is parallel to the street or road which is intended for pedestrian traffic. 
Sketch plan means a generalized sketch of the proposed subdivision submitted prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat to enable the subdivider to reach general agreement with the city planner and city engineer as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this chapter. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, freeway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or otherwise (see also the definition for public way, private street, private access drive, and right-of-way). Various classifications of streets may be defined as follows: 
(1)  Arterial. A street which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow; is of considerable continuity; and is used as a traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas. 
(2)  Major collector. A street which carries traffic from activity centers and minor collector streets to arterial streets and streets of higher classification. 
(3)  Minor collector. Principal entrance streets to subdivisions and the main streets for circulation within a subdivision which serve a network of four (4) or more local streets. Minor collector streets are designed so that traffic circulation in a subdivision would cause such a street to be used as link between local streets and major collector or arterial streets. 
(4)  Local. A street used primarily for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and dispersion of traffic. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac. A local street which is parallel to, and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(6)  Marginal access. A street which is parallel to, and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Street grade means the grade of the centerline of a street measured at any point along the street expressed as a percent. 
Street, city, means a street which is owned or maintained by the city. 
Street, county. A street which is owned or maintained by the county. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. Among other things structure includes buildings, fences, signs, swimming pools, etc. 
Subdivider means any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision, including any agent of the subdivider. 
Subdivision means any land, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels. The following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of this chapter. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved. 
Surveyor means a registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the state. 
Zoning enforcement officer means that person appointed by the mayor and city council to enforce provisions of the zoning ordinance and this chapter. 
Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city (Appendix A of this Code). 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 26-3. - Usage. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; the word "regulations" means "these regulations". 
(c)  A "person" includes, but is not necessarily limited to, a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(d)  Words or phrases not defined herein shall be considered to have a definition consistent with generally accepted planning principles or shall be as defined in a dictionary. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-4. - Authority; purpose. 
(a)  By authority of ordinance of the city adopted pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through the state constitution and other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the state, the planning commission does hereby exercise the power and authority to review and approve or disapprove plats for the residential or nonresidential subdivision of land within the incorporated areas of the city which depict lots, blocks or sites with or without new streets or highways. 
(b)  In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and policies, this chapter is adopted. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-5. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall control the subdivision of residential and nonresidential land within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-6. - Policy and purpose. 
(a)  In the interest of orderly, planned, and efficient development and furtherance of the general health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and its development to be subject to the control of the city in order to ensure consistency with the adopted land use plan. 
(b)  The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform with and be properly related to the proposals shown in the adopted land use plan and it is intended that this chapter shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, the zoning ordinance, the land use plan, and capital budget and program of the city. 
(c)  This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other infrastructure facilities and services to both residential and nonresidential subdivision developments. 
(2)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, and to help insure that all lots will be accessible to fire fighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles. 
(3)  To insure adequate drainage by providing for the proper layout of streets and lots, thereby reducing maintenance problems. 
(4)  To assure adequate identification of property on the public records. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 26-7. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply as follow: 
(1)  Any person proposing to subdivide land within the city shall submit to the planning commission plats of the proposed subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  No subdivider shall proceed with construction of any improvements on a proposed subdivision before obtaining preliminary plat approval from the planning commission and approval of construction plans by the city engineer as certified thereon. 
(3)  No plat of a land subdivision within the incorporated area of the city shall be accepted for recording by the clerk of superior court of the county except the final plat on which is inscribed the final approval of the planning commission. The county shall not record or file a plat of a subdivision which is not the final plat and which does not have the final approval of the planning commission, as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-8. - Compliance with chapter prerequisite to approval of subdivision. 
No subdivision of land within the city that fails to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2002) 
Sec. 26-9. - Amendments. 
The planning commission at its own initiative, or upon referral from the mayor and city council may from time to time recommend amendments to this chapter. Any amendment to this chapter shall be heard by the planning commission who shall make a recommendation of the mayor and city council regarding approval or denial. Prior to acting on any proposed amendment, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on the amendment, having first published a notice of the time and place of the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of public hearing. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-10. - Contracts with other jurisdictions. 
If a proposed subdivision is located within the incorporated area of the city and partially within the unincorporated area of the county or within the incorporated areas of another municipality the mayor and city council may provide by contract with the governing authority of the county or of the other municipalities involved so that either the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the entire subdivision or so that the provisions of an ordinance of the county or another municipality regulating the subdivision of land shall apply to the entire subdivision. Lacking such an agreement, that portion of the subdivision lying with the city shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. The planning commission may disapprove all or any part of a subdivision where proper access and the provision of services affecting the health, safety and welfare of the subdivision are jeopardized by reliance upon the performance of another jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Secs. 26-11—26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 

Sec. 26-36. - Application process and approval procedure. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever any residential or nonresidential subdivision of land is proposed, and prior to issuing any permit for erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision, the owner, subdivider, or authorized agent shall apply for, and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure, which includes four (4) steps. 
(1)  Sketch plan. 
(2)  Preliminary plat. 
(3)  Construction plans. 
(4)  Final plat. 
All submittals shall be consistent with provisions of the zoning ordinance and other codes, ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Subdivision review procedure. The following procedures shall be followed when submitting plats: 
(1)  The subdivider and his professional representative shall meet with the secretary of the planning commission to review the sketch plan. 
(2)  No later than fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting date of the planning commission the subdivider shall submit three (3) copies of a preliminary plat to the secretary of the planning commission for review and local distribution, and appropriate fees shall be paid. 
(3)  The subdivider shall also deliver one (1) copy of the preliminary plat to the following city and county departments for review: 
a.  Water department. 
b.  Health department. 
c.  Water pollution control department (if subdivision is to be served by a community sewer system). 
d.  Board of education. 
e.  Fire marshal. 
(4)  The secretary of the planning commission and city engineer shall utilize the fifteen-day period to the planning commission meeting date to review the preliminary plat. The subdivider shall be notified if any changes are necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter and shall be responsible for having all changes made and a revised plat submitted prior to the planning commission meeting date. The subdivider shall also bring evidence of approval of those departments listed in paragraph (3) above to the planning commission meeting. 
(5)  At the hearing, the planning commission shall approve, approve subject to modifications, table, or disapprove the preliminary plat. If approval is given subject to modifications, the required modifications shall be provided to the subdivider in writing, and all modifications shall be made and approved by the secretary of the planning commission and city engineer prior to issuance of a grading permit. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the planning commission shall notify the subdivider in writing, citing the reasons for disapproval. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on the original of the preliminary plat, and one (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(6)  Preliminary plat approval is tentative, pending submission of a final plat, and is valid for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, after which it shall expire. 
(7)  A grading permit shall be issued only subsequent to approval of construction plans. 
(8)  Prior to installation of any improvements and before submittal of a final plat, two (2) copies of construction plans depicting the design of all required improvements shall be submitted to the city for review by the city engineer. 
(9)  Within twelve (12) months from the date of preliminary plat approval, five (5) copies of a final plat for one (1) or more phases of the subdivision shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the meeting of the planning commission and all appropriate fees paid. The subdivider shall also provide satisfactory evidence of improvements installation or provide the necessary improvements guarantee. Failure to submit within this time period shall void the plat unless an extension for a period not to exceed six (6) months is granted by the planning commission. Such extension must be applied for in writing by the subdivider. 
(10)  The planning commission at the hearing shall determine whether all requirements of this chapter have been met and either approve, table, or disapprove the final plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the planning commission shall notify the subdivider in writing, citing the reasons for disapproval. 
(11)  When all improvements required by this chapter have been made, the subdivider shall provide to the city engineer one (1) complete set of as-built drawings depicting the subdivision and all improvements. A letter from the subdivider's registered professional engineer shall accompany this submittal and certify that all improvements have been installed in accordance with the construction plans previously submitted to, and approved by the city engineer. 
(12)  The approved final plat is to be recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county within sixty (60) days of the date of final plat approval. 
(c)  Fees to recover the costs of review for the preliminary plat, construction plans and final plat shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87; Ord. No. 07-06, pt. I, 6-5-07) 
Sec. 26-37. - Resubdivision (plat amending). 
For any change in a plat of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such plat, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any plat or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such change shall be submitted to the building official for review by the building official and city engineer. The building official and city engineer shall approve or disapprove the resubdivision. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-38. - Subdivisions with prior approval. 
Subdivisions which are entirely developed or which have received preliminary plat approval prior to adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to proceed in accordance with the construction standards in effect at time of approval of the preliminary plat. This provision shall expire five (5) years after August 4, 1987, after which all subdivisions shall conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-39. - Preapplication review of proposed subdivision. 
(a)  Duty of subdivider. Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the city is proposed, the subdivider or his agent shall consult early and informally with the secretary of the planning commission. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. 
(b)  Purpose of review. The purpose of the preapplication review is to facilitate the subsequent preparation of plans. 
(c)  Fees. No fees shall be charged for a preapplication review. 
(d)  Sketch plan specifications. The sketch plan shall represent the entire area which the subdivider contemplates developing, including those units/sections not scheduled for immediate development. The sketch plan submitted shall be prepared in ink or pencil on a reproducible medium and can be a freehand rendering. The sketch plan shall illustrate the ultimate development of the entire parcel(s) for which formal plat approval will initially be requested. Three (3) copies of the sketch plan shall be submitted. It shall be prepared at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and is to include site topography at a contour interval of ten (10) feet or less. The sketch plan shall include at minimum the following information: 
(1)  Subdivision name and unit if within existing subdivision. 
(2)  Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of legal owner or agent of the property. 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of registered professionals responsible for subdivision design, for design of improvements, and for surveys. 
(5)  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
(6)  Vicinity map. 
(7)  Proposed use of property to be subdivided. 
(8)  Total acreage. 
(9)  Location of existing property lines, major easements/rights-of-way, watercourses, drainage areas and ditches, and distinctive natural features. 
(10)  The location and width of all existing or proposed streets or public ways within; or directly adjacent to the subject property. 
(11)  Existing buildings. 
(12)  The approximate location and width of proposed streets. 
(13)  The approximate location of all proposed or existing lots and the square footage of the smallest lot. 
(14)  The location of flood hazard areas taken from the HUD (FEMA) maps. 
(15)  Statement of proposed water and/or sewer supply or collection method. 
(16)  Zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1; Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-40. - Application for preliminary plat. 
Following the preapplication review of a proposed land subdivision, the subdivider or his agent shall submit to the secretary of the planning commission: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent; 
(2)  The preliminary plat and other documents, as specified in section 26-42. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2005) 
Sec. 26-41. - Review of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Report, hearing required. The secretary of the planning commission shall check the plat submitted pursuant to section 26-40 for conformance to the rules and regulations of this chapter and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the persons designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  Action by planning commission. Thereafter, the planning commission shall give tentative approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat. A notation of the action shall be made on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if the preliminary plat is disapproved. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one (1) copy added to the records of the planning commission. 
(c)  Effect, duration of approval. Tentative approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Tentative approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one (1) year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2006) 
Sec. 26-42. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
(a)  Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
(b)  Sheet size. Sheet size shall be twenty-three (23) inches by twenty-eight (28) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one (1) sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(c)  Ground elevations. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, based on a datum plane approved by the secretary of the planning commission, by contours at an interval of not more than five (5) feet where the ground slope is regular or at an interval of not more than two (2) feet where necessary because of irregular land. 
(d)  Preliminary plat content. The preliminary plat shall represent the entire area which the subdivider contemplates developing, including possible unit divisions not scheduled for immediate development. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted for review and copies shall be transmitted by the subdivider to the appropriate city and county agencies. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or registered professional engineer. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in ink on a reproducible medium. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background, and the submittal shall include such other documents as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. If the preliminary plat is prepared by a registered professional engineer reference must be made to the legal survey of the parcel. A copy of the survey must be included with the preliminary plat if not stamped by a licensed land surveyor. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Names and right-of-way width of all proposed streets. 
(3)  The name and address and telephone number of the owner or owners of the land to be subdivided and the name, address and telephone number of the subdivider. 
(4)  The seal(s), name(s), and addresses of the licensed land surveyor or registered professional engineer. 
(5)  Date, graphic scale, numeric scale, north arrow and space for revisions. 
(6)  Vicinity map indicating streets and highways, railroads and other significant features within; or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(7)  Proposed use of property to be subdivided. 
(8)  Total acreage, outlet acreage if applicable and the acreage of the smallest lot. 
(9)  Present zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
(10)  The location of property with respect to surrounding streets, and the names of adjoining developments. 
(11)  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property, to be expressed in feet. 
(12)  Unit divisions if known, or staged development if proposed by the subdivider. 
(13)  The approximate location and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, drainage or other underground structures within, and immediately adjacent to the subject property. 
(14)  The location of existing and proposed streets, easements, water bodies, flood hazard areas and floodplains, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and rock outcrops. 
(15)  The location and width of proposed streets. 
(16)  Reference points from proposed intersections to permanent features. 
(17)  The location and scaled dimensions of all proposed or existing lots. The minimum front yard setback on all lots and side lot setback for corner lots. 
(18)  The location and scaled dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
(19)  Sufficient data acceptable to the city engineer to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all property lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground; and the location of all proposed monuments. Control survey must close and balance within a tolerance of one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet. 
(20)  Blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be lettered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
(21)  All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlots shall be numbered in a logical sequence. 
(22)  List of proposed utilities to be located underground. 
(23)  A statement of the proposed method of water supply, major drainage provisions, detention areas, and proposed sewerage disposal plans. If the development is to utilize private sewer, all information required by the health department shall be provided. 
(24)  The total number of units if not a single-family subdivision. 
(25)  Certification for signature of the chairman of the planning commission approving the preliminary plat. 
The lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause of disapproval of a preliminary plat. 
(e)  Certificate of tentative approval. A certificate of tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
 Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia, all the requirements of tentative approval having been fulfilled; this preliminary plat was given tentative approval by the Stone Mountain Planning Commission at its meeting on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 

 
(Code 1976, § 8-2007; Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-43. - Construction plans. 
(a)  Generally. Prior to installation of any required improvements, the subdivider shall submit two (2) copies of construction plans to the city engineer. No improvements shall be installed until the city engineer formally approves the construction plans. Construction plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(b)  Plans submitted. All construction plans submitted to the city engineer shall be prepared in ink, on a reproducible medium. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background. 
(c)  Scale. Construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards contained in this chapter and shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet with a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet. 
(d)  Content of construction plans. Construction plans shall be submitted for all required improvements and amended when necessary. The following information shall be depicted: 
(1)  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerlines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the centerline of the existing road or roads shall be shown. The radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets. 
(2)  Where slopes in excess of twenty (20) percent occur on cross slopes the city engineer may require that cross sections of all proposed streets at fifty-foot stations shall be shown at five (5) points as follows: On a line at right angles to the centerline of the street, and such elevation points shall be at the centerline of the street, each property line, and points fifty (50) feet inside each property line. 
(3)  Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks if provided, drainage easements, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm sewers, drains, and exact location and size of all existing water, gas or other underground utilities or structures. All utilities proposed for location underground shall be duly noted. 
(4)  Location and size of all existing and proposed drainage structures including detention ponds, catch basins, grates, headwalls and any extensions thereof. The acreage of the drainage area and all pipe and ditch sizing calculations shall be provided. 
(5)  The engineer preparing the construction plans shall certify the centerline of all streets and drainage ways based upon a field run survey. 
(6)  Plans for water systems and plans and profiles for sewer systems and storm drainage pipes. 
(7)  All information required by the city construction standards and specifications. 
(8)  A sedimentation and erosion control plan. 
(9)  A hydrological study. 
(10)  Title, name, address, stamp and signature of professional engineer and date, including revision dates. 
(11)  Typical street section to include: asphalt and base thickness, curb, road width, shoulder slope and right-of-way width. 
(e)  Certification. The following certification shall appear on the Construction Plans: 
ENGINEERS CERTIFICATION 
STORM WATER RUNOFF 
2, 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100 year storm 
I ____________ a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia hereby certify that the grading and drainage plans for the project known as ____________ lying in Land Lot ____________ of the ____________ District of DeKalb County have been prepared under my supervision and that the execution of said plans will not increase the present storm water discharge rate from the site. This the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 

 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-44. - Application for final plat approval. 
After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the planning commission, the subdivider or his agent shall submit to the secretary of the planning commission: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of the final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent; and 
(2)  The final plat and other documents, as specified in section 26-47. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2008) 
Sec. 26-45. - Review of final plat. 
(a)  Report, hearing required. The secretary of the planning commission shall check the final plat submitted pursuant to section 26-44 for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat, and with the rules and regulations of this chapter, and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the final plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  Action by planning commission. Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action shall be made on the tracing and two (2) prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if the final plat is disapproved. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2009) 
Sec. 26-46. - Recording of final plat. 
(a)  Required. Upon approval of a final plat, the secretary of the planning commission shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider or his agent shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee. 
(b)  Duty upon recordation. Upon recording of the approved final plat, the original tracing or a reproducible linen print of the final plat with all certificates endorsed thereon shall be provided by the subdivider for the records of the planning commission. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2010) 
Sec. 26-47. - Final plat specifications. 
(a)  Generally. Within twelve (12) months of the date of approval of the preliminary plat the subdivider shall submit three (3) copies of the final plat to the secretary of the planning commission for review. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(b)  Conformity. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat. It may represent only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to develop and record at this time. 
(c)  Final plat content. The final plat submitted shall conform to the preliminary plat and shall be prepared in ink on a reproducible medium. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background, and the submittal shall include such other documents as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or larger. Sheet size shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. If the entire final plat cannot be depicted on one (1) sheet, the plat may be drawn on two (2) or more sheets with an index provided on each sheet. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of subdivider. 
(3)  Date of survey; date of plat drawing; graphic scale; north arrow with reference of bearing to Magnetic, True, or Grid North. 
(4)  Location of tract (land district and land lot), and acreage. 
(5)  If part or all of the tract is a portion of a former subdivision reference shall be made to the former plat, with identification of the former lots and blocks being resubdivided. 
(6)  Index map, when more than one (1) sheet is required to depict plat. 
(7)  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street lines, bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments which shall be accurately described on the plat. 
(8)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth foot and bearings to the nearest second. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field, and shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet. 
(9)  The error of closure, as calculated by latitudes and departures, shall be stated. Surveys shall be coordinated and vertically tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Elevations. The benchmark used shall be provided. 
(10)  Municipal, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the boundary line of the subdivision by distance and angles, when such lines transverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(11)  Exact location, right-of-way widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks. Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, length of tangents, and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
(12)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one hundredth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords, and tangents of radii of rounded corners. 
(13)  Building setback lines, with dimensions. 
(14)  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than ninety (90) degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown. 
(15)  Blocks lettered alphabetically within each block; lots or sites numbered in numerical order. 
(16)  The square footage of the smallest lot. 
(17)  Location, dimensions and purposes of easements, including slope easements, public service utility right-of-way lines, areas (other than streets) to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to the public; sites for other than residential use, with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
(18)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as "future". 
(19)  The following certification: 
"In addition to any other powers the City of Stone Mountain may have, this subdivision is a special drainage district. See Article 2, Section 2, Paragraph 6, Georgia Constitution, 1983." 
(20)  Certifications for final plat approval by the chairman of the planning commission and city engineer. 
(21)  Owner's certification. The final plat, shall contain in addition to a licensed land surveyor's certification as statement as follows: 
"I (we) hereby certify that I (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, dedicate all streets, easements, alleys, walks, parks and other open spaces to public or private use as noted, and agree to provide directly or indirectly for maintenance of all common areas or outlots". 
This statement shall be signed and dated by the owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, of the proposed subdivision prior to final plat approval. 
(22)  A copy of approved as-built water and sewer plans shall accompany the final plat submittal. 
The final plat shall be accompanied by statements of deed restrictions (covenants) which the subdivider intends to apply to the subdivision. All deed restrictions shall meet or exceed the requirements contained in this chapter and the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 26-48. - Revisions to plats. 
No change, erasure, or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on accompanying data sheets after approval of the planning commission has been endorsed in writing on the plat sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the planning commission. In no case shall the planning commission approve a revision thereof unless the fact that it is a revised plat is clearly stated thereon. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Secs. 26-49—26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-71. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety or property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2012) 
Sec. 26-72. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a publicly dedicated street. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2013) 
Sec. 26-73. - Conformance to master plan. 
(a)  Required. All streets and other features of the master plan of the city shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimensions indicated on the master plan. 
(b)  Reservations. When features of the master plan other than streets, such as schools or other public building sites, parks, or other land for public uses, are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be reserved by the subdivider for acquisition by the appropriate public agency. 
(c)  Land not required or suitable. Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2014) 
Sec. 26-74. - Large scale developments. 
The requirements of this chapter may be modified in the case of a large-scale community or neighborhood unit, such as a housing project which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks and streets, if the development is approved by the planning commission and if deed covenants or other legal measures to assure the accomplishment and continuance of the plan are provided. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2015) 
Sec. 26-75. - General requirements for streets. 
(a)  Existing streets. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(b)  Street names. Street names shall require the approval of the planning commission. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
(c)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Dead-end streets. Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, dead-end streets shall not be greater in length than five hundred (500) feet. They shall be provided at the closed-end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least fifty (50) feet with an outside pavement radius of at least forty (40) feet. 
(e)  Alleys. Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-purpose, commercial or industrial developments but shall not be provided in residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2016) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 25. 
Sec. 26-76. - Street design requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the following street improvements shall be installed and provided by the subdivider. The improvements shall be conveyed or transferred to, and title shall vest in, the city upon acceptance unless otherwise indicated on the plat. 
(b)  Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on, and access from an existing federal, state, county or city road. Such a street or highway must be improved in accord with this chapter, with the exception of private access drives. Adequate curbing, acceleration and deceleration lanes are to be provided. 
(c)  Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to city-adopted construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the city engineer. 
(d)  Topography and arrangement. At the completion of rough grading activities the subdivider's engineer shall certify to the city engineer that grading has been completed and conforms to the plans submitted. 
(1)  Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance and excessive speeds attributed to long straightways. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of this chapter. 
(2)  Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(3)  Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
(4)  The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
(5)  If adjoining property contains a street that is terminated by a temporary cul-de-sac or dead-end street, the preliminary plat shall provide for a continuation of this street on the property being developed, unless specifically exempted by the city council. 
(e)  Street design standards. The following design standards shall be utilized in subdivision development: 

 
  *;hg;120 feet when median is provided. 
 **;hg;Curb and gutter required (dimensions are back-to-back of curbs). 
***;hg;Local streets in large-lot (estate) subdivisions shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet and shall consist of two (2) traffic lanes, having a minimum width of 26 feet (back to back of curbs). 

 
*;hg;A 14 percent grade will be acceptable between vertical curves for a distance not to exceed 100 feet. 
Note:  ;hg;Minimum grade for all streets shall be one and one-half (1.5) percent. Cul-de-sac turnaround grades shall be greater than three (3) percent. 

 
*;hg;When cross-slopes exceed eight (8) percent, the centerline radius may be reduced to 150 feet. 

 

 

 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-77. - Block requirements. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Length. Blocks shall be not greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length. 
(2)  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets, limited access highways or railroads, or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2018) 
Sec. 26-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 5 of an ordinance adopted December 1, 1992, repealed section 26-78 in its entirety. The section pertaining to lot requirements was originally derived form the Code of 1976, section 8-2019. 
Sec. 26-79. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, and public grounds shall not be permitted unless their control is placed in the hands of the city council, under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2021) 
Sec. 26-80. - Slopes. 
(a)  Generally. Development of subdivisions is to be accomplished with minimal earth moving and disruption to the natural topography of the site. It is the intent of this chapter that existing or manmade slopes be modified or designed in such a way as to minimize potential for erosion and to maximize ease of maintenance. Subdivision development shall conform to provisions of the erosion and sedimentation control chapter of this Code. 
(b)  Slope design standards. The following design standards for slopes will be adhered to: 
(1)  No existing or proposed cut or fill slope shall exceed three (3) horizontal units to one (1) vertical unit within eleven (11) feet of the edge of pavement or back of curb. Beyond such eleven (11) feet the slope may be greater than three (3) to one (1) up to a maximum slope of one and one-half (1½) horizontal units to one (1) vertical unit, provided that all cut and fill shall be within the prescribed right-of-way of the road or slope easements. All grading as provided within this section shall be completed and approved by the city engineer prior to the installation of any utilities. 
(2)  All fill slopes created for the purpose of street construction shall have a compaction of not less than ninety-five (95) percent as determined by established engineering practices. 
(3)  Slopes flatter than those set forth in the foregoing paragraphs may be required, when, in the opinion of the city engineer, the general nature of the soil involved warrants a flatter slope. To control surface drainage on existing and proposed slopes, berm ditches may be required at the top and at the intersection of the slope and ground line. 
(4)  All slopes created or existing within the subdivision or as a result of the subdivision development shall be planted or otherwise protected from erosion and failure. Such planting and other protection from erosion and failure shall be completed and shall be undertaken immediately upon creation of any slope steeper than two (2) horizontal feet to one (1) vertical foot and completed without delay in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. In addition, the subdivider may be required to provide a fence, hedge, guardrail or other protective device, specified by the city engineer along ridges in excess of twenty (20) vertical feet in height and with slopes in excess of 1.5:1 (horizontal:vertical) to prevent dangerous falls for children and other residents of the subdivision. At the option of the city engineer the developer shall provide certified test results of compaction and any materials provided at the location and frequency determined necessary by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Erosion and sediment control, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 26-81. - Drainage. 
(a)  The storm water drainage system and easements shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and easement. 
(b)  Storm water runoff and storm sewer or channel design shall be designed by a method as approved by the city engineer, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with the construction plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried for a distance of more than six hundred (600) feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. 
(c)  Natural drainage channels existing within a subdivision shall be improved by the subdivider to specifications approved by the city engineer if erosion, flooding, or hazard will be created by the continued existence thereof, as determined by the city engineer. 
(1)  Accessibility to public storm sewers. Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to the specifications of the city engineer. If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the city engineer and the planning commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. 
(2)  Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area whether inside or outside the subdivision. The city engineer shall approve the necessary size of the facility which has been designed by a registered professional engineer, based on one hundred ten (110) percent of the current storm runoff for the one-hundred-year storm for culverts under streets, and the twenty-five-year storm for all other culverts. Minimum pipe size shall be eighteen (18) inches. 
(3)  Effect on downstream drainage areas. The developer shall study and the city engineer shall review and approve the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the planning commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of the potential condition in such sum as the planning commission shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate watercourse or facility. 
(4)  Drainage easements. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least twenty (20) feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Where pipe size warrants, a ten-foot easement shall be permitted. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. Easements less than twenty (20) feet may be approved by the city manager. Low-lying land along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainageways. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Sewers, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 26-82. - Water facilities. 
(a)  Necessary action shall be taken by the subdivider to extend or create a water-supply system for the purpose of providing domestic water use and fire protection. 
(b)  Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the county. 
(c)  Water main extensions shall be approved by the county. 
(d)  A copy of the as-built water plans shall be submitted to the city engineer. 
(1)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart and shall be approved by the city engineer. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other water supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. All fire hydrants shall be set plumb with outlets eighteen (18) inches above finished grade or twelve (12) inches above a finished concrete surface. 
(2)  Design standards. The water system design standards shall be those of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 26-83. - Sewerage facilities. 
(a)  Where an adequate public sanitary sewerage system is within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed development, or in the opinion of the county water pollution control department is reasonably accessible, the applicant shall connect to this system, providing sewers to each lot in the subdivision, and appropriate connection to each house. 
(b)  Installation of any sewer lines, laterals and mains shall be subject to the approval of the county water pollution control department and other applicable state agencies. 
(c)  A copy of the as-built sewer plans shall be submitted to the city engineer. 
(1)  Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the county health department and the results submitted to the county health department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size and location of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the county health department. 
(2)  Design standards. The design standards for sewage facilities shall be those of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Sewers, Ch. 22; zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 26-84. - Other utilities. 
(a)  Generally. Applicants are required to locate all utility facilities underground throughout the subdivision. All existing and proposed utility easements outside of road rights-of-way shall be shown on the construction plans and final plats. 
(b)  Location. Overhead utility lines shall be located along the front, side and/or rear of property lines, or at such other locations as may be approved by the utility companies involved. 
(1)  The facilities for underground utilities or conduits for their construction shall be in place prior to final surfacing of streets. 
(2)  All facilities for utilities shall, where possible be placed in easements provided for that purpose in the subdivision or located as approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  No subdivision street shall be cut for underground utilities. 
(c)  Easements. Utility easements for electric and telephone service lines, sewage lines, water lines or other such utilities located along rear lot lines or side lot lines or, passing through a lot shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, five (5) feet on each lot, and more if determined by the city engineer. 
(d)  Road surfacing and improvements. After utilities have been installed, the applicant shall construct concrete curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to be surfaced, roadways to the widths prescribed in this chapter. Such surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding area. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. 
(1)  For residential streets, base and paving shall be one (1) of the following types: 
Type I: Six-inch crusher run stone base applied on a properly prepared sub-grade brought to a ninety-five (95) percent compaction (Standard Proctor). A two-inch plant mix asphalt Type E or F is to be applied to the base. 
Type II: Five-inch compacted crusher run stone base applied on a properly prepared sub-grade brought to a ninety-five (95) percent compaction (Standard Proctor). A two-inch plant mix asphalt (Asphaltic Base Type B) is to be applied to the base which meets with state approved standards for plant mix asphalt. A one-and-one-half-inch plant mix asphalt Type E or F shall be applied over the binder. 
(2)  For commercial streets, base and paving shall be as follows: 
Type III: Six-inch crusher run stone base applied on a properly prepared sub-grade brought to a ninety-five (95) percent compaction (Standard Proctor). A two-and-one-half-inch asphaltic base Type B covered by a two-and-one-half-inch surface course Type E or F plant mix asphalt. 
(3)  For industrial streets, base and paving shall be as follows: 
Type IV: Eight-inch crusher run stone base applied on a properly prepared sub-grade brought to a ninety-five (95) percent compaction (Standard Proctor). A three-inch asphaltic base Type B covered by a one-and-one-half-inch surface course of Type E or F plant mix asphalt. 
(4)  Concrete curbs and gutters shall be constructed with three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at twenty-eight-day breaking strength, twelve (12) inches by thirty (30) inches. Roll type curb and gutter shall not be permitted in single-family subdivisions. 
(5)  Primary highway systems. Whenever a proposed subdivision abuts an arterial road or major collector, an access road or lane with curbing extending the full length of the subdivision along such highway and providing limited access thereto may be required at a distance suitable for the use of the land between such access road or lane and highway. 
(6)  Driveways. Driveways shall have a slope of not more than a positive or negative twelve (12) percent for a distance of ten (10) feet measured along the driveway centerline from the right-of-way line. Centerline elevations on all driveways, at the right-of-way line, must be a minimum of six (6) inches above the elevation of the gutter line. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 25. 
Secs. 26-85—26-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LEGAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 26-106. - Interpretation; conflict. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of Articles I through IV shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  The requirements of, restrictions imposed and powers conferred by, Articles I through IV shall be in addition and supplemental to the requirements of, restrictions imposed and powers conferred by other ordinances. 
(c)  Where any provisions of Articles I through IV impose restrictions different from those imposed by any other provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose a higher standard shall control. The city does not exercise any control or enforcement over deed restrictions, covenants or any other restrictions imposed by a developer. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2003; Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-107. - Saving provision. 
This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue, of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, or as waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person by lawful action of the city except as shall be expressly provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 26-108. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce this chapter and to determine any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
(b)  No owner, or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in the subdivision proposed shall transfer title to any such parcel before a final plat of such subdivision has been approved by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and properly recorded. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-87) 
Secs. 26-109—26-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COUNTY ORDINANCE 

Sec. 26-131. - Adopted. 
(a)  Chapter 14, Article III, Subdivisions, of the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia, as amended, is adopted in its entirety as a part of this section. 
(b)  Any person violating the terms of this section or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Editor's note— The city adopted the subdivision regulations of the county in 1986. The ordinance adopted in the above section is on file in the city hall. 
Sec. 26-132. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply, except to the extent that it is amended by Articles I through IV. 
Chapter 27 - TAXATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12; taxation, § 6.10 et seq.; delinquent taxes, § 6.18; tax levies, § 6.24. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 5; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 12. 
State Constitution reference— Municipal taxation, Art. IX, § IV. 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. Title 48; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal property tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 27-1. - Tax on insurance companies. 
(a)  Gross premium tax, life, accident and sickness insurance. There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each company writing life, accident and sickness insurance doing business within the city in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies upon the lives of persons residing within the corporate limits of the city. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums, as used in O.C.G.A. section 33-8-4. The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fee levied in section 12-171. 
(b)  Gross premium tax, all other companies. There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each company doing an insurance business within the city in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies upon risks located within the corporate limits of the city excluding premiums taxed by subsection (a). The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees levied by section 12-171. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4002) 
Cross reference— Insurance licenses, § 12-171 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8.1, 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 27-2. - Collection of taxes, delinquent tax notice and penalty, and interest on unpaid taxes. 
(a)  One-half (½) of the ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by August 15 in each year. The remaining one-half (½) of the taxes shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by November 15 of each year. 
(b)  A penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of each installment shall be added to each installment that is not paid before the installment becomes delinquent. 
(c)  All taxes remaining unpaid as of the close of business on December 31 of each year shall bear interest at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40, but in no event shall an interest payment for delinquent taxes be less than one dollar ($1.00). 
(d)  The city may enter into contracts for the billing and collection of ad valorem property taxes. The city or the contracted tax collectors shall issue executions for delinquent taxes, penalties, and interest against each delinquent taxpayer commencing on March 1 of each year upon any property on which is delinquent for the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92(3); Ord. No. 02-4, Pt. I, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 02-11, Pt. I, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 27-3. - Rate for ad valorem property taxation. 
The council of the city hereby ordains that an ad valorem tax at a rate of $2.227 per every $1,000.00 of assessed valuation for the year 2016 be levied on all taxable property in the city to provide funding for city governmental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13, Pt. I, 7-5-16) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, Pt. I of Ord. No. 2016-13, adopted July 5, 2016, has been codified as herein set out in § 27-3. Said provisions did not expressly amend the Code.. 
Chapter 28 - STORMWATER UTILITY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-499. - Reserved. 
Sec. 28-500. - Findings. 
The mayor and city council make the following findings: 
(1)  The city is authorized by the supplementary powers provisions of article IX, section II, paragraph III(a)(6) of the Georgia Constitution to provide a stormwater collection and disposal system throughout the city; 
(2)  The federal Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 USC § 1251 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act emphasizes the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater programs which address water quality and the impact of storm water runoff; 
(3)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the corporate limits of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the corporate limits of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(4)  The stormwater needs in the city include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways. The service and benefit rendered or resulting from provision of stormwater management systems and facilities may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs, and risk exposure. 
(5)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities in the city which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the city and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in the city in concert with the management of other water resources in the city and county. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for the stormwater management program, operating capital and investment needs. 
(6)  The mayor and city council find, conclude and determine that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering and funding stormwater management services in the city. 
(7)  An equitable approach to funding stormwater management services and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service charges upon properties that is related to burden of stormwater quality control service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city. Such schedule of service charges can be complemented by other funding methods which address specific needs, including but not limited to, allocations of special purpose local option sales taxes to stormwater drainage improvement projects. A service charge credit is an appropriate means of adjusting service charges in recognition that private stormwater systems and/or actions can effectively reduce or eliminate the burden of stormwater quantity and quality control service requirements and costs that a property or properties pose for the city. Impervious area is the most important factor influencing stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city, and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating stormwater service charges and associated credits. In addition, the value to the stormwater utility of certain actions and practices performed by property owners and other stormwater utility customers may be recognized by credits based on other factors, including but not limited to the avoided cost of public information and education realized by the utility when public information and education about stormwater management is provided by the public school system. 
(8)  The "Feasibility Study for a Stormwater Utility User Fee" prepared by HDR/WL Jorden, Inc., CH2M HILL, Brown Design Associates, Inc. and CFA International, LLC properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities for all of the county. 
(9)  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities identified in the "Feasibility Study for a Stormwater Utility User Fee", it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems in the city in concert with similar programs in the county. 
(10)  It would be advantageous for the city and the county to enter into an intergovernmental agreement to effectively provide stormwater services and charge and collect reasonable fees for such services. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-501. - Establishment of a utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater management utility within the city which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. Such utility shall be under the direction of a stormwater utility director, appointed by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the city budget and accounting system, separate and apart from its general fund, for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the city council. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be deposited promptly upon receipt into the stormwater enterprise fund, to be held and invested in trust for the purposes dedicated, and expended exclusively for purposes of the utility, including capital project construction. No other funds of the city shall be deposited in the stormwater enterprise fund or commingled with dedicated stormwater revenues, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater enterprise fund, including grants, loans, and bond proceeds may be combined with and applied to stormwater management capital projects as deemed appropriate by the city council, upon recommendation of the stormwater utility director. 
(c)  The city council hereby transfers to the stormwater utility director operational control over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-502. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
Customer of the stormwater utility means all persons, properties, and entities served by and/or benefitting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Detached dwelling unit means developed land containing one (1) structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one (1) or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one (1) family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one (1) or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar nonresidential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple unit residential properties. 
Developed land means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than two hundred (200) square feet of impervious surface as defined in this article. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) of impervious area means the median average impervious coverage of detached dwelling unit properties in the city as determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties or classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other properties. Three thousand (3,000) square feet of impervious area shall be one (1) equivalent unit. 
Hydrologic response means the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions, and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Multiple dwelling unit residential properties means developed land whereon two (2) or more attached residential dwelling units are located and shall include, but is not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which two (2) or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple dwelling unit properties shall be treated as other developed lands. 
Other developed land means, but shall not be limited to, multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants. 
Service charges means the periodic rate, fee, or charge applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city stormwater utility. Service charges are based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of developed land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one (1) or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater services above those normally provided by the city. 
Stormwater management systems mean those systems which address the issues of drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs through improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the collection, retention, detention, and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage. 
Undeveloped land means land in it unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land shall also include property altered from its natural state by the creation or installation of less than two hundred (200) square feet of impervious surface. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 05-10, Pt. I, 4-18-05) 
Sec. 28-503. - Scope of responsibility for the drainage system in the city. 
(a)  The city drainage system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the city which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which: 
(1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way, and easements; 
(2)  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(3)  Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities. 
Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city or county and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, or its occupant, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the state and the Unites States of America. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may not exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-504. - Requirements for on-site stormwater systems; enforcement methods and inspections. 
All property owners and developers of developed real property within the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city development regulations and the laws of the state and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonable necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of the filing of such action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of the county. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-505. - Determination and modification of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall be determined and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the objective of the city council to establish rates, fees and charges that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of stormwater management services and facilities to those properties who benefit therefrom and, which together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility, will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted programs, services and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-506. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning January 1, 2005, and shall be billed periodically thereafter to customers, except as specific exemptions and credits may apply. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-507. - Stormwater service charges. 
The following stormwater rates shall apply: 
(1)  All single detached dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one (1) equivalent residential unit. 
(2)  Other developed lands. All developed lands not classified as detached dwelling units shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit (ERU) for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof on the property, rounded to the next highest tenth of an equivalent residential unit. 
(3)  Stormwater service charge rate per equivalent residential unit (ERU) of increment thereof. The stormwater service charge per equivalent residential unit shall be as set out in the schedule of fees and charges, per month. 
(4)  Multiple dwelling units. All multiple dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one (1) equivalent residential unit times the number of dwelling units located on the multiple dwelling unit property times an adjustment factor that adjust the ERU to equal the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of a single dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling lot in the city, which has been determined to be 0.5. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 05-10, Pt. I, 4-18-05) 
Sec. 28-508. - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. 
(1)  Undeveloped land as defined in this article shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks) shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(3)  Developed land other than individual detached dwelling units, including but not limited to multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Technical Manual. The stormwater service charge credit may be up to one hundred (100) percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
(4)  Groups of detached dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association providing on-site systems, facilities, services, or activities which reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Technical Manual. The stormwater service charge credit available to groups of detached dwelling units may be up to one hundred (100) percent of the service charge applicable to the individual properties, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by homeowner's association reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
(5)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on continuing provisions of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-509. - Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, collections. 
(a)  A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land, as shown from public land records of the county, shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may backbill for a period of up to four (4) years, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A one (1) percent late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(b)  Suit for collection shall be commenced by the city in the court of the owner's residence; provided, however, if the owner is not a resident of this state, suit may be filed in the superior court of the county. No lien shall be imposed for delinquent collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 05-10, Pt. I, 4-18-05) 
Sec. 28-510. - Stormwater utility service charges billed in common. 
The stormwater utility service charge may be billed on a common statement and collected along with city taxes or county taxes or both city and county taxes. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 28-511. - Appeals. 
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city stormwater utility director. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Using the information provided by the appellant, the director shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within thirty (30) days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the director may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  A decision of the director which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the city manager within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the city manager by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The city manager shall issue a written decision on the appeal within thirty (30) days. All decisions of the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. 
(5)  All decisions by the city manager shall be final. 
(6)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city manager may be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the superior court of the county, filed within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, Pt. I, 12-7-04) 
Secs. 28-512—28-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 28-521. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This chapter shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (2) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city clerk to be a hotspot land use; or 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a. and b. above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city clerk. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The city clerk is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda or equivalent local stormwater management design manual, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-522. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-523. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection 28-523(b); 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection 28-523(c); 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection 28-523(d), if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with subsection 28-523(e), if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 28-523(g). 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, the county greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter, including the performance criteria set forth in section 28-524 below. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this chapter are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 28-524; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 28-524 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero (0) to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 28-524; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act and chapter 9, Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the city or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 28-523(d) below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 28-523(d). 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 28-526 of this chapter. 
The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Performance and maintenance bonds. As a condition of permitting land development or redevelopment, the city shall require a performance bond for the cost of construction of stormwater management facilities. 
(f)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 28-523(a) above (two (2) copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such re-submittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this chapter, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this chapter and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by subsection 28-525(b). 
(g)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(h)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-524. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Over bank flooding protection. Downstream over bank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 28-524(2) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection 28-524(1). The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-525. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-526. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan that are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this chapter. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, may correct the violation as provided in subsection 28-526(d) hereof. 
Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after thirty (30) days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-527. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains uncorrected after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Secs. 28-528—28-28-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 28-541. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Stone Mountain Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-542. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the mayor and city council finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace; 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-543. - Definitions. 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by subsection 28-545(a)(1) below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection 28-545(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-544. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 28-543 of this chapter. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this chapter. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silvaculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this chapter. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 5-542(2)a., above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and value structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the public works director on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the public works director to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silvaculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this chapter, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection 28-545(b) below. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-545. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this chapter, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this chapter, and the public works director finds and determines that the requirements of this chapter prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the city council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the city council shall grant no variance from any provision of this chapter without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the city council. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this chapter, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one (1) alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-546. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-547. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the public works director may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-548. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-549. - Inspection. 
The public works director may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the public works director in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-550. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the public works director determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the public works director by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the public works director shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the public works director may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The public works director may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The public works director may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The public works director may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the public works director may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as the public works director shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the public works director has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the public works director may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the public works director may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-551. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of public works director, may appeal in writing within five (5) business days after the issuance of such decision or order to the mayor of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of public works director, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Secs. 28-552—28-560. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER CONTROL ORDINANCE 

Sec. 28-561. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-562. - Definitions. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public or private property means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-563. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-564. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-565. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00); 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Secs. 28-566—28-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 28-581. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The public works director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-582. - Definitions 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 28-583 of this chapter. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-583. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the county water and sewer department. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-584. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-585. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photograph, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delay in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this chapter. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-586. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three (3) business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-587. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the public works director is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection 28-587(e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the public works director finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the public works director may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the public works director. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city manager or the mayor, in the absence of the city manager, shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the city manager, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within five (5) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation remains uncorrected after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Secs. 28-588—28-590. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 1—7.2, adopted May 6, 2014, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 28-601—28-607, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 08-10, Pt. I, 9-2-08. 

Sec. 28-601. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of City of Stone Mountain. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The city clerk or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this article, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 16, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. [For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for unincorporated DeKalb County, dated May 16, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto.] 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to City of Stone Mountain; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by City of Stone Mountain. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to City of Stone Mountain; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by City of Stone Mountain. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at 875 Main Street, Stone Mountain GA 30083. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of City of Stone Mountain or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, Pt I(§ 1), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2016-17, Pt. I(§§ 1, 2), 10-4-16) 
Sec. 28-602. - Definitions. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the (city clerk)'s interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building has the same meaning as structure. 
Development means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before (* specific date) [* i.e., the effective date of the initial floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the national flood insurance program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before (* specific date) [*i.e., the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after (* specific date) and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [* i.e., the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after (* specific date) [* i.e., the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance adopted by a community]. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the (City of Stone Mountain) to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Note— Inclusion of this definition allows policyholders to avail ICC portion of the flood claim under the repetitive loss declaration by the community in addition to one (1) time substantial flood damage declaration by the community. However, if adopted, the community will need to track the flood damages over the ten (10) year periods. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, Pt I(§ 2), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 28-603. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Stone Mountain a permit application on a form provided by the City of Stone Mountain for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty (20) foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one (1) foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 28-605(b)(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in section 28-605(a)(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including, but not limited to permits required by section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city clerk a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city clerk shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the city clerk shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city clerk shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 28-604 and 28-605; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the city clerk shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city clerk shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the appointed official's. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, Pt I(§ 3), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 28-604. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Stone Mountain. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Stone Mountain, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Stone Mountain. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. 
(1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Stone Mountain. If floodway data is not available from the City of Stone Mountain, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Stone Mountain. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under section 28-604(c)(1) shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 28-604(d); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Stone Mountain using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Stone Mountain prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Stone Mountain. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Stone Mountain until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the City of Stone Mountain. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The City of Stone Mountain may direct the property owner (at no cost to City of Stone Mountain) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Stone Mountain. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, Pt I(§ 4), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 28-605. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings - All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of City of Stone Mountain to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this article; and 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city clerk using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in Al-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the city clerk to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city clerk using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with section 28-605(a)(5)a and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings substantial improvements (section 28-605(b)(1)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 28-604(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(7). 
(c)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a. Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
Note— A definition of "adjacent" should be included in an adopted ordinance. This definition might include those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
(d)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the city clerk shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood-prone enclosures in accordance with section 28-605(a)(5)a. 
(e)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 28-605(a)(5)a; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a non residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the city clerk using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 28-603(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, Pt I(§ 5), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 28-606. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the City of Stone Mountain. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the City of Stone Mountain. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the City of Stone Mountain shall have the right to appeal such decision to the appointed official as established by City of Stone Mountain in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the appointed official. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appointed official may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided in section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the City of Stone Mountain and appointed official's shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The city clerk shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the City of Stone Mountain and appointed official's shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the City of Stone Mountain and the appointed official's may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, Pt I(§ 6), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 28-607. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the City of Stone Mountain determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Stone Mountain by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation. 
(c)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Stone Mountain shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Stone Mountain may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The City of Stone Mountain may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Stone Mountain may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Stone Mountain may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Stone Mountain may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the City of Stone Mountain shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Stone Mountain has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the City of Stone Mountain may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Stone Mountain may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Stone Mountain Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, Pt I(§ 7), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 28-608—28-620. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 28-621. - Purposes. 
(a)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(b)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(c)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(d)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(e)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(f)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(g)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(h)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(i)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(j)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(k)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(l)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-622. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available in all zoning districts as a use by right. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two (2) methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-623. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 28-624 of this article; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 28-624, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 28-624, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and subdivision regulations of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 28-624. - Open space. 
(a)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least seventy-five (75) feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one (1) acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 8 inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40-percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than 10 percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silvaculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this chapter. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one (1) of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this chapter. If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-5-05) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This appendix contains the Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted December 2, 2008. Future amendments will be indicated by history notes in parentheses ( ) following new or amended sections. A uniform system of capitalization and punctuation has been used. Any material in brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for clarity. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected. 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 1.12. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; cemeteries, ch. 6; environment and land development, ch. 8; drainage under environment and land development ordinance, § 8-12; erosion and sediment control, ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; certain transient or temporary retail and wholesale sales, § 12-3; noise disturbances, § 15-5; signs, ch. 23; exempt signs, § 23-5; permitted signs, § 23-7; subdivision regulations, ch. 26; definitions for land subdivision regulations, § 26-2; policy and purpose of land subdivision regulations, § 26-6; final plat specifications under land subdivision regulations, § 26-47; sewerage facilities under land subdivision regulations, § 26-83. 
State Constitution reference— Planning and zoning, Art. IX, § II, Par. IV. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I: - PREAMBLE 

Section 1-1. - Enactment, short title, jurisdiction. 
1-1.1 Enactment. Pursuant to the authority conferred by HB 51 amending title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A.] to include chapter 66, "The Zoning Procedures Law" and for several purposes of promoting the health, safety, aesthetics, convenience, order, prosperity and the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia; of improving the city's appearance; lessening congestion in the streets; furthering traffic safety, securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land, avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer, schools, parks and other public requirements; protecting property against blight and depreciation; encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and other structures through out the city; securing economy in government expenditures; and for other purposes, all in accordance with a land use plan for the development of the city, the mayor and city council of the city, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and sections of the zoning ordinance of the city, and the official zoning map for the city, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made part of this ordinance, said map being certified and on file in the office of the city clerk where said zoning map shall be available for public display. The official zoning map shall have marked upon it the following: "Official Zoning Map of the City of Stone Mountain." The official zoning map shall be signed by the city clerk and shall include the date of its adoption. 
1-1.2 Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Stone Mountain Zoning Ordinance." 
1-1.3 Jurisdiction. These regulations shall govern the use of all land and the developments and redevelopments thereof within the incorporated areas of the city. 
ARTICLE II: - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 2-1. - Administration and procedure. 
2-1.1. Administration of zoning ordinance. It shall be the duty of the city manager or their designee to interpret and enforce this zoning ordinance and to carry out the duties required. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except in conformity with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
2-1.2 Pre-application meeting. Applications to amend the zoning ordinance, applications to amend the zoning map, and applications to vary the terms of the zoning ordinance shall not be submitted or accepted by the city until a pre-application meeting is held with the zoning administrator or their designee. 
The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to assist in the applicant's understanding of this zoning ordinance and its requirements; to educate the applicant on community design policies and standards; and to inform the applicant of all necessary application materials required by the zoning ordinance. No final decision on the application or assurances that a particular proposal will be approved shall be made. 
2-1.3 Procedure for amending the zoning ordinance. Whenever the public necessity, public convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action, this zoning ordinance, including the official zoning map, may be amended by the mayor and city council. The procedures for amending this zoning ordinance, and for variances, and for planned unit developments, shall be as provided in this article. 
Initiation of amendments. Amendments to this zoning ordinance may be initiated by one of the following: 
A.  The mayor and city council may initiate zoning text or zoning map amendments. The requirements for applications in section 2-1.2 shall not apply to amendments initiated by the mayor and city council. 
B.  Any person, firm, corporation or agency may initiate applications to amend the zoning map, provided that said person, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of all of the property involved. 
Initiation of variances. Variances may be initiated by any person, firm, corporation or agency provided that said person, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of all of the property involved. 
Applications for map amendments and variances. Each application to amend the official zoning map, vary the terms of this zoning ordinance shall be filed with the city clerk and shall include the following information: 
A.  A pre-application form signed and dated by the zoning administrator or their designee stating that a pre-application meeting took place pursuant to section 2-1.2. 
B.  A legal description of the tract(s) that are the subject of the application. 
C.  The name and address of the owner(s) of the tract and agent(s), if any. 
D.  Whenever the applicant is not the property owner, the owner shall certify by notarized signature that (s)he has given authority to the applicant to file the application. When properties have more than one owner, the notarized signature of all property owners shall be required. 
E.  An application fee established by the city. 
F.  The present and proposed zoning classification for the tract(s) and the land use classification for the tract(s), as shown on the future development map. 
G.  Zoning application disclosure forms. 
H.  Copy of the paid tax receipt for the property or a statement signed by an official in the tax commissioner's office indicating the taxes have been paid. 
I.  A written analysis of the impact of the proposal with respect to the relevant criteria as follows: 
1.  For map amendments, section 2.1-5. 
2.  For variances, section 2.1-11; 2.1-12. 
J.  Preliminary plans that demonstrates how the application adheres to the requirements of this zoning ordinance 
K.  Other materials reasonably required by the city necessary to the analysis of the application. 
No application shall be deemed accepted and filed until all required forms have been completed and all required materials have been submitted, including fees. The date an application is complete and hence accepted and filed shall be noted on the application form by the zoning administrator or his/her designee, and any subsequent deadlines tied to date of application shall begin to run as of said date. 
Review by planning and zoning committee. Once an application is deemed complete and accepted, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall schedule a meeting of the planning and zoning committee to review the application and provide a recommendation to the mayor and city council. This recommendation may be in the form of a motion duly passed by the planning and zoning committee at their meeting and contained in their minutes. 
2-1.4 Public hearing and decision. This section outlines the proper process for zoning hearings and decisions. 
Authority. The mayor and city council shall make all final zoning decisions. The mayor and city council shall hold the public hearing required by this article prior to said zoning decisions following the public notice requirements herein. The term "zoning ordinance" shall mean this zoning ordinance (known as appendix A to the City Code of Ordinances) as well as the official zoning map adopted herewith and made a part thereof, as amended. 
The term "zoning decision" shall mean final legislative action by the mayor and city council which results in: 
A.  The adoption of a zoning ordinance; 
B.  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance; 
C.  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another; or 
D.  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which zones property to be annexed to the city. 
Public hearing. Before a zoning decision is made, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed action; 
A.  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the mayor and city council shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city a notice of the hearing before the mayor and city council. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
B.  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the mayor and city council shall post the announcement and notice of the hearing at the city hall building. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
C.  If a proposed zoning decision is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than the mayor and council, then: 
1.  The notice, in addition to the requirements of this section, the application shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
2.  The city shall post one or more signs in a location that is noticeable from street view, at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. At least one sign shall be posted along each street on which the subject property has frontage. Each sign shall contain the time and place of the public hearing before the mayor and city council and the nature of the proposed change; and 
D.  When a proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a public hearing shall be held by the mayor and city council on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six months but not more than nine months prior to the date of final action of the zoning decision by the mayor and city council. The hearing required by this section shall be in addition to the hearing required under this section (section 2-1.4). 
1.  Notice of this hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the manner required by this section (section 2-1.4). Above and sign(s) shall be posted on the property in the manner required under this section (section 2-1.4). 
2.  Notice as required under this section (section 2-1.4), both posted and published, shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
E.  The following policies and procedures shall govern the conduct of the public hearing held by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to this section. Printed copies of these policies and procedures shall be made available to the general public. 
1.  The hearing shall be presided over by the mayor. After calling the hearing to order, the mayor shall request that the parcels of property which are the subject of the zoning proposal be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the zoning administrator or their designee's recommendation shall be presented. The mayor and city council shall cause the zoning administrator's written recommendation to be made part of the record. 
2.  Proponents of each proposed zoning decision shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the zoning decision. If all ten minutes are not used, the proponents' remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Opponents of each proposed zoning decision shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning each zoning decision. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote, provided they are expanded equally for proponents and opponents. 
Zoning decision and annexation. Before a zoning decision is made, the mayor and city council shall hold a meeting for review and recommendation purposes prior to a final decision on the proposed action; 
A.  A meeting of the mayor and city council for the purposes of reviewing and making final decisions on zoning proposals shall be conducted following the public hearing at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council. At said meeting, the mayor and city council shall review the analysis and materials submitted by the initiating party, the recommendations of the zoning administrator or their designee and the planning and zoning committee, other matters of record and materials, data, evidence and opinion submitted, and the corresponding review standards and criteria set forth in section 2-1.5 (review standards for zoning proposals) in making a final decision on each zoning proposal. At this meeting the mayor and city council may approve, deny or defer the proposal, add or delete conditions to the proposal, or allow a proposal to be withdrawn with or without prejudice. An application allowed to be withdrawn with prejudice may not be resubmitted except in compliance with section 2-1.7 (resubmittal of rezoning application). 
B.  An action by the mayor and city council to defer a final decision on the zoning proposal shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the proposal will be considered. 
C.  If the zoning is for property to be annexed into the city then: 
1.  The mayor and city council shall complete the required procedures for such zonings, except for the final vote of the mayor and city council, prior to the adoption of the annexation zoning ordinance or resolution or the effective date of any local act but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6. 
2.  The public hearing required by this section (section 2.1-4) shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the city. 
3.  In addition to any other notice requirements, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county wherein the property to be annexed is located a notice of the hearing as required under the provisions of this section (section 2.1-4), as applicable, and shall place a sign on the property when required by this section (section 2.1-4). 
4.  The zoning classification approved by the mayor and city council following the hearing required by this section (section 2.1-4), shall become effective on the later of: 
a.  The date the zoning is approved by the mayor and city council; 
b.  The date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2; or 
c.  Where a county has interposed an objection pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11, the date provided for in paragraph (8) of subsection (b) of said code section. 
D.  Exception for annexed property zoned DK-A: Properties annexed with a zoning district of DK-A pursuant to article XIV are not subject to the regulations contained in section 2-1.4, zoning decision and annexation, paragraphs A. through C. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, Pt. I, 9-2-14) 
2-1.5 Review Standards for Zoning Proposals. 
Review Standards. The zoning administrator, planning and zoning committee, and mayor, and city council shall consider the below listed standards governing the exercise of the zoning power whenever deliberating over any zoning decision pursuant to this article. Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
A.  The following is a list of standards that should be used in all zoning proposal reviews: 
1.  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
2.  The extent to which property values are diminished by their particular zoning restrictions; 
3.  The extent to which the possible reduction of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
4.  The relative harm to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
5.  The suitability of the subject property for the zoning proposed; 
6.  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
7.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
8.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
9.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
10.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
11.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan and future development map; 
12.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
13.  The impact upon the appearance of the city; 
14.  The impact upon the provision of water, sewage, transportation and other urban services; 
15.  The impact upon population density and the potential for overcrowding and urban sprawl; 
16.  The impact upon thoroughfare congestion and traffic safety; and 
17.  The protection of property against blight and depreciation. 
2-1.6 Application Withdrawal. An application may not be withdrawn or amended by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this article shall have first appeared; however, the mayor and city council may allow an application to be withdrawn with or without prejudice. A withdrawal without prejudice authorized by the mayor and city council shall not be considered a denial for purposes of section 2.1-7 (rezoning application resubmittal). 
2-1.7 Resubmittal of rezoning application. If the zoning decision of the mayor and city council is for the purpose of the rezoning of property and the amendment to the zoning ordinance to accomplish the rezoning is denied by the mayor and city council, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months following the denial of the rezoning by the mayor and city council. If the zoning request is approved by the mayor and city council then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least twenty-four (24) months from the date of council action. 
2-1.8 Zoning map amendment and boundary changes. If, in accordance with the applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such change shall be made and indicated on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and city council. 
2-1.9 Conditional zoning. In approving an amendment to the zoning map, the zoning administrator or their designee may recommend and the city council may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to mitigate impacts which may be expected without the imposition of those conditions. 
A.  Such conditions may consist of a variety of requirements, including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Setbacks from any lot line; 
2.  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; 
3.  Restrictions in the location of driveways and curb cuts; 
4.  Restrictions regarding what land uses or other activities may be permitted; 
5.  Maximum building heights and other dimensions; 
6.  Landscaping requirements which may include location, type and maintenance of plant materials, fences, walls, earth berms or other buffer provisions; 
7.  Screening or other protective measures; preservation of existing trees and other vegetation; 
8.  Special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; 
9.  Permitted hours of operation; 
10.  Architectural style; 
11.  A requirement that the existing building(s) be retained; 
12.  A requirement that development take place according to a site plan; 
13.  Limitation on exterior modifications to existing buildings; 
14.  Public facility improvements by the owner; a time limit within which the property must either be used as rezoned or revert to the prior to other appropriate zoning status; or 
15.  Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning. 
B.  Additional requirements and procedures. 
1.  Whenever an application for amending the official zoning map is accompanied or supported by specific plans and designs or other written requirements for a particular use and its development, the mayor and city council may approve the amendment as "conditional." It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to ensure that the eventual development of the property is in strict compliance with the plans, designs and other written requirements submitted as part of the rezoning application and approved as conditional. 
2.  Upon approval by the mayor and city council, said "conditional" plans shall bear a certificate by the city clerk indicating said approval. One copy of said plan shall be maintained by the city clerk as a part of the record of rezoning, one copy filed with the zoning administrator or their designee and one copy returned to the applicant. 
3.  If for any reason, development and use of the property approved in accordance with the procedure outlined in this section (section 2.1-9) above cannot be accomplished, such conditions shall not be altered, changed or varied, except after approval by the mayor and city council. 
4.  Modification of final "conditional" plans: The city manager shall have sole authority to approve minor changes to final "conditional" plans that were approved by the mayor and city council. For the purposes of this section, a minor change in the final "conditional" plans, means a slight alteration to a final "conditional" plan or change in layout that does not result in the visible intrusion of any building, structure, driveway, walkway, parking lot, plaza, wall or similar built element into any open space, yard, landscaped buffer, undeveloped space, or any similar space, when any such space is shown on the final "conditional" plan as being next to and visible from a property line or street. 
5.  Requirements imposed as a condition to rezoning shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of the use of the property as rezoned. 
6.  Requirements imposed as a condition to rezoning shall be interpreted and continuously enforced by the zoning administrator in the same manner as any other provision of the zoning ordinance. 
7.  A conditional zoning shall be noted on the zoning map by adding the suffix "C" to the zoning district designation for the property so zoned. 
2-1.10 Procedures for appeal. 
Appeal to mayor and city council. The following serves as the official procedure for appeals made to mayor and city council: 
A.  Where it is alleged by any aggrieved person, firm or corporation that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator, or other authorized city official in the performance of duties under this zoning ordinance, such person, firm or corporation may seek a review of such order, requirement, decision or determination by the mayor and city council. Said appeals shall be filed with the city clerk in writing within 15 days following the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination. 
B.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the mayor and city council, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court of the county on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
C.  The mayor and city council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and provide 15 days' notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an agent or by an attorney. The mayor shall request that the appeal be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the mayor shall cause the action being appealed to be identified and read. The aggrieved party shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the appeal. If all ten minutes are not used, the aggrieved party's remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. The acting party and those in opposition to the appeal shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the order, requirement, decision or determination. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote of the mayor and city council, provided they are expanded equally for the aggrieved party and the acting party. 
D.  Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the mayor and city council shall make a determination on each appeal. The mayor and city council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the filing of the appeal. The mayor and city council shall reverse, defer, affirm, or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the city manager, or other authorized city official and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken. An appeal shall be sustained or the decision below modified only upon an expressed finding by the mayor and city council that the authorized city official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material of fact, or that said official's action was arbitrary. 
2-1.11 Variance Standards and Procedure. The mayor and city council may authorize upon proper application in specific cases, variance from the terms of this zoning ordinance. Request for variance applications shall be filed with the city clerk. All filed applications shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator or their designee and the zoning administrator shall provide a written recommendation to the mayor and city council for a final decision. 
General standards for application and approval. 
A.  No variance shall be granted to allow a building, structure or use not authorized in the applicable zoning district or a density of development not authorized with such development. 
B.  Applications for variances shall adhere to the provisions as set forth in section 2.1-3 (procedure for amending the zoning ordinance). The mayor and city council shall authorize variances from the terms of this zoning ordinance only upon making all of the following findings: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
2.  The application of this zoning ordinance to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
4.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; and 
5.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this zoning ordinance. 
Mayor and city council hearings. 
A.  Before deciding a variance application in accordance with this zoning ordinance, the mayor and city council shall provide for a hearing on the proposed action as set forth in section 2-1.4 (public hearing and decision). 
B.  The provisions regarding public notice as set forth in section 2-1.4 (public hearing and decision) regarding publication, sign postings, and regarding written notice shall apply to variance applications. 
C.  The mayor and city council shall make a "variance decision" for each application. For purposes of this article the term "variance decision" means final action by the mayor and city council which results in a variance approval or a variance denial. No application shall be filed for any variance for the same parcel(s) within six months from the date the "variance decision". 
D.  Said final action shall be made no later than 60 days following filing of a complete application, unless extended by agreement of the applicant. 
E.  The mayor and city council may require accompanying written requirements as part of a "variance decision", thereby approving the variance as "conditional." 
F.  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to the "variance decision." 
G.  Appeals of a "variance decision" of the mayor and city council by an aggrieved party to the superior court shall be authorized pursuant to section 2.1-10 (procedures for appeal). 
2-1.12 Administrative variances. The city manager or their designee shall have the authority to grant limited minor administrative variances from certain provisions of this zoning ordinance, where the city manager determines that: 
A.  The strict application of the requirements of this zoning ordinance would cause undue and unnecessary hardship to the property owner or authorized agent; and 
B.  The intent and continued integrity of the zoning ordinance can be achieved with equal performance and protection of public interests through grant of the administrative variance. 
C.  All applications for administrative variances shall be submitted to the city clerk. The authority to grant such administrative variances shall be limited to variance from the following requirements: 
1.  Front yard or yard abutting a public street not to exceed 20 percent from the required setback. 
2.  Side yard—Variance not to exceed three feet deducted from the required setback. 
3.  Rear yard—Variance not to exceed five feet deducted from the required setback. 
D.  The city manager or their designee shall make an "administrative variance decision" for the application. For purposes of this article the term "administrative variance decision" means final action by the city manager or their designee which results with an administrative variance approval or an administrative variance denial. 
E.  The decision of the city manager or their designee regarding an administrative variance decision shall be considered the "final decision." Said final decision shall be made no later than 30 days following filing of a complete application, unless extended by agreement of the applicant. 
F.  Appeals from a final decision on an administrative variance by an aggrieved party shall follow the appeals procedure of section 2.1-10 (procedures for appeal). 
2-1.13 Special permits. Special event and temporary permits shall meet the regulations provided in this section. 
A.  All applications for special permits shall be made to the city manager. Special permits shall include all special events and temporary events including art shows, carnival rides and special events of community interest. 
B.  The city manager or their designee shall have the authority to grant special permits upon a determination that the special events, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, would not negatively affect the safety and welfare of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, nor impair the purposes or intent of this zoning ordinance. The city manager shall have up to seven days to make a decision on the issuance of the permit. If the city manager or their designee fails to act on the issuance within this time frame, the city manager shall be deemed to have approved the submitted special permit. 
2-1.14 Building permits required. No building or other structure, except those exempted in the International Building Code, latest edition, shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the city. No building permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
All applications for building permits for uses other than one-family and duplex dwellings shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and the locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and the location on the lot of the building or structure to be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
2-1.15 Exempt buildings and structures. All buildings or other structures exempted under section 2.1-1.4 shall comply with all other applicable regulations and ordinances of the city. 
2-1.16 Expiration of building permit. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 180 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. 
If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the city manager or their designee. Written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
2-1.17 Rserved. 
2-1.18 Special Use Permits. The mayor and city council may authorize upon proper application in specific cases, a special use permit. Request for special use permits shall be filed with the city clerk. All filed applications shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator or their designee and the planning and zoning committee and both shall provide a written recommendation to the mayor and city council for a final decision. No decision shall be made by the mayor and council prior to the holding of a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Any special use permit granted shall remain in effect at that location until that use is discontinued for a period of six months. 
2-1.19 Provisions of Zoning Ordinance to be Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance, statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this zoning ordinance, the provisions of such standards shall govern. 
2-1.20 Penalties for violation. All uses of land, buildings or structures shall be completed in accordance with approved development plans and permits, including any conditions attached thereto. The building inspector shall make periodic field inspections as required. When a violation is found to exist, the building inspector shall immediately advise the zoning administrator of the violation, so that appropriate action may be taken to ensure compliance. 
The zoning administrator or their designee shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this zoning ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. If it is found that any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance are being violated, the zoning administrator shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such written notice shall not be a necessary condition precedent to enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this zoning ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as prescribed in the city charter. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
2-1.21 Remedies. If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this zoning ordinance, the mayor and city council, the city manager, the city attorney or any adjacent or other property owner or anyone else who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop, prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use. 
2-1.22 Severability Clause. Should any section or provision of this zoning ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the zoning ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. The mayor and city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the zoning ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, Pt. I, 2-2-16) 
ARTICLE III: - DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THE ORDINANCE 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust company or corporation as well as an individual. 
The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel". 
The word "building" includes the word "structure". 
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designated to be used or occupied". 
The word "map" or "zoning map" means the "Zoning Map of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia." 
Accessory use: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of building and located on the same lot with such principal use of building. 
Aggrieved person: An applicant or owner of property within 300 feet of the property in question or city-sanctioned groups including the historic preservation committee, planning and zoning committee, downtown development authority or citizen groups such as the Women's Club, Veterans of Foreign Wars or Rotary Club. 
Alteration; building and structural: Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as any type of supporting structural member) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another or of a building from one location to another. 
Alley: A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Buffer strip: A strip of land planted with evergreen shrubbery so as to form a solid barrier to vision from the ground to a height of six feet. 
Building: Any structure permanently attached to the ground and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Building, accessory: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a principal building on the same lot. 
Building, height of: The vertical distance from the mean finished ground level at the front of the building to the highest point of a roof. 
Building line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building (excluding the outermost three feet of any uncovered porches, steps, gutters and similar fixtures) and the centerline of the street. 
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Commercial vehicle: Any vehicle designed, used or maintained for the transportation of persons, goods, or things used in trade, services, or commerce in general. For the purposes of this ordinance, buses, vans and other vehicles seating more than nine persons used for transportation of people shall be considered a commercial vehicle. 
Dwelling unit: A dwelling or portion thereof providing facilities for one or more persons living as a nonprofit single housekeeping unit. 
Family day care home is operated in a private residential home to provide child care for children less than 18 years of age for less than 24 hours per day. Family day care home providers care for three, but no more than six children for a fee. 
Group Day Care Home is operated by a person, corporation, or institution, to provide child care for children less than 18 years of age for less than 24 hours per day. Group Day Care Homes are licensed for 7-18 children. 
Lot: A portion of land devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
Lot width: The shortest distance between the side lot lines, measured at the midpoint of the building line. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Nonconforming use: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of the ordinance or amendment thereto which does not conform after the passage of this ordinance or amendment thereto with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. Existing improvements which do not meet required parking and loading regulations, height regulations, area regulations, and residential floor area regulations for the district in which they are located are not nonconforming uses as defined above. 
Sign: Shall mean a device, structure or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. For purposes of this ordinance, the term "sign" shall include the structure upon which a sign face is located. Any device, structure or representation for visual communications which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others that is wholly located within a completely enclosed building and is located a minimum of three feet away from any opening or exterior window or and seasonal holiday decorations shall not be included within the definition of "sign" and regulated as such. 
Sign, area of: Shall mean the total area upon which a message is displayed on any sign consisting of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Sign, free-standing: Any sign which is not supported by a wall or roof of a building, or which extends more than three feet horizontally from the wall of a building. 
Street: A public or private thoroughfare, not less than 40 feet wide, which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
Yard (front): A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches. On multi-frontage lots all yards fronting on a public street hall be considered front yards. 
Yard (side): A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot; extending from the front lot line to the rear yard; being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections thereto. 
Yard (rear): A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches, provided that said projections be at least 20 feet from the rear lot lines. On all corner lots the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
ARTICLE IV: - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Section 4-1. - District names. 
4-1.1 Conventional districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the city shall have the following use districts: 

 
  
4-1.2 Special district. The special FL and BB districts are superimposed on the conventional districts and are designated as follows: 

 
Section 4-2. - District boundaries. 
4-2.1 The boundaries of each district are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map, City of Stone Mountain, Georgia", adopted in 2007, and certified by the city clerk. 
Said map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this ordinance; it shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
4-2.2 Amendment to official zoning map. If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and city council, with an entry in the minutes of such council meeting as follows: 
"On ____________ , 20 ____________ by official action of the Mayor and City Council, the following change/changes was/were made to the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change/changes)" 
Said entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the city clerk or designee. No amendment of this ordinance is official until such change and entry is made on said map. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. 
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the city clerk or designee shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
4-2.3 Replacement of official zoning map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the mayor and city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map, and said map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk or designee and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted ____________ , 20 ____________ , as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Stone Mountain, Georgia". 
Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
4-2.4 Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district in the city, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the center line of a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
B.  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the center line of the street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
C.  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. 
D.  In the case of a double frontage lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the double frontage lot lies shall apply to that portion of the double frontage lot. 
E.  Where zoning district boundaries are in doubt, the planning and zoning committee shall make such interpretation using the appropriate scale from the official zoning map. 
4-2.5 Annexation. 
A.  Any land subsequently annexed to the city shall be annexed in accordance with the procedures adopted by mayor and council that are based upon state law and are part of the City Code. It shall, immediately upon annexation, be classified into a zoning category compatible with adjacent zoning and land uses, and sound planning principles in accordance with the procedure in section 2-1.5 and applicable state law. 
ARTICLE V: - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 5-1. - Single-family residential (R-1) district. 
5-1.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as R-1) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Recognizes the existence of previously established low density residential districts in communities; 
•  Encourages clustering of development and provision of location, environmental and development amenities; 
•  Provides for low density residential development in cul-de-sac neighborhoods, community areas and the urban area; and 
•  Enhances the community's character through the promotion of high quality design. 
Uses are limited to single-family dwellings served by public sewers, some residentially related institutions, to certain incidental uses intended primarily to provide service to a dwelling or a residential neighborhood. 
5-1.2. Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. 
2.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
3.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
4.  Conservation/open space development of permitted residential uses, provided that conditions outlined in Article VII (Conservation/open space development) are met. 
5.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
6.  Guest house, pool house, or servant quarters on a lot containing a single-family residence limited to one on each lot and shall not include cooking facilities and shall not exceed the square footage of the principal structure. 
7.  Swimming pool for a single-family residential dwelling, that is completely enclosed by an opiate fence or wall at least four (4) feet in height, but not over eight (8) feet in height. Swimming pools shall meet all the requirements of the International Building Code and applicable local health department rules and regulations. 
8.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall not exceed a total of 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
9.  Temporary construction uses. 
10.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations. 
11.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
12.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or woven wire fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
e.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
13.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
14.  Schools offering traditional core educational courses similar to the public elementary, middle and high schools, provided: 
a.  Any school be on a lot at least of 400 feet wide and containing six acres of lot area; 
b.  All buildings be at least 60 feet from every property line. 
15.  Existing cemeteries. 
16.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-1.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Cultural exhibits and libraries. 
2.  Churches, provided: 
a.  The lot abuts upon an arterial or collector street or state highway. 
b.  The lot is at least three acres in size. 
c.  All buildings are located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
d.  A buffer at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen; 
e.  Adequate off-street parking, provided: 
i.  Parking area is located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
f.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
3.  Family day care center, provided 
a.  It is an owner-occupied establishment; 
b.  Must obtaining signatures from neighboring lots 
c.  No more than six individuals are kept. 
4.  Group day care facilities including private kindergartens and playschools, provided: 
a.  The lot abuts upon a major or collector street or a state highway. 
b.  A circular drive for off-street loading and unloading of children is provided. 
c.  At least 35 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment is provided. 
d.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment is provided. 
e.  The outdoor play area is enclosed by a fence at least four feet in height but not over eight feet in height. 
f.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
g.  If a special use permit is approved, comply with all state day care requirements and health regulations. 
4.  Parks, private, provided: 
a.  All buildings are located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
5.  Neighborhood recreation centers, provided: 
a.  All buildings are located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
6.  Bed and breakfast. 
7.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-1.4 Prohibited uses. All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-1.5 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-1 district. Any exceptions to the following must be approved by the planning and zoning committee upon recommendation from staff. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 40 feet. 
4.  Minimum setback to a public street: 50 feet (from property line). 
5.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
7.  Total maximum height: 30 feet. 
8.  Minimum heated floor area: 1,250 square feet. 
9.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: none. 
10.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: Ten feet. 
11.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or 2 stories. 
12.  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
5-1.6 Additional District Development Regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-1 District. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting, other than landscape lighting, if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
2.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view. 
3.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The R-1 district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
5-1.7 Minimum parking requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Each single-family dwelling shall have two garage or carport parking spaces; such parking spaces shall be prohibited in required front yards or corner lot side yards. 
2.  A minimum driveway length of 20 feet shall be required between said parking and any street right-of-way line. 
3.  Parking shall only be allowed on areas surfaced with all-weather materials such as concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or decorative gravel. 
4.  Automobiles parked in front yards cannot consume more than 20 percent or 400 square feet, whichever is less. 
5.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
6.  The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle is prohibited except when any of the following provisions apply: 
a.  A commercial vehicle temporarily parked or standing in a residential zoning district for less than eight hours. 
b.  An automobile, pickup truck, van or sport utility vehicle used to provide daily transportation to and from work. 
7.  A maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a single family residential lot provided that it is parked in compliance with section 5-104 of the Code of Ordinances. Additional major recreational equipment may only be parked or stored in enclosed buildings or in a carport provided that said recreational equipment fits entirely within the carport. However, such equipment may be parked on residential premises for a period of not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
5-1.8 Streetscape requirements. Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district, pursuant to chapter 25, streets and sidewalks. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the R-1 district: 
A.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
1.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of five feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
B.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
1.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
Section 5-2. - Traditional residential (R-2) district. 
5-2.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (R-2) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Promotes the preservation of historic and architectural integrity of Stone Mountain's residential neighborhoods; 
•  Restricts properties and structures to predominantly low density single-family residential uses; 
•  Requires low densities that are similar to the established neighborhoods within the R-2 district; 
•  Protects the established neighborhoods from encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the single-family residential environment. 
Uses are limited to single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings upon condition, some residentially related institutions, to certain incidental uses intended primarily to provide service to a dwelling or a residential neighborhood. 
5-2.2 Permitted Uses by Right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes provided the development is compatible to the scale and architectural style of the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.  Swimming pool for a single-family residential dwelling, that is completely enclosed by an opaque fence or wall at least four feet in height, but not over eight feet in height. Swimming pools shall meet all the requirements of the International Building Code and applicable local health department rules and regulations. 
3.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
4.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
5.  Conservation/open space development of permitted residential uses, provided that conditions outlined in article VII (conservation/open space development) are met. 
6.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
7.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations. 
8.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
9.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or opiate fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  Ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
e.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
10.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
11.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
12.  Existing cemeteries. 
13.  Temporary construction uses. 
5-2.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Single- and two- family attached dwellings, provided the dwelling is owner-occupied. 
2.  Cultural exhibits and libraries. 
3.  Churches, provided: 
a.  The lot abuts upon an arterial or collector street or state highway. 
b.  The lot is at least three acres in size. 
c.  All buildings are located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
d.  A buffer at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen; 
e.  Adequate off-street parking, provided: 
i.  Parking area is located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
f.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
4.  Bed and breakfast. 
5.  Guest house, pool house, or servant quarters on a lot containing a single-family residence limited to one on each lot and shall not include cooking facilities and shall not exceed the square footage of the principal structure. 
6.  Accessory dwelling units and garage apartments provided that: 
a.  The minimum lot area required for any lot containing an accessory dwelling unit or garage apartment shall be the minimum lot size required by R-2 district regulations, and the guest house or servant quarters shall not exceed the square footage of the principal structure. 
b.  The primary building/residence is not rented. 
c.  The accessory dwelling unit shall contain 400 or less square feet, with the maximum lot coverage with the principal and accessory structures combined not to exceed the maximum lot coverage as specified in the R-2 District Regulations. 
d.  The accessory dwelling unit shall meet the requirements as provided in Article VI Supplemental, Section 6-8 Accessory Uses. 
7.  Family day care center, provided 
a.  It is an owner-occupied establishment; 
b.  Must receive approval by: 
i.  Obtaining signatures from neighboring lots; and 
ii.  Receive approval through a public hearing. 
c.  No more than six individuals are kept. 
8.  Group day care facilities including private kindergartens and playschools, provided: 
a.  The lot abuts upon a major or collector street or a state highway. 
b.  A circular drive for off-street loading and unloading of children is provided. 
c.  If a special use permit is approved, comply with all state day care requirements and health regulations. 
d.  At least 35 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment is provided. 
e.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment is provided. 
f.  The outdoor play area is enclosed by a fence at least four feet in height but not over eight feet in height. 
g.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
9.  Neighborhood recreation centers, provided: 
a.  All buildings are located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
10.  Schools offering traditional core educational courses similar to the public elementary, middle and high schools, provided: 
a.  Any school be on a lot at least of 400 feet wide and containing six acres of lot area; 
b.  All buildings be at least 60 feet from every property line. 
11.  Planned community including single family residential units, multi-family residential units with or without individual cooking facilities and complimentary uses primarily to provide services to the planed community, provided: 
a.  The minimum parcel size for the development is five acres. 
b.  A master plan for the entire development is approved. 
c.  Commercial or other non-residential uses shall be incidental to the primary use. 
12.  Parks (private). 
a.  All buildings are located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
13.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-2.4 Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-2.5 District Development Regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-2 district. Any exceptions to the following must be approved by the planning and zoning committee upon recommendation from staff. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 15,000 feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 30 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street: Ten feet (from property line). 
5.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet. 
7.  Maximum height (of living space, not including attic and basement): 30 feet. 
8.  Minimum heated floor area: 1,500 square feet. 
9.  Maximum floor area: None. 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: None. 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: Ten feet. 
12.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or 2 stories. 
a.  Bonus: 35 feet or three stories, provided: 
i.  The principle dwelling is a part of a conservation/open space development; 
ii.  The principal dwelling promotes sustainable building practices as outlined by LEED or EARTH CRAFT building standards. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent, including off-street parking. 
5-2.6 Additional district development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-2 district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Base density. 
a.  One to two dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Maximum density. 
a.  Two dwelling units per acre. 
3.  Minimum density. 
a.  none. 
4.  Setback requirements for mixed-use development. 
a.  None. 
5.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting other than landscape lighting, if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
6.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view. 
7.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The R-2 district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
5-2.7 Minimum parking requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Each single-family dwelling shall have two garage or carport parking spaces; such parking spaces shall be prohibited in required front yards or corner lot side yards. 
2.  A minimum driveway length of 20 feet shall be required between said parking and any street right-of-way line. 
3.  Parking shall only be allowed on areas surfaced with all-weather materials such as concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or decorative gravel. 
4.  Automobiles parked in front yards cannot consume more than 20 percent or 400 square feet, whichever is less. 
5.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
6.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
7.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
8.  Parallel parking is permitted along all streets within the development provided the street construction specifications meet the required city code regarding parallel parking. 
9.  The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle is prohibited except when any of the following provisions apply: 
a.  A commercial vehicle temporarily parked or standing in a residential zoning district for less than eight hours. 
b.  An automobile, pickup truck, van or sport utility vehicle used to provide daily transportation to and from work. 
10.  A maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a single family residential lot provided that it is parked in compliance with section 5-104 of the Code of Ordinances. Additional major recreational equipment may only be parked or stored in enclosed buildings or in a carport provided that said recreational equipment fits entirely within the carport. However, such equipment may be parked on residential premises for a period of not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
5-2.8 Streetscape requirements. Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district, pursuant to chapter 25, streets and sidewalks. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the R-2 district: 
A.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
1.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of five feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
B.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
1.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, Pt. I(§§ 1, 2), 3-6-18) 
Section 5-3. - In-town neighborhood (R-3) district. 
5-3.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (R-3) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Promotes the preservation of historic and architectural integrity of Stone Mountain's residential neighborhoods; 
•  Encourages and allows for cluster development; 
•  Encourage the preservation of functional open space in and around the R-3 district; 
•  Encourages infill development; 
•  Provides for compact single-family and two-family residential development; 
•  Promotes more efficient use of land and utilities; 
•  Accommodates moderate- density residential development adjacent to small-scale commercial uses; 
•  Encourage pedestrian-oriented development within walking distance of transit opportunities; 
•  Enhance the community's character through the promotion of high quality urban design. 
Uses are limited to single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, some residentially related institutions, to certain incidental uses intended primarily to provide service to a dwelling or a residential neighborhood. 
5-3.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Single- and two- family attached dwellings, provided the dwelling is owner occupied. 
2.  Detached single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. 
3.  Conservation/open space development of permitted residential uses, provided that conditions outlined in article VII (conservation/open space development) are met. 
4.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
5.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
6.  Fire and police protection services. 
7.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
8.  Temporary construction uses. 
9.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations. 
10.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
11.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or woven wire fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
e.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
12.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
13.  Schools offering traditional core educational courses similar to the public elementary, middle and high schools, provided: 
a.  Any school be on a lot at least of 400 feet wide and containing six acres of lot area; 
b.  All buildings be at least 60 feet from every property line. 
14.  Existing cemeteries. 
15.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-3.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Cultural exhibits and libraries. 
2.  Lodges and buildings of fraternal and civic assembly, provided that: 
a.  The lot abuts upon an arterial or collector street or state highway. 
b.  The lot is at least three acres in size. 
c.  All buildings are located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
d.  A buffer at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen; 
e.  Adequate off-street parking, provided: 
i.  Parking area is located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
f.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
2.  Bed and breakfast provided that it is owner-occupied and that conditions outlined in article XV (bed and breakfast facilities) are met. 
3.  Accessory dwelling units, guest houses, or servant quarters on a lot containing a single-family residence limited to one on each lot and provided further that the minimum lot area shall be the minimum lot size required by R-3 district regulations. 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit shall contain not less than 400 or less square feet, with the maximum lot coverage with the principal and accessory structures combined not to exceed the maximum lot coverage as specified in the R-3 district regulations. 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit shall meet the requirements as provided in article VI supplemental, section 6-8 accessory uses. 
4.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Rental of permitted accessory dwelling units and guest cottages, provided that: 
a.  Yard, area, and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each such use whether or not such use is on an individual lay-out; 
b.  The primary building/residence is not rented. 
6.  Eating and drinking establishments. 
7.  Food and beverage retail sales. 
8.  Retail sales and services, provided: 
a.  A use does not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area per parcel. 
b.  The lot must abut a major street as defined by the official zoning map. 
9.  Planned community including single family residential units, multi-family residential units with or without individual cooking facilities and complimentary uses primarily to provide services to the planned community, provided: 
a.  The minimum parcel size for the development is five acres. 
b.  A master plan for the entire development is approved. 
c.  Commercial or other non-residential uses shall be incidental to the primary use. 
5-3.4 Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-3.5 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-3 district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 
a.  7,000 feet (detached residential); 
b.  5,000 feet (attached residential); 
c.  No minimum (commercial). 
2.  Minimum lot width: 30 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 30 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street (from property line): 
a.  20 feet (detached residential); 
b.  20 feet (attached single-family residential); 
c.  No minimum (commercial). 
5.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  20 feet (detached residential); 
b.  20 feet (attached single- and two-family residential); 
c.  30 feet (commercial). 
7.  Maximum height (of living space, not including attic and basement): 30 feet. 
8.  Minimum heated floor area: 
a.  1,250 square feet (detached residential). 
b.  1,000 square feet (attached single- and two-family residential). 
c.  No minimum (commercial). 
9.  Maximum floor area. 
a.  10,000 square feet (detached residential). 
b.  2,000 square feet (attached single- and two-family residential). 
c.  1,000 square feet (commercial). 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: None. 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: None. 
12.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or two stories. 
Bonus: 50 feet or three stories, provided: 
a.  The principal dwelling is a part of a conservation/open space development; 
b.  The principal dwelling promotes sustainable building practices as outlined by LEED or EARTH CRAFT building standards. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent, including off-street parking. 
5-3.6 Additional district development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-3 district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Base density. 
a.  Four to ten dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Maximum density. 
a.  Ten dwelling units per acre. 
3.  Minimum density. 
a.  Four dwelling units per acre. 
4.  Setback requirements for mixed-use development. 
a.  Front setbacks may vary from a minimum of 15 feet to a maximum of 25 feet to accommodate for outdoor retail and dining. 
5.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting other than landscape lighting, if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
6.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view. 
7.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The R-3 district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
5-3.7 Minimum parking requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Each single-family dwelling shall have two garage or carport parking spaces; such parking spaces shall be prohibited in required front yards or corner lot side yards. 
2.  A minimum driveway length of 20 feet shall be required between said parking and any street right-of-way line. 
3.  Parking shall only be allowed on areas surfaced with all-weather materials such as concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or decorative gravel. 
4.  Automobiles parked in front yards cannot consume more than 20 percent or 400 square feet, whichever is less. 
5.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
6.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
7.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
8.  Underground or within the building parking is encouraged to maximize green space. 
9.  Shared parking should be utilized to reduce surface parking as outlined in article VII: off-street parking and loading requirements. 
10.  Parallel parking is permitted along all streets within the development provided the street construction specifications meet the required city code regarding parallel parking. 
a.  The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle is prohibited except when any of the following provisions apply: 
i.  A commercial vehicle temporarily parked or standing in a residential zoning district for less than eight hours. 
ii.  An automobile, pickup truck, van or sport utility vehicle used to provide daily transportation to and from work. 
11.  A maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a single family residential lot provided that it is parked in compliance with section 5-104 of the Code of Ordinances. Additional major recreational equipment may only be parked or stored in enclosed buildings or in a carport provided that said recreational equipment fits entirely within the carport. However, such equipment may be parked on residential premises for a period of not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
5-3.8 Streetscape requirements. Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district, pursuant to chapter 25, streets and sidewalks. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the R-3 district: 
A.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
1.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of five feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
B.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
1.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, Pt. I(§§ 3, 4), 3-6-18) 
Section 5-4. - Shermantown residential (R-4) district. 
5-4.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (R-4) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Recognizes the existence of a previously established medium density residential district in communities and the urban area; 
•  Retains and protects the historic Shermantown neighborhood; 
•  Encourages infill development; 
•  Provides for compact single family residential development; 
•  Promotes more efficient use of land and utilities; 
•  Accommodates moderate- density residential development above small-scale ground-floor commercial uses; 
•  Encourage pedestrian-oriented development within walking distance of transit opportunities; 
•  Enhance the community's character through the promotion of high quality urban design. 
Uses are limited to single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, some residentially related institutions, mixed-use developments to certain enumerated complimentary uses intended primarily to provide service to a dwelling or a residential neighborhood. 
5-4.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. 
2.  Attached single- and multi-family dwellings, provided: 
a.  Residential units are not on the ground floor; 
b.  Are a part of a residential/commercial mixed-use building. 
3.  Conservation/open space development of permitted residential uses, provided that conditions outlined in article VII (conservation/open space development) are met. 
4.  Rental of permitted residential uses or guest cottages, provided that either the principal residence or guest cottage is owner occupied; that yard, area, and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each such use whether or not such use is on an individual lay-out. 
5.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
6.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
7.  Fire and police protection services. 
8.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
9.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; except that not more than two automobiles in operating condition belonging to residents of a dwelling shall be parked between a dwelling and the street or streets it adjoins. All cars in excess of two and all cars not in operating condition any truck, boat or unoccupied travel trailer shall be parked in the rear yard or in a garage or carport. All automobile parts shall be stored within a garage or storage building. Any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
10.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations. 
11.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
12.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or opiate fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
e.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
13.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
14.  Schools offering traditional core educational courses similar to the public elementary, middle and high schools, provided: 
a.  Any school be on a lot at least of 400 feet wide and containing six acres of lot area; 
b.  All buildings be at least 60 feet from every property line. 
15.  Existing cemeteries. 
16.  Retail sales and services, provided: 
a.  A use is a part of a residential/commercial mixed-use building; 
b.  A use does not exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area per parcel; 
c.  A use does not provide for, or serve alcohol. 
17.  Churches, provided: 
a.  The lot abuts upon an arterial or collector street or state highway. 
b.  The lot is at least three acres in size. 
c.  All buildings are located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
d.  A buffer at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen; 
e.  Adequate off-street parking, provided: 
i.  Parking area is located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
f.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
18.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-4.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Cultural exhibits and libraries. 
2.  Lodges and buildings of fraternal and civic assembly, provided that: 
a.  Such use is currently underserved by existing use. 
b.  The lot abuts upon an arterial or collector street or state highway. 
c.  The lot is at least three acres in size. 
d.  All buildings are located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
e.  A buffer at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen; 
f.  Adequate off-street parking, provided: 
i.  Parking area is located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
g.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
3.  Bed and breakfast facilities. 
4.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
a.  Accessory dwelling units shall contain 400 or less square feet, with the maximum lot coverage with the principal and accessory structures combined not to exceed the maximum lot coverage as specified in the R-4 district regulations. 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit shall meet the requirements as provided in article VI supplemental, section 6-8 accessory uses. 
5.  Eating and drinking establishments (with alcohol). 
6.  Food and beverage retail sales (with alcohol). 
7.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-4.4 Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-4.5 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-4 district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 
a.  5,000 feet (detached residential); 
b.  No minimum (attached single/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building); 
c.  No minimum (commercial). 
2.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 30 feet 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street (measured from property line): 
a.  15 feet (detached residential); 
b.  No minimum (attached single/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building); 
c.  No minimum (commercial). 
5.  Minimum side yard: 
a.  Ten feet (detached residential); 
b.  No minimum (attached single/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building); 
c.  No minimum (commercial); 
d.  If mixed-use building is detached from neighboring parcel buildings, there must be a 12-foot alleyway from the street to behind the building. 
i.  Alleyway must be maintained in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of visitors, employees and residences. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  20 feet (detached residential); 
b.  20 feet (attached single/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building); 
c.  30 feet (commercial). 
7.  Maximum height (of living space, not including attic and basement): 30 feet. 
8.  Minimum heated floor area: 
a.  1,000 square feet (detached residential). 
b.  600 square feet (attached single/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building). 
c.  No minimum (commercial). 
9.  Maximum floor area: 
a.  2,500 square feet (detached residential). 
b.  1,500 square feet (attached single/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building). 
c.  2,500 square feet (commercial). 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: None. 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: None. 
12.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or two stories. 
Bonus: 50 feet or three stories, provided: 
a.  The principle dwelling is a part of a conservation/open space development; 
b.  The principal dwelling promotes sustainable building practices as outlined by LEED or EARTH CRAFT building standards. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent, including off-street parking. 
a.  50 percent (detached residential); ten percent parking. 
b.  40 percent (attached single/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building; 20 percent parking. 
c.  40 percent (commercial); 20 percent parking. 
5-4.6 Additional District Development Regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the R-4 district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Base density. 
a.  Four to eight dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Maximum density. 
a.  Eight dwelling units per acre. 
3.  Minimum density. 
a.  Four dwelling units per acre. 
4.  Maximum nonresidential. 
a.  None. 
5.  Setback requirements for mixed-use development. 
a.  Setbacks may vary from 15 to 25 feet to accommodate for outdoor retail and dining. 
6.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting, other than landscape lighting if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
b.  Lighting must be pedestrian-oriented and included in alleyways. 
7.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view. 
8.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The R-4 district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
5-4.7 Minimum Parking Requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Each single-family dwelling shall have two garage or carport parking spaces; such parking spaces shall be prohibited in required front yards or corner lot side yards. 
2.  A minimum driveway length of 20 feet shall be required between said parking and any street right-of-way line. 
3.  Parking shall only be allowed on areas surfaced with all-weather materials such as concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, or decorative gravel. 
4.  Automobiles parked in front yards cannot consume more than 20 percent or 400 square feet, whichever is less. 
5.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
6.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
7.  The location and design of parking structures should minimize their visibility from the street, adjacent properties, or other public areas and are not appropriate abutting residential properties outside the R-4 district. 
8.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
9.  Underground or within the building parking is encouraged to maximize green space. 
10.  Shared parking should be utilized to reduce surface parking. 
11.  Parallel parking is permitted along all streets within the development provided the street construction specifications meet the required city code regarding parallel parking. 
12.  The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle is prohibited except when any of the following provisions apply: 
a.  A commercial vehicle temporarily parked or standing in a residential zoning district for less than eight (8) hours. 
b.  An automobile, pickup truck, van or sport utility vehicle used to provide daily transportation to and from work. 
13.  A maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a single family residential lot provided that it is parked in compliance with section 5-104 of the Code of Ordinances. Additional major recreational equipment may only be parked or stored in enclosed buildings or in a carport provided that said recreational equipment fits entirely within the carport. However, such equipment may be parked on residential premises for a period of not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
5-4.8 Streetscape requirements. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district, pursuant to chapter 25, streets and sidewalks. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the R-4 district: 
1.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
a.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of five feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
2.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
b.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, Pt. I(§ 5), 3-6-18) 
Section 5-5. - Village center mixed-use (VCM) district. 
5-5.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (VCM) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Accommodates moderate- to high-density residential development and ground-floor commercial uses with residential units above. This district also accommodates low-intensity office development compatible with the residential character of the VCM district. 
•  Allows for a diverse variety of uses, structures, densities and open spaces when not in conflict with existed and permitted land uses on abutting properties; 
•  Promotes a more efficient use of land and a smaller network of utilities and natural resources than conventional land development; 
•  Encourages the preservation of functional open space in and around the village center; 
•  Provides the opportunity for the application of innovative site planning concepts through the creation of aesthetically pleasing environments for living, shopping and working on properties of adequate shape, size and location that conventional land development may not allow for; 
•  Encourages high pedestrian use and accessibility and transportation alternatives. 
Uses are limited to multi-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, mixed-use residential and commercial developments to commercial and professional complimentary uses intended primarily to provide service to the entire city. 
5-5.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Attached multi-family dwellings, provided: 
a.  Is a part of a residential/commercial mixed-use building. 
2.  Conservation/open space development of permitted residential uses, provided that conditions outlined in article VII (conservation/open space development) are met. 
3.  Rental of permitted residential uses, provided that yard, area, and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each such use whether or not such use is on an individual lay-out. 
4.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
5.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
6.  Fire and police protection services. 
7.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
8.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
9.  Temporary construction uses. 
10.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations provided: 
11.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
12.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or woven wire fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
e.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
13.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
14.  Consumer services (non-automotive). 
15.  Recreation sales and services. 
16.  Automatic teller machines that are not an accessory use to a financial center. 
17.  Professional medical clinic services. 
18.  Financial services. 
19.  Eating and drinking establishments. 
20.  Food and beverage retail sales, 
21.  Professional offices. 
22.  Retail sales (general excluding automotive). 
23.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-5.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Cultural exhibits and libraries. 
2.  Bed and breakfast. 
3.  Laundry services (drycleaners). 
4.  Consumer repair services provided: 
a.  Services are non-automotive; 
b.  No outside storage. 
5.  Animal sales and services (household pets no outside kennels or runs). 
6.  Eating and drinking establishments (with walk-through service). 
7.  Recreational equipment rental provided there is no outside storage. 
8.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
9.  Day nurseries and kindergartens. 
a.  The following provisions apply to day nurseries and kindergartens: 
i.  There shall be not less than thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum licensed enrollment and not less than one hundred (100) square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum licensed enrollment. 
ii.  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet in height but not over eight (8) feet in height 
iii.  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading. 
10.  Business or vocational school. 
11.  Private or parochial elementary, middle or high school, or college. 
a.  Day nurseries and kindergartens may be established as an accessory use to private or parochial schools subject to the requirements listed in 5-5.3A-9. 
12.  Churches. 
5-5.4 Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-5.5 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the VCM district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Minimum lot size: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 40 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street: None. 
5.  Minimum side yard: None. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
7.  Maximum height (of living space, not including attic and basement): 50 feet. 
8.  Minimum floor area: 600 square feet. 
9.  Maximum floor area: 2,400 square feet. 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: none. 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: none. 
12.  Maximum building height: 50 feet or three stories. 
Bonus: 65 feet or four stories, provided: 
a.  The principle building is a part of a conservation/open space development; or 
b.  The principle building is a part of a mixed-use residential/commercial development; or 
i.  The principal building promotes sustainable building practices as outlined by LEED or EARTH CRAFT building standards. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 80 percent, including a maximum of 20 percent for off-street parking. 
5-5.6 Additional district development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the VCM district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee 
1.  Maximum density. 
a.  20 dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Minimum density. 
a.  Eight dwelling units per acre. 
3.  Setback requirements for mixed-use development. 
a.  Setbacks may vary from zero to ten feet to accommodate for outdoor retail and dining. 
4.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting, other than landscape lighting if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
b.  Lighting must be pedestrian-friendly and included in alleyways. 
5.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view. 
6.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The VCM district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
d.  Interconnections to adjoining property, whether developed or undeveloped, should be included and incorporated into the design where appropriate. Proposed parcels should be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
5-5.7 Minimum parking requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
2.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
3.  The location and design of parking structures should minimize their visibility from the street, adjacent properties, or other public areas and are not appropriate abutting residential properties outside the VCM district. 
4.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
5.  Underground or within the building parking is encouraged to maximize green space. 
6.  Shared parking should be utilized to reduce surface parking as outlined in article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements. 
7.  Parallel parking is permitted along all streets within the development provided the street construction specifications meet the required city code regarding parallel parking. 
a.  The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle is prohibited except when any of the following provisions apply: 
i.  A commercial vehicle temporarily parked or standing in a residential zoning district for less than eight hours. 
ii.  An automobile, pickup truck, van or sport utility vehicle used to provide daily transportation to and from work. 
8.  A maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a single family residential lot provided that it is parked in compliance with section 5-104 of the Code of Ordinances. Additional major recreational equipment may only be parked or stored in enclosed buildings or in a carport provided that said recreational equipment fits entirely within the carport. However, such equipment may be parked on residential premises for a period of not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
5-5.8 Streetscape requirements. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the VCM district: 
1.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
a.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of ten feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
b.  One street tree as approved by the planning and zoning committee shall be planted for each 40 feet linear feet within the required streetscape zone; street trees might be regularly spaced (40 feet on center), or they may be irregularly spaced where opportunities exist, subject to the approval of the city council. 
2.  Pedestrian amenities. 
a.  The streetscape zone shall be planted with street trees and furnished with street furniture, including but not limited to benches and litter receptacles. The streetscape zone may also include signs, light poles, and other similar items unless otherwise specifically prohibited by regulation. 
b.  For all new streetscape development, attention and respect must be given to the current, surrounding infrastructure and design. 
3.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
a.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, 9-4-12; Ord. No 2016-19, Pt. I(§§ 1—7), 12-6-16) 
Section 5-6. - Multi-family residential (MR-1) district. 
5-6.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (MR-1) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Accommodate moderate- to high-density residential development above or adjacent to ground-floor commercial uses. This district also accommodates office development compatible with the residential character of the MR-1 district. 
•  Support mixed-use (residential/nonresidential) projects with active ground-floor uses; 
•  Allow for a diverse variety of uses, structures, densities and open spaces when not in conflict with existed and permitted land uses on abutting properties; 
•  Promote a more efficient use of land and a smaller network of utilities and natural resources than conventional land development; 
•  Provide the opportunity for the application of innovative site planning concepts through the creation of aesthetically pleasing environments for living, shopping and working on properties of adequate shape, size and location that conventional land development may not allow for; 
•  Encourage high pedestrian use and accessibility and transportation alternatives. 
Uses are limited to multi-family dwellings, mixed-use residential and commercial developments to commercial and professional complimentary uses; certain enumerated complimentary uses intended primarily to provide services to this district. 
5-6.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Two-family attached dwellings. 
2.  Multi-family attached dwellings. 
3.  Mixed-use dwellings. 
4.  Conservation/open space development of permitted residential uses, provided that conditions outlined in article VII (conservation/open space development) are met. 
5.  Rental of permitted residential uses, provided that yard, area, and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each such use whether or not such use is on an individual lay-out. 
6.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
7.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
8.  Fire and police protection services. 
9.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
10.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
11.  Temporary construction uses. 
12.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations provided: 
13.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
14.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or opiate fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
b.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
c.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
d.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
15.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
16.  Consumer services (non-automotive). 
17.  Professional medical clinic services. 
18.  Financial services offices. 
19.  Eating and drinking establishments (without alcohol). 
20.  Food and beverage retail sales (without alcohol). 
21.  Professional offices. 
22.  Retail sales (general excluding automotive), provided: 
a.  A use does not exceed 45,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
23.  Neighborhood recreation centers, provided: 
a.  All buildings are located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
24.  Temporary construction uses. 
25.  Schools offering traditional core educational courses similar to the public elementary, middle and high schools, provided: 
i.  Any school be on a lot at least of 400 feet wide and containing six acres of lot area; 
ii.  All buildings be at least 60 feet from every property line. 
26.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
i.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-6.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Churches, provided: 
a.  The lot abuts upon an arterial or collector street or state highway. 
b.  The lot is at least three acres in size. 
c.  All buildings are located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
d.  A buffer at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen; 
e.  Adequate off-street parking, provided: 
i.  Parking area is located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
f.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
2.  Cultural exhibits and libraries. 
3.  Family day care center, provided 
a.  It is an owner-occupied establishment; 
b.  Must receive approval by: 
i.  Obtaining signatures from neighboring lots; and 
ii.  No more than six individuals are kept. 
4.  Group day care facilities including private kindergartens and playschools provided: 
a.  The lot abuts upon a major or collector street or a state highway. 
b.  A circular drive for off-street loading and unloading of children is provided. 
c.  If a special use permit is approved, comply with all state day care requirements and health regulations. 
d.  At least 35 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment is provided. 
e.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment is provided. 
f.  The outdoor play area is enclosed by a fence at least four feet in height but not over eight feet in height. 
g.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
5.  Animal sales and services (household pets, no outside runs or kennels). 
6.  Consumer repair services provided: 
h.  Services are non-automotive; 
i.  No outside storage. 
7.  Eating and drinking establishments (with walk-through service). 
8.  Laundry services (drycleaners). 
9.  Recreational equipment rental provided there is no outside storage. 
10.  Automatic teller machines that is a part of a mixed use development. 
11.  Bed and breakfast, provided that conditions outlined in article XV (bed and breakfast facilities) are met. 
12.  Other uses as approved by the mayor and city council of the city, provided: 
i.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-6.4 Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-6.5 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the MR-1 district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee 
1.  Minimum lot size: 
a.  7,000 feet (multi-family residential); 
b.  No minimum (attached two/multi-family dwellings as a part of a mixed-use building); 
c.  No minimum (commercial). 
2.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 35 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street (from property line): No minimum. 
5.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
a.  No minimum (commercial); 
b.  If mixed-use building is detached from neighboring parcel buildings, there must be a 12-foot alleyway from the street to behind the building. 
i.  Alleyway must be maintained in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of visitors, employees and residences. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet. 
7.  Maximum height: 50 feet. 
8.  Minimum floor area: 
a.  400 square feet (residential). 
b.  1,500 square feet (commercial). 
9.  Maximum floor area. 
a.  2,000 square feet (residential). 
b.  4,500 square feet (commercial). 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: Ten feet. 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: none. 
12.  Maximum building height: 50 feet or three stories. 
Bonus: 65 feet or four stories, provided: 
a.  The multi-family building contains at least ten percent affordable/workforce housing units. 
b.  The principal dwelling is a part of a conservation/open space development; 
c.  The principal dwelling promotes sustainable building practices as outlined by LEED or EARTH CRAFT building standards. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent, including a maximum of 20 percent for off-street parking. 
5-6.6 Additional District Development Regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the MR-1 district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Maximum density. 
a.  20 dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Minimum density. 
a.  Eight dwelling units per acre. 
3.  Setback requirements for mixed-use development. 
a.  Setbacks may vary from 15 to 25 feet to accommodate for outdoor retail and dining. 
4.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting other than landscape lighting, if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
b.  Lighting must be pedestrian-friendly and included in alleyways. 
5.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view. 
b.  Tenants and lessees of the same building or structure may share disposal facilities, provided that the design and plan is brought before the planning and zoning committee. 
6.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The MR-1 district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
d.  Interconnections to adjoining property, whether developed or undeveloped, should be included and incorporated into the design where appropriate. Proposed parcels should be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
5-6.7 Minimum Parking Requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
2.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
3.  The location and design of parking structures should minimize their visibility from the street, adjacent properties, or other public areas and are not appropriate abutting residential properties outside the MR-1 district. 
4.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
5.  Underground or within the building parking is encouraged to maximize green space. 
6.  Shared parking should be utilized to reduce surface parking as outlined in article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements. 
7.  Parallel parking is permitted along all streets within the development provided the street construction specifications meet the required city code regarding parallel parking. 
a.  The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle is prohibited except when any of the following provisions apply: 
i.  A commercial vehicle temporarily parked or standing in a residential zoning district for less than eight hours. 
ii.  An automobile, pickup truck, van or sport utility vehicle used to provide daily transportation to and from work. 
8.  A maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a single family residential lot provided that it is parked in compliance with section 5-104 of the Code of Ordinances. Additional major recreational equipment may only be parked or stored in enclosed buildings or in a carport provided that said recreational equipment fits entirely within the carport. However, such equipment may be parked on residential premises for a period of not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
5-6.8 Streetscape requirements. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the MR1 district: 
1.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
a.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of ten feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
b.  One street tree as approved by the planning and zoning committee shall be planted for each 40 feet linear feet within the required streetscape zone; street trees might be regularly spaced (40 feet on center), or they may be irregularly spaced where opportunities exist, subject to the approval of the mayor and council 
2.  Pedestrian amenities. 
a.  The streetscape zone shall be planted with street trees and furnished with street furniture, including but not limited to benches and litter receptacles. The streetscape zone may also include signs, light poles, and other similar items unless otherwise specifically prohibited by regulation. 
b.  For all new streetscape development, attention and respect must be given to the current, surrounding infrastructure and design. 
3.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
a.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
Section 5-7. - General commercial (GC) district. 
5-7.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (GC) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Encourages the organized concentration of a wide variety of retail goods and services for the community; 
•  Promotes high-quality design and aesthetic features including lighting, landscaping and pedestrian-oriented amenities; 
•  Encourage inter-parcel accessibility and promotes the use of transportation alternatives; 
•  Creates and enhances commercial areas where complete retail sales and services are available and desirable for public service and convenience; and 
•  Require a location accessible to large numbers of people and that serve substantial portions of the community. 
This district is intended primarily for developments that contain commercial, financial, governmental or professional complementary uses intended primarily to provide service to the entire community. Typically this district would be applied where central area commercial facilities are desired or along major roadways. 
5-7.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Administrative and business offices. 
2.  Animal sales and services (household pets, no outside runs or kennels). 
3.  Animal sales and services (veterinary — small animals, no outside runs or kennels). 
4.  Business equipment sales. 
5.  Commercial recreation. 
6.  Communication services. 
7.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
8.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
9.  Fire and police protection services. 
10.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
11.  Temporary construction uses. 
12.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations provided. 
13.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
14.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or opiate fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
e.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
15.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
16.  Consumer services (non-automotive). 
17.  Recreation sales and services. 
18.  Automatic teller machines that are not an accessory use to a financial center. 
19.  Professional medical clinic services. 
20.  Financial services. 
21.  Eating and drinking establishments. 
22.  Food and beverage retail sales. 
23.  Professional offices. 
24.  Retail sales (general excluding automotive). 
25.  Funeral and interment services. 
26.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
27.  Business or vocational school. 
28.  Private or parochial elementary, middle or high school, or college. 
a.  Day nurseries and kindergartens may be established as an accessory use to private or parochial schools subject to the requirements listed in 5-7.3A-9. 
29.  Churches. 
5-7.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the mayor and council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Cultural exhibits and libraries. 
2.  Hotel and lodging services. 
3.  Laundry services (drycleaners) 
4.  Consumer repair services provided: 
a.  Services are non-automotive; 
b.  No outside storage. 
5.  Eating and drinking establishments (with drive-thru service). 
6.  Retail sales and services (with drive-thru service). 
7.  Recreational equipment rental provided there is no outside storage. 
8.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
9.  Day nurseries and kindergartens. 
a.  The following provisions apply to day nurseries and kindergartens: 
i.  There shall be not less than thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum licensed enrollment and not less than one hundred (100) square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum licensed enrollment. 
ii.  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet in height but not over eight (8) feet in height. 
iii.  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading. 
5-7.4 Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-7.5 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the GC district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Minimum lot size: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 40 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street: 50 feet (from property line). 
5.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet (20 if abutting a residential district). 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 15 feet (25 if abutting a residential district). 
7.  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
8.  Minimum heated floor area: 2,000 square feet. 
9.  Maximum floor area: 10,000 square feet. 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: 
a.  50 feet (if abutting a residential zoning district). 
b.  15 feet (if abutting a non-residential zoning district). 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: 20 feet. 
12.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or 2 stories. 
Bonus: 45 feet or three stories, provided: 
a.  The principal building is a part of a conservation/open space development; or 
b.  The principal building promotes sustainable building practices as outlined by LEED or EARTH CRAFT building standards. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 70 percent, including off-street parking. 
5-7.6 Additional District Development Regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the GC district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Site and landscaping plan. 
a.  A site plan and landscaping plan must be submitted and approved by the planning and zoning committee prior to development or redevelopment. 
2.  Landscaped buffers. 
a.  A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or city-approved equivalent. Minimum width of a planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area. 
3.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting, other than landscape lighting if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
b.  Lighting must be pedestrian-friendly and included in alleyways. 
4.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view with materials that are resistant to rotting or decay, such as brick masonry or city-approved equivalent. 
b.  Each trash disposal area shall contain gates that shall remain closed when not in use. 
c.  Each trash disposal area shall be at least six feet in height to adequately screen dumpsters and recycling bins. 
5.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  Perimeter setbacks and buffers should protect the privacy and amenity of adjoining uses, both existing and anticipated. 
b.  The GC district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
d.  Interconnections to adjoining property, whether developed or undeveloped, should be included and incorporated into the design where appropriate. Proposed parcels should be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
5-7.7 Minimum parking requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
2.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
a.  The location and design of parking structures should minimize their visibility from the street, adjacent properties, or other public areas and are not appropriate abutting residential properties outside the GC district. 
b.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
c.  Underground or within the building parking is encouraged to maximize green space. 
d.  Shared parking should be utilized to reduce surface parking as outlined in article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements. 
5-7.8 Streetscape requirements. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the GC district: 
1.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
a.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of ten feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
b.  One street tree as approved by the planning commission shall be planted for each 40 feet linear feet within the required streetscape zone; street trees might be regularly spaced (40 feet on center), or they may be irregularly spaced where opportunities exist, subject to the approval of the city council. 
2.  Pedestrian amenities. 
a.  The streetscape zone shall be planted with street trees and furnished with street furniture, including but not limited to benches and litter receptacles. The streetscape zone may also include signs, light poles, and other similar items unless otherwise specifically prohibited by regulation. 
b.  For all new streetscape development, attention and respect must be given to the current, surrounding infrastructure and design. 
3.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
a.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, 9-4-12; Ord. No 2016-19, Pt. I(§ 8), 12-6-16) 
Section 5-8. - Office professional institutional (OPI) district. 
5-8.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (OPI) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Provides a transition between commercial, residential and the village center districts; 
•  Provides space for office, retail and institutional facilities that do not generate heavy automobile traffic or operate between the hours of 9:00 pm and 7:00 am; 
•  Creates and enhances a healthy mix of office, institutional and retail use areas where complete services are available and desirable for public service and convenience; and 
•  Requires a location that will reduce the use of automobile traffic between these separate uses while maximizing the footprint of a developable area. 
This district is intended primarily for developments that contain financial, governmental, professional or complementary retail uses intended service to the professional community. 
5-8.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Administrative and business offices. 
2.  Business equipment sales. 
3.  Communication services. 
4.  Community parks and recreation (publicly owned). 
5.  Conservation and passive recreation areas. 
6.  Cultural exhibits and library services. 
7.  Fire and police protection services. 
8.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
9.  Temporary construction uses. 
10.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations provided: 
11.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
12.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or opiate fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
e.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
13.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
14.  Retail sales and services not exceeding 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
15.  Professional medical clinic services. 
16.  Financial services. 
17.  Eating and drinking establishments (without alcohol). 
18.  Food and beverage retail sales (without alcohol). 
19.  Professional offices. 
20.  Funeral and interment services. 
21.  Schools offering traditional core educational courses similar to the public elementary, middle and high schools and colleges (including junior colleges), provided: 
a.  Any school be on a lot at least of 400 feet wide and containing six acres of lot area; 
b.  All buildings must be at least 60 feet from every property line. 
22.  Schools shall be permitted to construct residential dormitories to house no more than 75 students. School dormitories shall conform to the specifications provided for residential dormitories in the International Building Code manual as adopted now or in the future. 
23.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development 
24.  Business or vocational school. 
25.  Private or parochial elementary, middle or high school, or college. 
a.  Day nurseries and kindergartens may be established as an accessory use to private or parochial schools subject to the requirements listed in 5-8.3A-8. 
5-8.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the city council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Animal sales and services (household pets, no outside runs or kennels). 
2.  Animal sales and services (veterinary - small animals no outside runs or kennels). 
3.  Automatic teller machines that are not an accessory use to a financial center. 
4.  Gasoline and fuel stations. 
5.  Construction sales and services (not exceeding 8,000 square feet of gross floor area). 
6.  Eating and drinking establishments (with alcohol). 
7.  Food and beverage retail sales (with alcohol). 
8.  Day nurseries and kindergartens. 
a.  The following provisions apply to day nurseries and kindergartens: 
i.  There shall be not less than thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum licensed enrollment and not less than one hundred (100) square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum licensed enrollment. 
ii.  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet in height but not over eight (8) feet in height 
iii.  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading. 
5-8.4 Prohibited Uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-8.5 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the OPI district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee 
1.  Minimum lot size: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: None. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 40 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street: 50 feet (from property line). 
5.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet (20 if abutting a residential district). 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 15 feet (25 if abutting a residential district). 
7.  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
8.  Minimum heated floor area: 2,000 square feet. 
9.  Maximum floor area: 10,000 square feet. 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: 
a.  50 feet (if abutting a residential zoning district). 
b.  15 feet (if abutting a non-residential zoning district). 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: 20 feet. 
12.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or two stories. 
Bonus: 45 feet or three stories, provided: 
a.  The principal building is a part of a conservation/open space development; 
b.  The principal building promotes sustainable building practices as outlined by LEED or EARTH CRAFT building standards. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 50 percent, including off-street parking. 
5-8.6 Additional district development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the OPI district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Site and landscaping plan. 
a.  A site plan and landscaping plan must be submitted and approved by the planning and zoning committee prior to development or redevelopment. 
2.  Landscaped buffers. 
a.  A planter landscaped in screening shrubs and trees is required and shall be permanently maintained adjacent to the fencing and property lines abutting a residentially zoned property or property designated as residential in the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Each planter area shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised concrete curbing or city-approved equivalent. Minimum width of a planter shall be five feet. An irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order in each separate planter area. 
3.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting, other than landscape lighting if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
b.  Lighting must be pedestrian-friendly and included in alleyways. 
4.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view with materials that are resistant to rotting or decay, such as brick masonry or city-approved equivalent. 
b.  Each trash disposal area shall contain gates that shall remain closed when not in use. 
c.  Each trash disposal area shall be at least six feet in height to adequately screen dumpsters and recycling bins. 
5.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The OPI district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
d.  Interconnections to adjoining property, whether developed or undeveloped, should be included and incorporated into the design where appropriate. Proposed parcels should be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
5-8.7 Minimum parking requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
2.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
3.  The location and design of parking structures should minimize their visibility from the street, adjacent properties, or other public areas and are not appropriate abutting residential properties outside the OPI district. 
4.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
5.  Underground or within the building parking is encouraged to maximize green space. 
6.  Shared parking should be utilized to reduce surface parking as outlined in article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements. 
7.  Parallel parking is permitted along all streets within the development provided the street construction specifications meet the required city code regarding parallel parking. 
5-8.8 Streetscape requirements. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the OPI district: 
1.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
a.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of ten feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
b.  One street tree as approved by the planning and zoning committee shall be planted for each 40 feet linear feet within the required streetscape zone; street trees might be regularly spaced (40 feet on center), or they may be irregularly spaced where opportunities exist, subject to the approval of the mayor and council. 
2.  Pedestrian amenities. 
a.  The streetscape zone shall be planted with street trees and furnished with street furniture, including but not limited to benches and litter receptacles. The streetscape zone may also include signs, light poles, and other similar items unless otherwise specifically prohibited by regulation. 
b.  For all new streetscape development, attention and respect must be given to the current, surrounding infrastructure and design. 
3.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
a.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, 9-4-12) 
Section 5-9. - Industrial (I) district. 
5-9.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (I) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Accommodates development for heavy commercial uses associated with manufacturing and assembly; 
•  Provides for a district where such uses can operate in a manner that does not cause harm to the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding districts; 
•  Encourages similar uses to operate in designated, concentrated areas within the city; 
•  Provides for appropriate operating hours that do not cause hardship upon the landowner in this district nor upon the surrounding districts. 
Uses are limited to developments associated with heavy commercial and industrial operations. Operating hours for all uses within this district are from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. 
5-9.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Agricultural uses when located on a tract of not less than five acres. 
2.  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, assembly, packaging, repair or servicing of any consumer or commercial-grade product. 
3.  Warehousing, wholesaling, storage or transport of consumer or commercial-grade product. 
4.  Retail sale of any commodity manufactured, processes, fabricated, assembled or repaired by the occupant on the premises. 
5.  Offices which are in conjunction with other permitted uses. 
6.  Laboratories. 
7.  Building material yards. 
8.  Automobile, truck or equipment repair garages, provided that a minimum of two off street spaces are available for service. 
9.  Automobile wrecking or junk yards, when completely enclosed by an opiate fence having a minimum height of six feet, but no less than what effectively screens from plain view of all sides of the property. 
10.  Trucking, railroad terminals and stations. 
11.  Fire and police protection services. 
12.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard; any accessory building exceeding 200 square feet shall have an exterior finish consistent with the primary residence. Accessory buildings shall be limited to two structures and not exceed 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
13.  Lodges and buildings of fraternal and civic assembly, provided that: 
a.  Such use is currently underserved by existing use. 
b.  The lot abuts upon an arterial or collector street or state highway. 
c.  The lot is at least three acres in size. 
d.  All buildings are located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
e.  A buffer at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen; 
f.  Adequate off-street parking, provided: 
i.  Parking area is located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
g.  A circular drive for off-street loading is provided. 
14.  Electric, gas, oil and communication facilities, excluding tower structures and including poles, lines, transformers, pipes, meters and related facilities for distribution of local service and owned and operated by a public utility. 
15.  Temporary construction uses. 
16.  Building or lands used for governmental purposes by a branch of a local, state or federal government such as schools, parks, post offices or fire stations provided: 
a.  A use does not exceed 12,000 square feet of gross floor area per parcel. 
17.  Public utilities including distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges and other similar uses or structures except warehouse, repair, storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment storage and radio and television studios. 
18.  Public utility facilities, if essential to service this zoning district, are permitted provided: 
a.  All structures, except for driveways, are placed 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  All structures, except for driveways, are enclosed by a wall or opiate fence at least but not greater than eight feet in height. 
c.  A ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet in height and provide an effective visual screen. 
i.  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
ii.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
d.  Stormwater management facilities shown on an approved final site plan or subdivision plat. 
e.  Other uses as approved by the city, provided: 
i.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-9.3 Permitted by condition (special uses). 
A.  The following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a conditional use permit by the city council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning committee and after a public hearing: 
1.  Laundry services (drycleaners). 
2.  Consumer repair services provided: 
a.  No outside storage. 
3.  Animal sales and services (household pets). 
4.  Eating and drinking establishments (without alcohol). 
5.  Recreational equipment rental provided there is no outside storage. 
6.  Other uses as approved by the mayor and city council, provided: 
a.  Approval must be given prior to development. 
5-9.4 Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses not listed in the permitted or conditional use sections are considered prohibited. 
5-9.5 Condition of operations. 
A.  All uses in the I district shall conform to the city's noise ordinance and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire and explosive hazard or glare. Within 300 feet of a residential district, all processes and storage, except of passenger vehicles, shall be in completely enclosed buildings. Processes and storage located at a greater distance shall be effectively screened by an opiate wall or fence of at least six feet in height, but in no case lower in height than the encloses process or storage. 
B.  In addition to complying with the conditions of 5-9.5A, all uses shall comply with the following: 
1.  Vibration: Every use shall be so operated that ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments, at any point on the property line of the property on which the use is located. 
2.  Smoke: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of smoke, from any source whatever, to a density greater than described as number 1 on the Ringelmann Chart; provided, that smoke equal to, but not in excess of, that shade of appearance described as number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for a period or periods totaling four minutes in any 30 minutes. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart as published and used by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, and which is hereby made, by reference, a part of this ordinance, shall be the standard. All measurements shall be at the point of emission. 
3.  Dust and dirt: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission into the air of dust or other solid matter which may cause damage to property or discomfort to persons or animals at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. 
4.  Industrial sewage and waste: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the discharge into any stream, lake, or the ground of any waste which will be dangerous or discomforting to persons or animals or which will damage plants or crops or the public water supply at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. When requested by the planning and zoning committee, the county department of health shall submit a written report describing the nature and degree of hazard of the waste emitted by a particular industry or process and recommend such performance standards as will be appropriate to accomplish the above general objective. 
5.  Odors: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of objectionable or offensive odors in such concentration as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. 
6.  Reserved. 
7.  Glare: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent emission of glare of such intensity as to be readily perceptible at any point on the nearest residential district. 
8.  Electrical disturbance and radioactivity: Each use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of quantities of radioactive materials in excess of limits established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards or the emission of electrical disturbance sufficient to adversely affect the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 
9.  Traffic congestion and traffic noise: Each use shall take such measures to prevent or lessen traffic congestion and traffic noise generated by vehicles related to its operation as the planning and zoning committee may reasonably impose. Conditions imposed shall be designed to control the location, number, and concentration of vehicles entering or leaving a specific use at hours of peak traffic flow and thereby to relieve congestion and lessen traffic noise. Such conditions may include, but shall not be restricted to, the following: 
10.  Provision of acceleration and deceleration lanes for the storage of vehicles about to leave or enter upon the street on which the use abuts. 
a.  Provision of several points of access to off-street parking areas when such dispersal of access points will lessen congestion and vehicle concentration. 
5-9.6 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the I district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Minimum lot size: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
3.  Minimum road frontage (measured at property line): 35 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard abutting a public street: 85 feet (from property line). 
5.  Minimum side yard: None required except yards that abut a public street shall be considered front yards. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet. 
7.  Maximum height (of living space, not including attic and basement): 30 feet. 
8.  Minimum heated floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
9.  Maximum floor area: 12,000 square feet. 
10.  Minimum buffer area between adjacent, dissimilar districts: none. 
11.  Minimum separation between buildings on same lot: none. 
12.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or 2 stories. 
13.  Maximum lot coverage: 80 percent, including off-street parking. 
5-9.7 Additional district development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the I district. Any variance to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation of the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Base density. 
a.  None 
2.  Maximum density. 
a.  None. 
3.  Minimum density. 
a.  None. 
4.  Maximum nonresidential. 
a.  None. 
5.  Setback requirements for mixed-use development. 
a.  None. 
6.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting, other than landscape lighting if provided, shall be dark sky compliant and reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
b.  Lighting must be pedestrian-friendly and included in alleyways. 
7.  Trash disposal. 
a.  Each property shall provide adequate and accessible trash disposal areas. Said disposal area shall be screened from public view. 
8.  Connectivity and site design requirements. 
a.  The I district should incorporate multi-modal transportation (applicable modes consisting of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular) elements in the development, depending on the foreseeable needs of future residents and users of the site, and the relationship of the project site to the community at large. 
b.  A grid system of streets, where feasible given the topography, is preferred over cul-de-sac designs. Block length should be conducive to pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Traffic calming methods should be incorporated to promote pedestrian accessibility and safety. 
d.  Interconnections to adjoining property, whether developed or undeveloped, should be included and incorporated into the design where appropriate. Proposed parcels should be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
5-9.7 Minimum Parking Requirements. 
A.  The following serves as a minimum requirement, specifically intended for this district. Please refer to article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements for additional standards. 
1.  Minimum off-street parking spaces required. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as stated in article VII. 
2.  Decorative fences or walls, plantings, berms, or other similar features should be used to screen surface parking lots from public view or soften their visual impact. 
3.  The location and design of parking structures should minimize their visibility from the street, adjacent properties, or other public areas and are not appropriate abutting residential properties outside the I district. 
4.  Surface parking lots should be oriented behind or to the side of a building when possible. Surface parking lots should not be located on street corners. 
5.  Underground or within the building parking is encouraged to maximize green space. 
6.  Shared parking should be utilized to reduce surface parking as outlined in article VII, off-street parking and loading requirements. 
7.  Parallel parking is permitted along all streets within the development provided the street construction specifications meet the required city code regarding parallel parking. 
5-9.8 Streetscape requirements. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be built along both sides of all public and private streets in the district. The following provisions shall be required in storefront areas, as defined, and may be considered appropriate in other parts of the I district: 
1.  Sidewalks and streetscape zone. 
a.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet with a minimum clear zone of ten feet. Alongside the sidewalk and integrated there with shall be a continuous streetscape zone for street trees and street furniture adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than five feet in width. 
b.  One street tree as approved by the planning and zoning committee shall be planted for each 40 feet linear feet within the required streetscape zone; street trees might be regularly spaced (40 feet on center), or they may be irregularly spaced where opportunities exist, subject to the approval of the city council. 
2.  Pedestrian amenities. 
a.  The streetscape zone shall be planted with street trees and furnished with street furniture, including but not limited to benches and litter receptacles. The streetscape zone may also include signs, light poles, and other similar items unless otherwise specifically prohibited by regulation. 
b.  For all new streetscape development, attention and respect must be given to the current, surrounding infrastructure and design. 
3.  Pedestrian crossings of driveways and intersections. 
a.  The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that distinguishes the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, Pt. I, 2-2-16) 
Section 5-10. - Flood hazard (FL) district. 
5-10.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as FL) is created to establish a plan implementation zone that: 
•  Prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize expenditures for flood relief programs, flood control projects and flood damage repair; 
•  Preserve drainage courses that will be adequate to carry storm water runoff from existing and future land developments by (a) prohibiting any structures that would restrict or alter the free flow of flood waters, and (b) prohibiting land fills, junk yards, dumps, outdoor storage of materials, or other obstructions to the flow of flood waters, except those included in the permitted uses listed below. 
•  Preserve natural conditions that will (a) allow sufficient absorption to maintain an adequate subsurface water level, and (b) filter sediment from adjacent development. 
•  Minimize danger to public health by preserving natural drainage patterns and preventing stagnant water areas. 
The limits of the flood hazard (FL) district are hereby determined to be areas subject to frequent periodic flooding and delineated as alluvial soils by the Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
5-10.2 Permitted uses by right. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted subject to requirements and limitations of this ordinance: 
1.  Agriculture, including forestry and livestock raising, requiring no structures within the flood plain except structures for temporary shelter, and including agricultural and forestry access roads. 
2.  Dams provided they are constructed in accordance with specifications of the USDA Soil Conservation Service or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the city. 
3.  Fences that provide no material obstruction to the free flow of water. 
4.  Outdoor advertising signs. 
5.  Parking areas. 
6.  Roads, provided adequate capacity for the free flow of flood waters is provided by means of culverts or bridges, with designs approved by the city or the state highway department, and further that in no case will a culvert be located at an elevation higher than the level of the original stream bed. 
7.  Public, semi-public, private and commercial recreation uses requiring no structures within the flood plain except structures for temporary shelter. 
8.  Greenspace or yards. 
9.  Public, utility poles, towers, pipe lines and sewage treatment outfalls. 
5-10.3 Procedures for correcting an error in the FL zoning district. 
A.  If a property owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning committee that an error has been made in establishing the flood hazard district boundary line and that his property or a designated portion of it that now lies in the flood hazard district is actually not subject to flooding, the planning and zoning committee may recommend correction of the flood hazard district boundary line in question accordingly. 
B.  The planning and zoning committee and the property owner involved must seek the advice and assistance of the Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other competent technical advisor. 
5-10.4 City liability. 
A.  The granting of a building permit in any flood hazard district shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the city or by an official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon, or a cause of action against such public body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto. 
B.  Although alluvial soils represent the areas most often inundated by flood waters and represent the most realistic flood plain, infrequent floods will exceed the limits of alluvial soils. The designation of flood hazard districts shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the city or by an official or employee thereof that lands outside of such districts are not also subject to flooding. 
Section 5-11. - Green space (GS) district. 
5-11.1 Intent and where permitted. This district (hereafter referred to as (GS) is intended to control development on certain land and water areas 
•  To provide for the preservation of undeveloped land. 
•  To promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
•  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
•  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
•  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
•  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
•  To conserve scenic views. 
•  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
•  To provide recreational opportunities both active and passive. 
•  To discourage encroachment by residential, commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the relatively undeveloped character of the district. 
5-11.2 Permitted uses by right. 
1.  Publicly owned building, facility or land as part of a master recreational site plan. 
2.  Building, facility or land for the distribution of utility services. 
3.  Building, facility or land for recreation purposes. 
4.  Unlighted, regulation size or par three golf course. 
5.  Agriculture, forestry and horticulture. 
6.  Wildlife refuge 
5-11.3 District development regulations. 
A.  The following contain the development regulations for the GS district. Any exceptions to the following must be approved by the mayor and council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning committee. 
1.  Maximum building height: 30 feet or two stories. 
2.  Maximum lot coverage: 15 percent, including off-street parking. 
ARTICLE VI: - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Section 6-1. - Nonconforming uses. 
6-1.1 Nonconforming uses established. 
A.  Within the zoning districts established by this zoning ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted there might exist land, and uses of land and structures in combination which were lawful before this zoning ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this zoning ordinance or future amendment. Such nonconforming uses are declared by this zoning ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is the intent of this zoning ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their expansion. 
6-1.2 General rules for nonconforming use continuance. 
A.  To avoid undue hardship, the lawful use of any building, structure or land use at the time of enactment of this zoning ordinance may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this zoning ordinance except that the nonconforming use shall not be: 
1.  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
2.  Reestablished after discontinuance of six months or more. When a nonconforming use of a building, structure or land is discontinued for a continuous period of six months, the building, structure or land shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the existing zoning regulations of the district in which the building, structure or land is located. The provisions of this subparagraph shall operate to prohibit resumption of the nonconforming use after the specified time has elapsed, regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon the right to use the building, structure or land use not in conformance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance; 
3.  Repaired, rebuilt, or altered after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction for all uses with the exception of single-family detached uses which shall be permitted after any damage to be repaired or rebuilt to the equivalent of its pre-damaged condition. Authorized reconstruction shall begin within one year after damage is incurred; 
4.  Enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, except that a nonconforming use may be extended into an additional area of a building, structure or land use that existed at the time of passage or amendment of this zoning ordinance; 
5.  Enlarged, extended or moved, except in changing the use of a structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, in which case the expansion, enlargement or relocation of buildings or structures shall conform to the yard, buffer, height and other dimensional requirements for the underlying zoning district; 
6.  Extended throughout any part of a building unless such part was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this zoning ordinance. No such nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building or structure; or 
7.  Exempted from tree protection requirements; buffer, landscaping and screening requirements; parking and access requirements, or signs and lighting requirements of the underlying zoning district when changing to a conforming use. 
8.  Also to avoid undue hardship, nothing in this zoning ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this zoning ordinance. 
Section 6-2. - Group developments. 
A.  A group project (housing, commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religious, civic) of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two acres in area which will not be subdivided into customary lots and streets may be constructed provided: 
1.  Uses shall be limited to those permitted within the district in which it is located. 
2.  Density and building coverage requirements of the district are met. 
3.  The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall be adequate to meet all setback and yard requirements of the zoning district in which the plot is located. 
Section 6-3. - Lot of record. 
A.  Single lot record: Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence in the R-3 or R-4 districts or for a permitted use in other districts, provided the building conforms to the dimensional requirements applied to the lot and that a variance from those it cannot conform to be granted by the mayor and city council, and that construction is in compliance with other city ordinances. 
B.  Adjoining and vacant lots of record: If two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance and such lots individually are less than the lot width requirements for the zone in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  Lot in more than one district: Wherever the line of demarcation between two zoning districts of different usage divide a lot so that either one or both sections are made too small for advantageous use of the property, the property owner has the privilege of using said lot for any permitted use of either of two adjacent districts provided the specific use and site plan is approved by the mayor and city council. 
Section 6-4. - Vision clearance. 
A.  Visibility at minor intersections and access points: For purposes of this section, a "minor intersection" is defined as (a) an intersection where a cross (minor) street is controlled by "Stop" signs while the major street is uncontrolled; or (b) the intersection of a private drive or entrance or exit with a public street if the drive or entrance or exit is designed to allow left turns onto the public street across traffic approaching from the left. In this case, the words "minor street" shall include the words "private drive" or "entrance" or "exit". 
For the purpose of this section, an "access point" is defined as the intersection of a private drive or entrance or exit with a public street, if the drive or entrance or exit is designed to discourage or inhibit left turns onto the public street across traffic approaching from the left. 
1.  Visibility at minor intersections: At minor intersections no fence, wall, shrubbery, marquee or other material obstruction to visibility between the heights of three feet and ten feet shall be erected, planted, placed or maintained, and no vehicle so obstructing visibility shall be parked within triangular areas defined as follows: 
a.  Beginning at a point where the center line of the minor street intersects the midline of the nearest traffic lane, approaching from the left, on the major street; thence along said midline, in the direction of approaching traffic, a distance of 30 feet, if it is a two-lane street (or 35 feet if it is a four-lane street), for each five miles per hour of speed allowed by the posted speed limit; thence to a point on the centerline of the minor street which point is at least 15 feet from the curb line of the major street and at least ten feet from any crosswalk or stop sign, in a direction away from the major street; thence to the point of beginning. 
b.  If left turns from the minor street onto the major street are permitted, additional visibility triangles shall be required defined as follows: 
i.  Beginning at a point where the centerline of the minor street intersects the midline of the nearest traffic lane approaching from the right, on the major street; thence along said midline, in the direction of approaching traffic, a distance of 35 feet, if it is a two-lane street (or 40 feet if it is a four-lane street), for each five miles per hour of speed allowed by the posted speed limit; thence to a point on the centerline of the minor street which point is at least 15 feet from the curb line of the major street and at least ten feet from any crosswalk or stop sign, in a direction away from the major street, thence to the point of beginning. 
2.  Visibility at access points: At the intersection of any private drive or entrance or exit with a public street, no fence, wall shrubbery, sign, marquee or other material obstruction to visibility between the heights of three feet and ten feet shall be parked within triangular areas defined as follows: 
a.  Beginning at the point where the midline of the private drive or entrance or exit intersects the midline of the traffic lane nearest the curb, thence along said traffic midline, in the direction of approaching traffic, a distance of 22 feet for each five miles per hour of speed allowed by the posted speed limit; thence to a point toward the interior of the property, along the previously described private drive, exit or entrance midline, which point shall be 15 feet beyond the street right-of-way (except if there is no public sidewalk, said point need only be 15 feet beyond the curb); thence to the point of beginning. 
Section 6-5. - Number of buildings on a lot. 
Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereinafter be erected on any lot zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4, except under the provisions contained in this ordinance. 
Cross reference— Buildings, ch. 5. 
Section 6-6. - Street access. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut a publicly dedicated or maintained street. 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 25. 
Section 6-7. - Portable structures. 
A.  Trailers, converted mobile homes or other portable wheeled structures (whether on wheels or with wheels removed and placed on a foundation) that can be towed by their own chassis shall not be used for any commercial, office or residential use, except: 
1.  When used as a temporary building during construction of a permanent building or buildings on the same lot, or 
2.  When used as a temporary concession stand in a recreational facility. 
B.  Restricted use of trailers, convertible mobile homes or other portable wheeled structures shall be subject to mayor and council approval. 
Section 6-8. - Accessory uses. 
A.  Accessory uses or buildings (including accessory dwelling units) shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
B.  No accessory building shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
C.  Only two accessory buildings (not including accessory dwelling units) shall be permitted on a lot. 
D.  Accessory uses or structures (not including accessory dwelling units) shall be permitted if they meet the following: 
1.  Accessory buildings shall be set back not less than ten feet from any lot line. 
2.  An accessory building shall not be any larger than 24' x 24' and must comply with district development regulations. 
3.  Accessory buildings located on property in excess of one acre will not be restricted to size, as long as the structure meets building codes and other requirements of this ordinance. 
4.  Accessory buildings in residential districts shall not be used for any type of commercial operation whether permanent, part-time or as part of a home occupation except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. A home occupation can be conducted in an accessory building if approved as a conditional use. 
5.  No accessory structure shall exceed a height of 15 feet. 
6.  Detached accessory buildings shall be located at least ten feet from the principal structure on a lot. 
7.  Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted as accessory structures only in rear yards unless it can be documented that reception is impaired by such a location. In this case an antenna would be permitted in a side yard. 
a.  Satellite dish antennas which exceed two feet in diameter shall not be located on the roof of a single-family structure. 
8.  Basketball goals, which are attached to the principal residence structure or erected adjacent to and abutting the driveway of the principal residence structure or the driveway area shall be allowed in the front, side or rear yard but not in the right-of-way of a public street. 
9.  No fabricated structure shall be erected on a lot for accessory purposes in any residential zoning district except when constructed in the rear yard. 
a.  No tent or tarpaulin structures shall be erected on a lot for accessory purposes in any zoning district. Tent or tarpaulin structures shall be permitted in residential districts for temporary recreational use or in the exercise of religious observances or similar events. 
E.  Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted if they meet the following: 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit shall contain 400 or less square feet. 
2.  There shall be one off-street parking space provided for the accessory dwelling unit, which is in addition to any off-street parking spaces required for the primary residence. 
3.  No accessory dwelling unit shall exceed a height of 15 feet and shall be set back not less than 10 feet from any lot line. 
4.  Accessory dwellings, whether attached or detached, shall have exterior finishes or architectural treatments (e.g. brick, wood, etc.) or an appearance substantially similar to those on the principal residence. 
5.  The accessory building unit shall meet all building code standards including building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code requirements, and occupancy restrictions as provided in the city's ordinances. 
6.  The accessory dwelling shall not contain a home occupation and shall not be used for any commercial occupation. Any property owner seeking to establish an accessory dwelling unit shall apply to register the unit with the administration department (zoning administrator). The property owner shall file a complete registration application form, before building permit issuance, affirming that at least one owner will occupy the primary residence for the full length of time that accessory dwelling use is established in accordance with all applicable zoning regulations. The property owner shall annually affirm the same by registration renewal within thirty (30) days after January 1, of each year. 
7.  After receipt of a completed application for registration and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval of use, the city (building official) shall inspect the property to confirm adherence to the size, height, design, and parking requirements of this code are met. 
8.  The registration form or other forms as required by the zoning administrator shall be filed as a deed restriction with the DeKalb County Tax Assessor to provide notice of the presence of the accessory dwelling unit, the requirement of owner occupancy, and other standards for maintaining the unit as described, with verification of recording of the filing being provided to the city zoning administrator within 90 days of issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
9.  The zoning administrator (or his/her designee) shall report annually on accessory dwelling unit registration, number of units and distribution throughout the city, and average size of units. 
10.  Cancellation of registration of the accessory dwelling unit may be accomplished by the property owner filing a certificate with the zoning administrator (or his/her designee) for recording with the DeKalb County Tax Assessor or may occur as result of an enforcement action. 
11.  Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14, Pt. I, 10-4-16; Ord. No. 2018-02, Pt. I, 3-6-18) 
Section 6-9. - Home occupations. 
A.  Any occupation or commercial enterprise within the zoning districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, VCM, or MR-1 that meets the following requirements is permitted: 
1.  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupations except that guests of a bed and breakfast home facility and guests of a vacation home facility shall adhere to section 6-9(A)8 of this code section. 
2.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
3.  No business or advertising signs shall be permitted. 
4.  Use of the building for the purpose of a home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of one floor of the principal building, with the exception of bed and breakfast home facilities that shall not exceed the maximum allowance of three lodging rooms, and vacation home facilities that shall not exceed the maximum allowance of four lodging rooms. 
5.  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
6.  The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. Furthermore, except as would be caused by a typical residential use, no noise, vibration, dust, odor, smoke, glare, or electric disturbance which is perceptible beyond any property line will be permitted to occur as a result of the home occupation. 
7.  Only vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of 8,600 pounds or less shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of any home occupation. 
8.  Except as authorized under a special use permit customers or clients shall not permitted on the premises of a home occupation. 
9.  Home occupations are prohibited from pickup and delivery services on a fixed schedule within the zoning districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, VCM, or MR-1. 
10.  A home occupation shall not store or use hazardous materials that could pose a threat to public safety either by fire, explosion, or contamination except those used in routine home property maintenance. 
11.  A home occupation shall meet the requirements of the license and business regulations of the city. 
12.  A home occupation shall not store any goods or materials outside the principal building. 
13.  Home occupations shall pay a surcharge in addition to the fee regularly assessed sanitation fee for class 1 sanitation service. The surcharge shall be paid prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate. For new home occupations, the surcharge shall be prorated for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. 
B.  Whenever in this code section any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offence, or wherever in this code section the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of such provision may be punishable by revocation of home occupation license, and or will be punishable in accordance with section 1-11 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, pt. I, §§ 1—6, 8-1-17) 
Section 6-10. - Multi-family dwelling conversions. 
A.  If a multi-family dwelling development existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance is converted to condominium or townhouse units or lots (which conversion includes the creation or subdividing of the property into units or lots and may include common areas) then: 
1.  Neither existing buildings, dwelling units, or other structures, including accessory structures or buildings, nor any units or lots created by the conversion shall be required to conform to any yard, building site or related requirements. 
2.  The provisions of section 6-6, street access, shall not be applicable to conversions of multi-family dwellings to condominiums or townhouses. 
ARTICLE VII: - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Section 7-1. - General requirements, design standards. 
7-1.1 Off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
A.  The purpose of these standards is to provide for safe and complete connections to the transportation system, and safe on-site circulation for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians. In addition, these standards are intended to provide for adequate vehicle parking with appropriate landscaping. 
B.  Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged shall meet the off-street parking and loading and unloading space requirements of this ordinance for the addition made. 
C.  No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area, or usability of existing parking or loading space unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
D.  Off-street parking shall incorporate handicapped spaces into the design of parking facilities. 
7-1.2 General requirements. 
A.  Each district has its own set of additional parking requirements. All building, structures and uses shall comply with the guidelines within that section, in addition to the requirements contained herein. 
1.  Location of off-street parking facilities: Off-street parking facilities for one-family and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building to be served. The location of off-street parking facilities for other than one-family and two-family dwellings shall not be more than 300 feet distance from the building to be served, measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway. 
2.  Common or collective parking facilities: Parking requirements for two or more uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the allocation of a common or collective parking facility. Such facility shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for individual uses computed separately in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district. 
3.  Change in off-street parking or loading area: Area reserved for off-street parking or loading in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent off-street parking or loading space is provided. 
4.  Requirements apply to all uses: For uses not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for a similar use specifically mentioned in this section shall apply. 
7-1.3 Design standards. The following design requirements shall apply to all off-street parking spaces, driveways, and loading spaces. 
A.  Parking spaces. 
1.  Required dimensions for each parking space: Each full-size automobile parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet in length. Parking spaces for compact and sub-compact cars shall not be less than eight feet wide and 17 feet in length. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
2.  Interior driveways: Where 90-degree parking is utilized, all interior driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width. If 45 degree or 60 degree angle parking is used, then interior driveways shall be at least 12 feet in width for one-way traffic and 20 feet in width for two-way traffic. In the instance where parallel parking is utilized or there is no parking, interior driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet in width for one-way traffic and 20 feet in width for two-way traffic. 
3.  Surfacing, drainage and lighting: All off-street parking spaces, access and interior driveways shall be provided with a paved, dust-free surface. If the off-street parking facilities are used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. The lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect onto or cause glare in any adjacent residential district. 
4.  Sharing of required off-street parking spaces: One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be shared with a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. Parking requirements for two or more uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the allocation of a common or collective parking facility. This facility shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district. 
5.  Handicapped spaces: Handicapped parking spaces shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act. Parallel spaces for the handicapped adjacent to a walk shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width by 24 feet in length. If a walk is at an elevation different from the elevation of the parking space, a 1:6 ramp shall be provided up to the walk. For 90-degree or angled spaces, the minimum width of a stall shall be nine and one-half feet. An aisle, having a width of not less than three feet six inches shall be identified by pavement markings and by appropriate signage. 
6.  Compact and subcompact car spaces: Developments where 30 or more parking spaces are provided shall have a minimum of five compact parking spaces. These spaces shall be identified by pavement markings and by appropriate signage. 
7.  Bicycle spaces: Developments in all districts (excluding I), shall provide for bicycle parking racks at a ratio of at least one bicycle parking space for every 25 parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall be located within the landscape zone a maximum distance of 100 feet from the building entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space and shall provide a concrete pad upon which the bicycle parking space shall be firmly rooted. 
B.  Off-street loading stalls. 
1.  Required dimensions for each loading stall: Each loading stall shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 30 feet in length except that for wholesale and industrial use loading stalls shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 50 feet in length. 
2.  Access and location: All off-street loading stalls shall have access from an alley, or if there is no alley, from a public street. The off-street loading and unloading stalls shall be located to cause a minimum of interference with the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
3.  Surfacing, drainage and lighting: All off-street loading stalls and access shall be provided with a paved, dust-free surface. If loading stalls are to be used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. Lighting shall be dark sky compliant and designed to preclude light spill onto adjacent properties or the roadway. 
C.  Curb cuts. 
1.  Curb cut dimensions: Driveway curb cut widths shall be a maximum of 24 feet for two-way entrances and 12 feet for one-way entrances, unless otherwise permitted by the county or state department of transportation. For the purpose of this section, two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall only be counted as one curb cut provided that each curb cut does not exceed one lane in width. 
2.  Prohibited curb cuts: Driveway curb cuts shall not be permitted on any street that functions as an arterial street or collector street when access may be provided from a side or rear street located immediately adjacent to a contiguous property, with the exception of hotel patron drop-off drives. 
3.  Number of curb cuts: No more than one curb cut shall be permitted for each development, provided that properties with more than one street frontage may have one curb cut located on each street frontage. However, developments on properties with a single street frontage greater than 400 feet shall be permitted two curb cuts along one street frontage. 
Section 7-2. - Parking requirements. 
7-2.1 Off-street parking requirements. 
A.  Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building or structure, minimum off-street parking, plus drives and maneuvering space sufficient for ingress and egress by an automobile of standard size, in accordance with the schedule below. When a building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling rooms, guest rooms, floor area or seats, minimum off-street parking shall be provided for such additional rooms, floor area or areas. 
The following are the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by type of permitted use. The square footage is the gross square footage unless otherwise indicated. Where the use is mixed, total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. 
1.  Automobile repair garage: One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Automobile service station: three spaces for each service bay, with a minimum of ten spaces required. 
3.  Bus station: One space for each motor carrier plus one additional space for each two administrative or service employees, plus five and one-half spaces per 1,000 feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Business, professional offices and clinics: One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Bed and breakfast: One space per bedroom. 
6.  Bowling alleys: Five spaces per alley. 
7.  Religious institutions and other places of worship: One space per four (4) seats in the main auditorium. 
8.  Commercial, manufacturing and industrial establishments not catering to retail trade: One space per 2,000 square feet of gross office, plant or storage area. 
9.  Commercial and public recreation facility: 20 spaces minimum, except that golf courses shall require 20 spaces per each nine holes. 
10.  Delivery, ambulance and other similar services: One space for each vehicle plus one additional space for each two administrative or service employees. 
11.  Single and two-family dwellings: Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
12.  Food stores: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
13.  General business, commercial, personal service establishments or shopping centers and developments: One space per 200 square feet of gross leasable area (GLA) for buildings 50,000 square feet or less; one space per 250 square feet of GLA for buildings 50,001 to 100,000 square feet; one space per 300 square feet of GLA for buildings 100,001 to 400,000 square feet; one space per 350 square feet of GLA for buildings larger than 400,000 square feet. 
14.  Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, homes for the aged and similar institutional uses: One space per two beds. 
15.  Hotels: One space per unit plus one space per five units for visitors. 
16.  Lodges, fraternal or social organizations: Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
17.  Motels, tourist homes and transient hotels: One and one-quarter space per unit. 
18.  Multi-family, apartment and moderate density apartment developments: One and a half parking spaces for each dwelling unit in GC, VCM and MR-1 districts. In all districts, multi-family units greater than 1,500 square feet in floor area shall provide two and one-half parking spaces per unit. 
19.  Public or private swimming pool, neighborhood recreation center or similar use: A minimum of 20 spaces. 
20.  Restaurants, night clubs, taverns and similar establishments serving food or beverages and providing patron use area: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
21.  Restaurants, drive-in, without area provided for patron use: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than ten spaces. 
22.  Schools, public or private elementary and middle (K—8th grades): Two spaces per classroom. 
23.  Schools, public or private secondary (i.e. high school): One space per teacher or staff member, plus two spaces per classroom. 
24.  Schools, college, trade and vocational: Ten spaces per classroom. 
25.  Skating rinks, dance halls, pool rooms and other places of amusement or assembly without fixed seating: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
26.  Subdivision recreation facility: One space per ten dwelling units. 
27.  Theaters, auditoriums, funeral homes, gymnasiums, stadiums and other places of assembly with fixed seating: One space per three seats plus one space for each employee. 
28.  Wholesale or jobbing establishment or other similar use: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to sales or display plus one space per 2,000 square feet of gross storage area. 
B.  Additional requirements for non-single-family districts: All required off-street parking facilities (other than those for single-family dwellings), including entrances, exits, and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions. Each parking facility: 
1.  Shall have access to a public street; 
2.  Shall be graded and paved, including access drive(s), and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control; 
3.  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar devices; 
5.  To the extent practicable, adjacent parking lots serving nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall be interconnected and shall provide for future interconnectivity. 
6.  Shall have adequate lighting if the facilities are to be used at night, provided such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties; 
7.  Shall be designed to conform to the geometric design standards of the institute of traffic engineers. 
8.  Wheel bumpers shall be placed at the head of all parking spaces that abut a landscape strip or sidewalk. When wheel bumpers are adjacent to a sidewalk, a two foot extension of the sidewalk shall be permitted to be substituted in the place of the required wheel bumpers. 
9.  No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long term storage of any vehicles or equipment unless such use is permitted within the district in which the parking area is located. 
10.  Location on other property. If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby property within the same zoning district, provided a major portion lies within 1,200 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which such parking is provided. 
C.  Parking decks and structures: The following regulations shall apply to parking decks and parking structures. 
1.  Parking deck facades shall conceal automobiles from visibility from any public right-of-way or private drive or street that are open to the general public, and shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building. 
2.  All parking decks and parking structures shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum width of five feet connecting ground level parking to the public sidewalks and to all building entrances. 
3.  All parking decks and parking structures shall have a landscape strip a minimum width of six feet immediately contiguous to the parking facility for the whole of the exterior perimeter of the parking facility containing at least one understory or overstory tree, as appropriate, and ten shrubs per 50 linear feet, and a minimum of 90 percent living groundcover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. 
4.  Parking decks with a roof-level parking surface open to the sky and without another floor or surface above it shall meet the landscaping requirements of section 7-3 for only that portion of the parking deck surface that is open to the sky and without another floor or surface above it. 
7-2.2 Handicapped parking requirements. Handicapped parking spaces shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Handicapped spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act. All handicapped spaces shall be identified by pavement markings and by appropriate signage. Handicapped parking shall be required on all multi-family and nonresidential sites. 
B.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in the closest proximity to major building entrances, but in no event shall such spaces be located more than 100 feet from a major building entrance. 
C.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width by 20 feet in length and shall have an adjacent access aisle that has a minimum width of five feet. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. 
D.  The first one out of every eight accessible parking spaces shall be a van accessible space. Van parking spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle a minimum of eight feet in width and a vertical clearance of at least eight feet along the vehicular route to the parking space. 
E.  Handicapped parking will be required on all sites. The minimum number to be provided for all multifamily and nonresidential developments is as follows: 
1.  Up to 25 spaces in lot: One HC space. 
2.  Twenty-six to 50 spaces in lot: Two HC spaces. 
3.  Fifty-one to 75 spaces in lot: three HC spaces. 
4.  Seventy-six to 100 spaces in lot: Four (4) HC spaces. 
5.  One hundred one to 150 spaces in lot: Five HC spaces. 
6.  One hundred fifty-one to 200 spaces in lot: Six HC spaces. 
7.  Two hundred one to 300 spaces in lot: Seven HC spaces. 
8.  Three hundred one to 400 spaces in lot: Eight HC spaces. 
9.  Over 400 spaces in lot: Two percent of total spaces. 
Section 7-3. - Shared or reduced parking, landscaping requirements. 
7-3.1 Shared or reduced parking standards. 
A.  Reduced parking for R-1 and R-2 districts shall be prohibited. For all other districts, the applicant may request a reduction to or waiver of parking standards based on the following criteria: 
1.  Reduction of parking requirements through a shared parking arrangement may be administratively granted through written request from an applicant, provided that applicant documents that the arrangement shall avoid conflicting parking demands and provide for safe pedestrian circulation and access. 
2.  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces shall be provided; said map shall indicate or notate number of spaces in each parking area. 
3.  A shared parking calculation projection shall be provided that demonstrates that each use will have adequate parking provisions at all times. Said calculation must receive review and approval from the city manager or their designee. 
4.  For contiguous properties sharing parking spaces under this provision, cross-easements shall be filed establishing access to the parking spaces in perpetuity and documentation of filing provided to the city. 
5.  A reduction in the number of parking spaces that would otherwise be required for each of the various uses on a multiple-use property must be clearly shown on the development plan. If shared parking is proposed for a combination of contiguous properties, a plan must be submitted covering all of the properties that will be sharing the parking spaces. 
6.  A written agreement among all owners of record shall be provided and held on file with the city manager or their designee. All renewed or terminated leases shall be filed with the city clerk. 
7-3.2 Parking area landscaping requirements. 
A.  Interior landscaping for parking areas shall be required for all parking lots designed for 15 or more spaces. A detailed landscape plan created by a certified landscape architect, certified arborist or licensed forester shall be submitted to the city manager for approval. The following requirements shall apply: 
1.  There shall be one landscape island for every seven parking spaces and such island shall be planted with an overstory tree. 
2.  There shall be at least one overstory tree, ten low shrubs and a minimum of 60 percent living groundcover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in each landscaped area, and each landscaped area shall be at least 200 square feet in area with a minimum width or diameter of ten feet. 
3.  Vehicles shall be separated from sidewalks, driveways and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and by a strip of land at least ten feet wide reserved as open space and planted in grass containing at least one understory or overstory tree, as appropriate, and ten shrubs per 50 linear feet, and a minimum of 80 percent living groundcover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. Wheel bumpers shall be a minimum of 18 inches and a maximum of 36 inches from the end of the parking space. 
4.  Head-to-head parking shall provide a five-foot grass strip separating the wheel bumpers. The grass strip may be counted as part of the landscaped areas and shall have one tree every 50 feet containing at least one overstory tree, and ten shrubs, per 50 linear feet, and a minimum of 70 percent living groundcover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. 
5.  Landscaped areas shall provide drainage and irrigation that ensures full drainage to the storm drainage system. 
6.  There shall be a pedestrian walkway that is a minimum of five feet in depth along the front of all buildings for the purpose of allowing pedestrians to walk from the parking facility to the building in safety. 
7.  The requirement for all developments to have pedestrian walkways connecting ground level parking to public sidewalks and all building entrances shall be met and shall not be interpreted to prevent the landscaping requirements of this section to be fully met. 
8.  The mayor and city council may vary the minimum landscaping and tree requirements of this section if specific circumstances and/or site conditions create an unnecessary hardship. 
Section 7-4. - Loading requirements. 
7-4.1 Minimum off-street loading requirements. 
A.  The following are the minimum number of off-street loading stalls required by type of permitted use. The square footage is the gross square footage unless otherwise indicated. 
1.  Retail operations and all first floor nonresidential uses with a gross floor area of 2,500 square feet or less: One loading space which may be located adjacent to the street curb. 
2.  Retail operations, and all first floor nonresidential uses, with a gross floor area of greater than 2,500 square feet and less than 20,000 square feet, and all wholesale and light industrial operations with a gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet: One loading space. 
3.  Retail operations, including restaurant and dining facilities within hotels and office buildings, with a total usable floor area of 20,000 square feet or more devoted to such purposes: One loading berth for every 40,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; one loading space for every 20,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
4.  Office buildings and hotels with total usable floor area of 100,000 square feet or more devoted to such purposes: One loading berth for every 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
5.  Industrial and wholesale operations with a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or over shall conform to the following schedule: 

 
This space may be shared by up to four adjacent users by contractual arrangement specifying details of the sharing, a copy of which is to be provided to the City Manager or their designee. 
6.  Applicants may request a reduction to or waiver of loading requirements. The reduction of loading requirements may be permissible only through the permission of the mayor and city council provided the arrangement shall avoid conflicting parking demands and provide for safe pedestrian circulation and access. When loading berths are shared by numerous users, those users shall provide a contractual arrangement specifying details of the shared arrangement to the city manager or their designee. 
ARTICLE VIII: - BUFFER PROVISIONS 

Section 8-1. - Buffer areas. 
8-1.1 Buffer required. 
A.  It is recognized that the location of commercial or industrial land uses directly adjacent to single-family residence uses can create an incompatible situation. Accordingly, in commercial and industrial districts, when a principal structure is expanded or modified, a planted screening buffer shall be provided along all side and rear property lines contiguous with a residential district. The city council may require a similar buffer strip between other districts and land uses deemed to be incompatible. 
8-1.2 General provisions for buffer areas. 
A.  A planted buffer strip is required to protect residential land uses from excessive heat, dust, wind, light, spill, unsightly views, odors, and other characteristics commonly associated with commercial and industrial land uses and related vehicular and pedestrian traffic, which can adversely impact the quality of residential life. The required buffer shall provide necessary visual and acoustical privacy for the conduct of residential lifestyles in an undisturbed environment, and shall provide for the protection and preservation of property values in residential districts. 
B.  Required buffers shall be established and maintained by the owner of the incompatible land use. The required buffer must: 
1.  Be depicted in detail (the type and location of natural and planted vegetation are to be illustrated) on each site plan or plat prior to approval, and shall be designated as a permanent easement. 
2.  Not be disturbed by grading, property improvements or construction activities except where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth, where too dense to permit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers. Any contemplated disturbance shall first be brought to the attention of the planning and zoning committee and formal approval secured prior to initiating activity within required buffer area. 
3.  Utilize existing vegetation where it has been determined that existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion within the buffer strip, or when required be supplemented with approved, additional plantings. 
4.  Retain the natural topography of the land, except when a portion must be cleared and graded as required by law to prevent soil erosion or sedimentation. 
5.  Be completely installed in accordance with the approved plan prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
6.  Not be used for temporary or permanent parking or loading, other than for provision of drainage improvements as mandated by law or for a structure other than a fence. 
7.  Attain a height of not less than six feet within three years of the planting date. 
Section 8-2. - Minimum buffer specifications. 
8-2.1 Buffer widths. 
A.  The following specifications for buffer strip widths will be used by the planning and zoning committee and city council to determine buffer strip requirements: 
1.  Where a commercial or industrial district is contiguous with a single-family residential district, the width of the required buffer strip shall not be less than 40 feet, nor more than 75 feet. 
2.  In other instances, where an incompatible situation is determined, the width of the buffer strip shall be recommended by the planning and zoning committee, but shall not be less than 15 feet, nor more than 75 feet. The buffer strip required can include the minimum yard area as specified in the appropriate zoning district. 
8-2.2 Buffer composition. 
A.  In those instances where the natural vegetation and topography are insufficient to achieve the desired level of screening as determined by this ordinance, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide an acoustical and visual screen. The following plants are approved for use as part of the screening buffer, provided they are 2.5" in caliper size at breast height: 
1.  Trees: 
Loblolly Pine 
White Pine 
Virginia Pine 
Yaupon Holly 
American Holly 
Eastern Red Cedar 
Laurel Cherry 
Weeping Cherry 
Flowering Cherry 
Red Maple 
Walnut 
American Chestnut 
Red Bud 
Flowering Dogwood 
Arizona Cypress Redbay 
2.  Shrubs: 
Forsythia 
Indian Hawthorne 
Burning Bush 
Loripetalum 
Laurel 
Cleyera 
Euonymus 
Southern Waxmyrtle 
Northern Bayberry 
Pittosporum 
Japan Yew 
Trident Maple 
Tea Olive 
3.  Ground cover: 
Short Juniper 
Periwinkle 
Lippia 
Evergreen Candytuft 
Elysum 
Lenton Rose 
B.  Other evergreen plant materials having the same growth characteristics as the aforementioned may be substituted, subject to approval by the planning and zoning committee prior to installation. 
8-2.3 Buffer maintenance. 
A.  The screening buffer planting and any required landscaped open space planting shall be guaranteed for two years and maintained for the life of the commercial, industrial or residential development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed by the installing property owner to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the buffer actually serves the purpose for which it is intended. 
Section 8-3. - Other screening. 
8-3.1 Screening requirements. 
A.  Certain uses such as junk or salvage yard operations and other commercial and industrial operations requiring the storage of inoperative equipment or vehicles for prolonged periods of time could present unsightly views or health hazards. To preclude this from occurring, such properties must be completely enclosed by an opiate fence to completely obscures views of the property from adjacent sidewalks and streets, built to a height greater than that of the height of the highest piece of equipment or vehicle stored on the property; however, the minimum height of any fence shall be eight feet. Construction of cyclone fencing which utilizes metal inserts as screening shall be prohibited. 
ARTICLE XII: - FEE SCHEDULES 

Section 12-1. - Schedule of fees. 
12-1.1 Schedule of Fee, Changes and Revisions. 
A.  The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for rezoning applications, building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in city hall, and may be altered or amended only by the city council. 
B.  Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
ARTICLE XIV: - DEKALB COUNTY-ANNEXED (DK-A) ZONING DISTRICT 

[Section 14-1. - Establishment, regulation, development, and compliance.] 
Section 14-1.1 Establishment and application. 
The DeKalb County-Annexed (DK-A) Zoning District is applied to properties that are annexed into the city limits of the City of Stone Mountain after the effective date of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, Pt. I, 9-2-14) 
Section 14-1.2 Regulation of lands in the DK-A Zoning District. 
Any properties zoned DeKalb County-Annexed (DK-A) as shown on the official zoning map, unless otherwise specifically approved by the Stone Mountain Mayor and city council, shall be subject to the property-specific conditions of zoning or special use, or both, approved pursuant to the DeKalb County Zoning Ordinance which applied to said properties at the time they were zoned, or the special use was permitted in unincorporated DeKalb County immediately prior to annexation. The official DeKalb County zoning and special use permit files of properties so annexed shall become official files of the City of Stone Mountain and shall be maintained by the zoning administrator and said conditions of zoning or special use approval, or both, approved pursuant to the DeKalb County Zoning Ordinance and applied by the City of Stone Mountain, shall constitute the zoning regulations governing said properties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, Pt. I, 9-2-14) 
Section 14-1.3 Development of properties in the DK-A Zoning District. 
Properties in the DK-A district shall continue to enjoy the use or uses specifically conferred by a zoning or special use permit in place immediately prior to annexation and authorized pursuant to the DeKalb County Zoning Ordinance. Development of any properties zoned DK-A on the effective date of this zoning ordinance shall comply with the following: 
A.  The property-specific conditions of zoning adopted by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners in a property-specific rezoning action by resolution and which were in effect for said property when in unincorporated DeKalb County immediately prior to annexation. 
B.  The property-specific conditions of special use approval adopted by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners in a property-specific special use permit action by resolution and which were in effect for said property when in unincorporated DeKalb County immediately prior to annexation. 
C.  Any modifications of zoning or special use permit conditions granted by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners by official action which are a part of the official DeKalb County files for said property on record with the zoning administrator. 
D.  Any property-specific variances granted by the DeKalb County Board of Zoning Appeals and which are a part of the official DeKalb County files for said property on record with the zoning administrator. 
E.  In reviewing a development proposal for compliance with the zoning regulations of the DK-A Zoning District, questions may arise as to what other additional dimensional requirements or use regulations apply. In certain cases the zoning administrator may not be able to resolve such questions by relying on the zoning or special use permit conditions and any applicable variances or modifications of said conditions alone. For example, questions may arise as to whether the use provisions allow for an accessory building, structure, or use on the subject property that is not shown on the site plan approved as a condition. In such instances where questions about development permissions cannot be resolved by applying the above provisions A. through E. of this section, the zoning administrator shall apply regulations of the Stone Mountain zoning district established in article V, district regulations, of this zoning ordinance which most closely resembles the zoning district of DeKalb County's Zoning Resolution which applied to the property immediately prior to annexation, as more particularly shown in Table 14-1.1. 
F.  The zoning administrator shall use the regulations found in article VI, supplemental regulations, article VII, off street parking and loading regulations and article VIII, buffer provisions of the zoning ordinance when questions arise that are not addressed by article V, district regulations. 
Table 14-1.1 
DeKalb County—Stone Mountain Zoning District 
Conversion based on permitted uses and density 

 
Note 1: PC-2 and PC-3 districts incorporate multiple districts to regulate land use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, Pt. I, 9-2-14) 
Section 14-1.4 Remedies for additional development permission. 
A.  In any case where a development is proposed on property zoned DK-A but such development would not be consistent with the provisions of the DK-A zoning district as specified in this chapter, there shall be the following possible remedies: 
1.  File an application to rezone the property from DK-A to another zoning district set forth in article IV of this zoning ordinance which will lawfully provide for the proposed development, in accordance with applicable zoning procedures and article II of this zoning ordinance. 
2.  The zoning administrator may authorize that a variance application be made in accordance with the provisions of article II of this zoning ordinance, but only involving development that cannot meet the yard area, setbacks, buffers, landscape strips, building coverage, or other dimensional (numeric) requirements of the approved site plan and conditions of zoning. Variance applications shall be processed in accordance with applicable zoning procedures and article II of this zoning ordinance. 
3.  Administrative variances may be granted to properties zoned DK-A, pursuant to article II of this zoning ordinance. 
B  The zoning administrator shall not accept nor be authorized to process an application to modify the conditions of zoning approval pertaining to properties in the DK-A zoning district. 
C.  The zoning administrator shall not accept nor be authorized to process an application to modify a site plan or development plan approved by DeKalb County and made a part of the regulations of the DK-A Zoning District; provided, however, that minor revisions to an approved site plan or development plan may be administratively approved by the zoning administrator if in the zoning administrator's judgment such changes: 
1.  Do not involve an increase in density or intensity of the site; and 
2.  Do not alter buffers or setbacks along perimeter boundaries; and 
3.  Do not otherwise result in a change that would be contrary to the public interest or that would be better considered via a public hearing process and a change in zoning or special use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, Pt. I, 9-2-14) 
Section 14-1.5 Compliance. 
Except as this chapter specifically authorizes otherwise, lands annexed into the municipal limits of the City of Stone Mountain after the effective date of this zoning ordinance shall be subject to all applicable procedural and substantive requirements of this zoning ordinance as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, Pt. I, 9-2-14) 
Section 14-1.6 Assumption of administrative functions. 
In cases where conditions of DeKalb County zoning approval applicable to property in the DK-A zoning district require an administrative determination or decision, interpretation, or other administrative action, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to make such administrative determination, decision, or interpretation. To this end, the zoning administrator shall assume the authority of all administrative officials referred to in said conditions of zoning approval by DeKalb County; provided, however, that in cases where engineering considerations are specified, the zoning administrator shall refer such considerations to a licensed professional engineer, whose determination, decision, or interpretation shall be followed by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, Pt. I, 9-2-14) 
ARTICLE XV: - BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES 

Section 15-1. - Purpose, definitions, licenses. 
15-1.1 Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this article is the establishment of land use regulations within the scope of the zoning powers of the municipal authority to govern bed and breakfast facilities in the city. The intent of this article is to promote economic development in the bed and breakfast industry without harming existing residential properties. 
15-1.2 Definitions. 
A.  A lodging room is defined as a room that is used for temporary occupancy for a fee. 
B.  An owner is defined as an individual, partner, or officer of a corporation who is an officer registered with the Corporations Division of the Georgia Secretary of State with title to real property. 
C.  A bed and breakfast hotel facility is defined as a commercial type establishment offering no less than three and no more than eight lodging rooms to be used for temporary occupancy for a fee and that serves meals to guests. 
D.  A bed and breakfast home facility is defined as a residential type establishment, with commercial enterprise, offering no more than three lodging rooms for temporary occupancy for a fee and that may or may not offer food to guests. 
15-1.3 Licenses. 
A.  A bed and breakfast hotel facility shall obtain an occupational tax certificate from the city and must meet all requirements for food and lodging operations. 
B.  A bed and breakfast home facility shall obtain a home occupational tax certificate from the city and is exempt from local food operations requirements providing that only breakfast is served, with breakfast being defined as pre-wrapped, commercially prepared portions. 
C.  Fees for lodging in all bed and breakfast hotel and home facilities are subject to local and state taxation ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, pt. I, §§ 1—3, 8-1-17) 
Section 15-2. - Occupancy and parking restrictions. 
15-2.1 Occupancy restrictions. 
A.  A bed and breakfast hotel facility must meet the following occupancy restrictions: 
1.  Reserved. 
2.  Occupancy of a lodging room shall require at least 40 square feet per individual. 
3.  No occupancy shall exceed 14 days for any individual at a bed and breakfast facility. 
4.  The owner of a bed and breakfast facility shall live in the bed and breakfast facility, on the property, or live adjacent to the property on which the bed and breakfast is located. 
5.  Bed and breakfast facilities shall be available for occupancy on a continuous basis except for repairs, renovations, or the absence of the owner. 
B.  A bed and breakfast home facility must meet the following occupancy restrictions: 
1.  Provide no more than three lodging rooms with a minimum of 70 square feet per room. 
2.  Occupancy of a lodging room shall require at least 40 square feet per individual when occupied by more than one person. 
3.  Occupancy by guest(s) shall not exceed 14 consecutive days during any 90 day period. 
4.  The owner of a bed and breakfast home facility shall live in the bed and breakfast facility or on the property on which facility is located. Change in ownership shall be reported to the municipality and may be subject to new licensing requirements. 
5.  Bed and breakfast home facilities shall be available for occupancy on a continuous basis except for repairs, renovations, or the absence of the owner. 
6.  Bed and breakfast home facilities shall be required to have a smoke alarm in each lodging room (guest room) and a fire extinguisher visible and accessible to guests. The facilities are subject to at least one annual inspection at the time of initial licensing and during renewal of the same. 
15-2.2 Parking restrictions. 
A.  Except where permitted by law, no parking shall be allowed on the street or in the front yard of bed and breakfast facilities. 
B.  One parking space shall be maintained for each lodging room with a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum length of 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, pt. I, §§ 4—6, 8-1-17) 
Section 15-3. - Signage. 
15-3.1 Signage. 
A.  For bed and breakfast hotel facilities — One exterior sign is permitted not to exceed 12 square feet. The sign may not be attached to any structure on the premises. The sign may be lighted on two sides by an external light source not to exceed 2,400 lumens per light. A sign permit application must be submitted to the city clerk for approval and a sign permit fee must be paid according to the schedule of fees maintained by the city prior to the construction of an exterior sign. 
B.  For bed and breakfast home facilities — No business and advertising signs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, pt. I, §§ 7, 8, 8-1-17) 
ARTICLE XVI: - VACATION HOME FACILITIES 

Section 16-1. - Purpose, definitions, licenses. 
16-1.1 Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this article is the establishment of land use regulations within the scope of the zoning powers of the municipal authority to govern vacation home facilities in the city. The intent of this article is to promote economic development in the vacation rental industry without harming existing residential properties. 
16-1.2 Definitions. 
A.  A lodging room is defined as a room that is used for temporary occupancy for a fee. 
B.  An owner is defined as an individual, partner, or officer of a corporation who is an officer registered with the Corporations Division of the Georgia Secretary of State with title to real property. 
C.  A vacation home facility is defined as a residential type establishment, with commercial enterprise, offering whole house rental with no more than four lodging rooms for temporary occupancy for a fee and that does not offer food to guests. 
16-1.3 Licenses. 
A.  A vacation home facility shall obtain a home occupational tax certificate from the city. 
B.  Fees for lodging in a vacation home facility are subject to local and state taxation ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07, pt. I, 8-1-17) 
Section 16-2. - Occupancy and parking restrictions. 
16-2.1 Occupancy restrictions. 
A.  A vacation home facility must meet the following occupancy restrictions: 
1.  Provide no more than four lodging (guest) rooms with a minimum of 70 square feet per room. 
2.  Occupancy of a lodging room shall require at least 40 square feet per individual. 
3.  Occupancy by guest(s) shall not exceed 14 consecutive days during any 90 day period. 
4.  The owner of a vacation home facility shall live within the corporate boundaries of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
5.  Vacation home facilities shall be available for occupancy on a continuous basis except for repairs, renovations, or the absence of the owner. 
6.  Vacation home facilities shall be required to have a smoke alarm in each lodging room (guest room) and a fire extinguisher visible and accessible to guests. The facilities are subject to at least one annual inspection at the time of initial licensing and during renewal of the same. 
16-2.2 Parking restrictions. 
A.  Except where permitted by law, no parking shall be allowed on the street or in the front yard of a vacation home facility. 
B.  Parking regulations relative to the zoning district in which the vacation home facility is located shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07, pt. I, 8-1-17) 
Section 16-3. - Signage. 
16-3.1 Signage. 
A.  No business and advertising signs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07, pt. I, 8-1-17) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1976 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1976 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1976 Code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 