CODE OF ORDINANCES COUNTY OF FANNIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF 
FANNIN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS PUBLICATION 
____________ 
Howell P. Bruce, Jr. 
Chairman 
____________ 
Howell "Howie" Bruce, Jr., Chairman 
Tom Ledford, Post One Commissioner 
Steve Morris, Post Two Commissioner 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Lynn D. Doss 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Diane Thomas 
County Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF 
FANNIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
William S. Simonds 
Chairman 
____________ 
William S. Simonds, Chairman 
Earl Johnson, Post One Commissioner 
Larry Joe Sosebee, Post Two Commissioner 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Lynn D. Doss 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Rita Davis-Kirby 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a publication of the general and permanent ordinances of Fannin County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the county board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of David D. Beach, Code Attorney, and Ellen Torof, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Diane Thomas for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Fannin, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Fannin, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Fannin, Georgia. 2007. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-19—2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-40—2-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 2-67. - Purposes. 
(a)	Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, has, from time to time adopted, and shall, in the future, from time to time, adopt, various ordinances designated to preserve, safeguard, shield or enhance the quality of life of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia. Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, is authorized under the applicable sections of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Official Code of Georgia, and such laws made and provided, to enforce the terms and provisions of the various ordinances of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. Said various ordinances provide for the enforcement, in some manner, for the provisions of said ordinances. 
(b)	The board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia, has determined that there is a requirement to enhance and augment the enforcement provisions of the various county ordinances and to provide uniformity in both existing and future ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. I) 
Sec. 2-68. - Title. 
This division shall be cited as the "Enforcement Officer, Fannin County, a Political Subdivision of the State of Georgia, Duly Adopted County Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. III) 
Sec. 2-69. - Enforcement officer. 
(a)	The Fannin County board of commissioners does hereby establish the position of enforcement officer. 
(b)	Said position may be held by one person or several persons as may from time to time be promulgated by the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(c)	The individuals so designated by the board of commissioners of Fannin County may hold the position of enforcement officer in conjunction with any other compensated county position. 
(d)	Any peace officer of the State of Georgia or of Fannin County, Georgia, shall be designated as a supplemental enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. IV) 
Sec. 2-70. - Enforcement officer; duties/procedures. 
(a)	Authorization. 
(1)	The Fannin County enforcement officer(s) and/or any supplemental enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue citations to a violator or violators of any of the provisions of the various ordinances duly adopted by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(2)	The Fannin County enforcement officer(s) shall be authorized to issue citations to any person who may own or be in possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of any provision of the various ordinances of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	Format. Said citations shall be on a Uniform Traffic Citation, Summons, Accusation and Warning form or such other form as may be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(c)	Identification—Cited party. The enforcement officer shall list the name of the accused, as it is made known to him/her; together with the address of the accused and the phone number of the accused if available. The enforcement officer shall request the cited party to provide his/her driver's license as a means of verifying said party's identification. In the event said party is not in possession of a driver's license, the enforcement officer shall utilize the name and address supplied by the party to be cited. 
(d)	Same—Offense/violation. The citation shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged by briefly describing the prohibited act. For example, it shall be deemed sufficient to state that the accused did "deposit household garbage on the right-of-way of XYZ road." The citation shall further identify the date and time that said violation is alleged to have occurred, as well as the location of the violation. The enforcement officer need not state the name of the ordinance or the specific section violated, but merely describe the offense in sufficient detail to place the accused on notice as to what prohibited act he/she is accused of having committed. 
(e)	Notification as to trial. The citation shall indicate that the accused is to appear before the magistrate judge for Fannin County, Georgia, on the third Tuesday of the month following the issuance of the citation, at 2:00 p.m. There shall be a number on each citation, which shall appear on all subsequent court proceedings. 
(f)	Service on accused. 
(1)	Personal service. 
a.	A copy of the citation shall be served on the accused by the enforcement officer. Said service shall be accomplished by providing the accused with a copy of the citation at the time that it is issued. 
b.	In the event that the accused is not present at the time that the citation is issued, service can be perfected on the accused by serving a copy of the citation on the accused at such location as the accused may be found within the State of Georgia. 
(2)	Nonpersonal service. In the event that an accused cannot be located within the boundaries of Fannin County, Georgia, or the State of Georgia service shall be perfected in the manner set forth in the Georgia Civil Procedures Act as to service on out-of-state parties. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be forwarded to the accused via certified mail, return receipt requested, to such address or addresses as may be found by the enforcement officer. 
(g)	Signature. The citation shall be signed by the enforcement officer issuing said citation. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. V) 
Sec. 2-71. - Offense. 
Each violation of a county ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. VI) 
Sec. 2-72. - Court procedures. 
(a)	Court. Violations of any of the various ordinances of Fannin County shall be tried, upon citation or accusation, in the magistrate court for Fannin County, Georgia. Said citations or accusations shall be tried in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, title 15, chapter 10, articles 1—12. Said hearing shall be held on the third Tuesday of the month following the issuance of the citation, at 2:00 p.m. Any modification to this hearing date must be submitted in writing to the magistrate judge. 
(b)	Prosecuting attorney. Violations of any of the various ordinances of Fannin County may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney. Said violations may be tried on accusations or citations with accompanying testimony from the enforcement officer. If a prosecuting attorney is deemed needed, on a case-by-case basis, the county attorney, or such other attorney as designated by the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. In the absence of a prosecuting attorney, the enforcement officer shall be authorized to serve as the prosecutor. 
(c)	Other actions. Nothing in this division shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus, or such other proceedings as may be deemed appropriate to present, correct or abate any violation of the various ordinances of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. VII) 
Sec. 2-73. - Penalty for violation of county ordinances. 
(a)	Any person violating a provision of the various ordinances of Fannin County, upon conviction shall be subject to the following punishments: 
(1)	A fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00 for the first offense. 
(2)	A fine of not less than $500.00 or more than $1,000.00 for the second offense. 
(3)	A fine of not less than $1,000.00 or more than $1,500.00 for the third offense. In addition, anyone convicted of a third violation of any provision of any of the various ordinances of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, shall be confined in the Fannin County jail for a period of not less than 24 hours or more than 60 days, which is in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 15-10-62. 
(4)	In the sound discretion of the judge of the court in which a conviction is obtained, the individual may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any litter deposited thereon. Said punishment shall not exceed five miles, on both sides of a given public street, highway or public right-of-way. 
(5)	In the sound discretion of the judge of the court where conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any litter deposited thereon from any public beach or park. 
(6)	In the sound discretion of the judge of the court where a conviction is obtained, the person may be directed, with the permission of the owner and the tenant in possession, if any, to pick up litter on any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he/she has deposited litter. 
(7)	The punishments set out in subsection (a)(4), (5) or (6) of this section can be administered in conjunction with the punishments set out in subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(b)	No person accused of violating this division shall be arrested prior to a trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate and required to post a bond for his/her future appearance. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. VIII) 
Sec. 2-74. - Severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the ordinance from which this division is derived be declared invalid for any reason, the remainder or said ordinance shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. IX(1)) 
Sec. 2-75. - Compatibility. 
It is the intention of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia that this division is to be construed so as to augment any of the provisions of existing Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. IX(2)) 
Sec. 2-76. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 2-28-1995, art. IX(3)) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON SITE CONSUMPTION OF WINE AND MALT BEVERAGES AND FARM WINERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-23-2008, §§ 1.010—1.260, 2.010—2.090, adopted Dec. 23, 2008, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 6-19—6-22, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to malt beverage and wine sale and derived from Ord. of 1-24-2003, § I—IV. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-21. - License issuance for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and wine. 
Consumption on the premises licenses for the sale of malt beverages and wine outside municipalities in the county will be issued by the board of commissioners of the county pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth in the following paragraphs of this chapter. The holding of any of said licenses is declared to be a privilege and not a right. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.010) 
Sec. 6-22. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
Bar means a business open to the public which sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which does not meet the definition of a restaurant and which does not derive a minimum of 60 percent of its gross income from prepared food sales. 
Brown bagging means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
(1)	For which a county business license has been issued; and 
(2)	Which occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
Church means any permanent building which houses the main sanctuary in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. The term "church" shall not include the temporary housing of a religious group in an otherwise commercial center. 
College means only those state, county, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Director means the business license director for Fannin County. Currently said individual shall be the accounts payable clerk with the board of commissioners or such other position or board as the board of commissioners may from time to time designate. 
Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. As used in this chapter, the term "election" is defined as any statewide primary election and the statewide general election and any runoff held for such primary or general election. The term also includes "local elections." 
Good moral character means the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(1)	A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
a.	At the current time he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
b.	He is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
(2)	The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the county in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
a.	Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
b.	Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
c.	Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner. 
d.	Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
Indoor recreation establishment means an indoor facility that contains regulation-size courts or alleys where physical sporting activity takes place and equipment related to the activity is available for rent or sale. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or with a hotel with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by any fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Nonprofit private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state or a fraternal or veterans' organization associated with and a part of a recognized national fraternal or veterans' organization which is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes and which immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder: 
(1)	Has at least 100 members regularly paying dues; and 
(2)	Has tax exempt status under the provisions of Section 501(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; and 
(3)	Owns or leases a building or space for the reasonable use of its members; and 
(4)	Has no members or officers, agents or employees of the club receiving compensation directly or indirectly in the form of commissions or other compensation based on the amount of profits from the sale of malt beverages and wines beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting or by its governing body out of the general revenue of the club; and 
(5)	Has no part of the net earnings inuring to the benefit of any shareholder or member; and 
(6)	Has been in continuous operation for at least one year prior to the application for a license hereunder. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license. It shall be limited to one location for each license and there shall be a separate license for each premises outlet, except in the case of a licensee where: 
(1)	A golf course is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant, premises shall include the playing area of the golf course. 
(2)	Where a SportsCar, SCCA (Sports Car Club of America), ACO (Automobile Club De L'Quest) CART (Championship Auto Racing Teams), or NASCAR(National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing) sanctioned motor sport road race track facility is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant. Likewise, a train with a restaurant shall include all cars connected to the same engine with a minimum seating capacity of 60. 
(3)	A convention center or public venue designed to accommodate or seat a minimum of 750 people in a permanent structure being enclosed on at least three sides and having a permanent roof, and shall include all concession stands as one venue. 
(4)	In these exceptions the premises shall include the permanent concession points, grandstands and other event viewing areas; provided however, that alcoholic beverages may only be served at permanent concession points on the premises operated by the main licensed location and approved in advance by the county business license director or such other official as may be designated by the board of commissioners. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and permanent seating capacity of at least 60 people, with at least two meals per day being served for not less than five days a week, for at least seven months each calendar year, and the serving of such meals being the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
Retail package means sales of malt beverages or wine packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises sales. 
Veterans' organization means a veterans' group duly certified by their national organization and with a membership of not less than 25 persons. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this chapter. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means any state, county, church or other private school that teaches the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall include the adjacent open land or fenced areas used for school purposes but this shall not include any portion of a private school, where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.020) 
Sec. 6-23. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of selling malt beverages and wines of any kind for onsite consumption in the unincorporated area of the county without first obtaining a license therefore under this chapter. 
No person shall engage in the business of selling an alcoholic beverage of any type, to include all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine except as specifically authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.030) 
Sec. 6-24. - License classifications. 
Only the following classes of licenses shall be authorized: 
(1)	Malt beverage: Consumption on the premises; 
(2)	Wine: Consumption on the premises; 
(3)	Combination, malt beverage and wine: Consumption on the premises; 
(4)	Manufacturing: Farm winery, as set forth in division 2 of this chapter and following. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.040) 
Sec. 6-25. - License fees. 
(a)	The applicant for consumption on the premises malt beverage and/or wine license shall pay to the business license director at the time of application the sum of $5,000.00 for the sale of malt beverages and $5,000.00 for the sale of wine, as the initial cost of said licenses. 
(b)	Said licenses will only be sold in combination with each other, resulting in an initial application fee of $10,000.00. 
(c)	At the time of implementation, the number of licenses for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and/or wine (and excluding farm wineries) available for purchase shall be limited to 25 in the entire unincorporated area of the county. 
(d)	Subsequent to the initial license fee of $10,000.00, there shall be an annual license renewal fee for operation for one year at one location or one business where the product will be sold shall be due annually in the amount of $1,000.00. 
(e)	The annual fee is per calendar year and shall not be prorated. 
(f)	The license can be sold to a qualifying individual or entity, under the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. 
(g)	The applicant for a manufacturing license pursuant to the farm winery provisions of this chapter shall pay to the business license director at the time of application the sum of $1,000.00 as an initial fee. 
(h)	An annual license renewal fee for operation of a farm winery for one year at one location or one business where the product will be sold shall be due annually in the amount of $150.00. 
(i)	Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the initial license fee. Should the applicant be denied a license or should the applicant(s) withdraw the application prior to its being submitted to the commission, the license fee shall be refunded; however $150.00 for investigation and application processing shall be retained. 
(j)	Annual license fees for permanent concession points for the sale of alcoholic beverages as set forth under the definition of "premises" in section 6-22 shall be as follows: 
(1)	An annual inspection fee of $100.00 for one to four concession locations; 
(2)	An annual inspection fee of $200.00 for five to ten concession locations; and 
(3)	An annual inspection fee of $300.00 for more than ten concession locations shall be charged to offset the cost of concession site inspections. 
(4)	Licensing inspection fees for concession points shall not be pro-rated and shall be due and payable at the same time the alcoholic beverage license is renewed each year. 
(5)	Alcohol concession permits will be issued for each concession point as a supplementary license to the main licensed location. 
(6)	Any new concession locations added during the licensing year shall be charged an initial inspection fee of $50.00, and then the new concession location shall be added to the annual renewal fee the following year. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.050) 
Sec. 6-26. - License application. 
(a)	All applications for licenses to sell malt beverages and wine shall be made in person by the applicant to the business license director in writing on forms furnished by the business license director. The application shall contain, but is not restricted to, the following information: 
(1)	Name; 
(2)	Age; 
(3)	Address; 
(4)	Length of residency of the applicant; 
(5)	Name of business; 
(6)	Location of business; 
(7)	Description of the premises or place of business where the license is to be effective; 
(8)	Statement as to whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has made application previously for any malt beverage or wine license and the disposition of such application; 
(9)	Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime other than traffic violations; 
(10)	Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government, and the reason for said revocation; 
(11)	Whether any other person is interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses of the proposed business; 
(12)	Each applicant for a malt beverage or wine license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the business premises or a copy of the current lease for the premises upon which the license is to be effective; 
(13)	If the business is not an ongoing entity, the anticipated commencement dates for construction/operation; 
(14)	Only after meeting all requirements for licensing by the applicant shall the application be submitted to the commission for approval. Current license holders applying for additional locations shall be exempt from this provision. 
(b)	Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the nearest church, funeral chapel, school or college or shall have attached thereto an affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the licensed premises complies with the distance requirements of this chapter and any state or federal law. 
(c)	All applications shall bear an identification number (1 thru 25) and shall be dated as to the date received by the director. A duplicate copy of the application with the number, date and the signature of the director indicating receipt of the same and the fees shall be given to the applicant at the time of application. 
(d)	At such time as 25 applications have been received and a certified check for the license fees (totaling $10,000.00/per application) for malt beverages/wine have been received no additional applications shall be accepted until such time as a final disposition of the initial 25 has occurred. In the event that one or more of the initial 25 are not granted, notice of the availability of additional applications shall be made and applications accepted in accordance to the provisions of the notice and this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.060) 
Sec. 6-27. - License approval procedures. 
(a)	After filing an application with the director, the applicant for a license shall publish a notice of the application in the legal organ of the county one time (on such date as the legal notices are published) prior to the regular county commissioner meeting at which the application is to be presented and considered. The notice shall contain the name of the person applying for the license and the name of the person for whom the application is submitted, if different, and the location of the proposed premises. An affidavit of the publisher or his authorized agent certifying that the advertisement has been published shall be submitted to the director subsequent to the publication and prior to the same being placed on the agenda of the board of commissioners. 
(b)	After filing an application with the director, the applicant for a license shall place a sign in or at the establishment (if the same is a current business) where alcoholic beverages are to be sold. This sign shall remain on the premises from the date of the initial filing of the application with the director until the application has been approved or denied. The sign shall be a minimum of 12 inches × 15 inches and shall be visible from the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold is located. The sign shall contain the words "NOTICE: WINE/MALT BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR." The words shall appear in bold type and be clearly visible from the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold is located, and be located at the main entrance to the establishment. Letters on this sign shall be not less than four inches in height. The day, month, and year the license was applied for shall also appear on said sign. 
(c)	In the event that the restaurant or premises are not yet operational, the notice required in 6-27(b) shall be placed on the property for the proposed establishment. 
(d)	The application shall be reviewed and considered first by the sheriff of Fannin County in order to determine the compliance with this chapter as to any felony conviction which would preclude the obtaining a license. Thereafter the same shall be submitted by the director to the county commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled county commission meeting. The same shall then be tabled and not eligible for a vote by the county commission on the application until the next regularly scheduled county commission meeting. 
(e)	Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a conditional license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales for onsite consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.070) 
Sec. 6-28. - License renewal and transfer. 
(a)	A licensee who desires to renew his license for a subsequent calendar year must file a renewal application with the director on or before November 15 of the preceding year. Payment of license fees for renewal shall be made at the time of application and, upon approval of the renewal application by the director, the license will be issued. Applications for renewal shall be treated as applications for new licenses but need not be advertised and/or resurveyed unless requested by the director. Any renewals submitted after the due date of November 15, shall be considered delinquent and assessed a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the fees due. Interest on delinquent fees shall be assessed at one percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
(b)	No license may be transferred from one person to another or from one managing agent to another without the approval of the director pursuant to written application. 
(c)	Upon change of a license holder or owner (unless the owner is a corporation and stock is traded publicly or listed on a major stock exchange) the license shall be transferred and will remain in effect for no longer than 45 days or until the transfer is granted or refused under this chapter, whichever shall occur first. Payment of a transfer fee of $150.00, if made within five days of the transfer, or $300.00 if more than five days after the transfer, will be due at the time of application. The license shall cease to be in effect after 45 days or the business is closed. A time extension for the transfer may be granted by the director due to extenuating circumstances. 
(d)	Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representative or heirs may continue to operate under the original license for the balance of the year without payment of any fee, provided those persons are otherwise qualified as license holders. Otherwise, the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit. In such case, the transferee shall pay a transfer fee of $150.00. 
(e)	Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at another location must make a new application for the new location, providing the information as set forth above. However, the licensee will maintain his priority as to the 25 available licenses. 
(f)	No refund of renewal fees shall be made once the renewal application is submitted, approved and license is issued. 
(g)	Licenses may only be sold with an ongoing business and the new licensee will have to meet all the requirements of licensure. However, the new licensee will maintain the same priority as to the 25 available licenses. 
(h)	No license shall be sold separate and apart from an ongoing business and no license shall be sold for more than the stipulated fee of $10,000.00. 
(i)	Any license that is sold separate and apart from an ongoing concern or that is sold for more than the original fee shall be null and void and all priority as to the initial 25 licenses shall be lost. 
(j)	An individual, entity or organization may make application for a license and pay for the same prior to the establishment of a business. However, said individual, entity or organization cannot offer the same to sale to any third party separate and apart from an ongoing business. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.080) 
Sec. 6-29. - Qualifications of license holders. 
(a)	All applicants for a license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(b)	All sole proprietor owners who are permanent residents of the State of Georgia shall make application for a license in their own name. Where the owner is a corporation, partnership, association, or nonresident of the State of Georgia, the application shall be made in the name of an officer, partner or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business or in the name of the principal managing officer, or managing agent who is a permanent resident of the State of Georgia. In such cases the application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner who shall be named in the application. 
(c)	For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, applicant means the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other organization and the managing agent. 
(1)	Every managing agent applicant for a county malt beverage and wine license shall be at least 21 years of age, a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency, and a resident of the state, and shall make application on forms furnished by the business license office and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, and other supporting data as required thereby. 
(2)	Where the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and an officer or agent who meets the requirements as set forth in section 6-29. The officer or agent named as the applicant shall be an individual who does in fact have regular managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed fulltime by the corporation. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
(3)	Where the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license shall be issued jointly to the partnership and either the managing general partner thereof, or an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 6-29 does in fact have managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the partnership. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
(4)	Where the application is made on behalf of a sole proprietorship, the license shall be issued jointly to the sole proprietorship and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 6-29 who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the proprietor. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." The managing agent may be the sole proprietor, if he/she otherwise qualifies under this section. 
(5)	Where the application is made on behalf of any other type organization, the license shall be issued jointly to the organization and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 6-29 who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the organization. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." In the case of a nonprofit private club, the managing agent may be an officer of the organization in lieu of a full-time employee if the individual is otherwise qualified under section 6-29. 
(6)	A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(7)	The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by this chapter. Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(8)	In the event the managing agent changes, or ceases to meet requirements as set forth in subsections (1)—(5) above, the licensee shall notify the business license director within five days of the change. A fee of $150.00 will be charged for the processing of an application for the change of the "managing agent," or if after five days a fee of $300.00, and such applicant must be approved by the director. 
(9)	The business license director shall refuse to approve any managing agent who has been convicted, within the five years preceding his application, of any felony of any kind or any misdemeanor relating to an alcoholic beverage violation or any state law, or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(d)	Registered agent. 
(1)	All applications for licenses under this chapter shall nominate and name in the application one or more residents of Fannin County, Georgia, as the registered agent and representative of the applicant to receive all communications, notices, services or process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the applicant in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any county license. If the managing agent is a permanent resident of Fannin County, Georgia, then he/she may serve as the registered agent. The applicant shall furnish a notarized affidavit from such registered agent, and the mailing to any registered agent at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the applicant/licensee. 
(2)	A registered agent must be a U.S. citizen or a legal alien of at least 21 years of age. 
(3)	Such registered agent shall be a permanent resident of Fannin County, Georgia, and must be approved by the business license director. The business license director shall refuse to approve any registered agent who is not a bona fide resident of Fannin County, or who has been convicted of any felony of any kind, or any misdemeanor within the past five years relating to an alcoholic beverage violation or any state law, or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(4)	If any registered agent shall cease to be a resident of the county or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (3) of this section, the licensee shall notify the business license director in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered agent within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered agent shall meet the requirements in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section and must be approved by the business license director. The county shall charge a fee of $50.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent; provided, however, that if the licensee fails to notify the county and nominate a new registered agent within said five-day period, then the county shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent and/or revoke the licensee's license. 
(5)	No license may be transferred from one registered agent to another without the approval of the director pursuant to written application. 
(6)	Upon change of a registered agent the license shall be transferred and will remain in effect for no longer than 45 days or until the transfer is granted or refused under this chapter, whichever shall occur first. The license shall cease to be in effect after 45 days or the business is closed. A time extension for the transfer may be granted by the director due to extenuating circumstances. 
(e)	Where an application for a license is submitted for a nonprofit private club or veterans' organization, the application shall be made in the name of the highest elected officer and/or the manager of the club or organization. 
(f)	When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license shall be issued by the county commission to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
(1)	The applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, arrest record or reputation in any community in which he has resided indicates he is not likely to operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; 
(2)	The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony; 
(3)	The applicant is an official or employee of the county; 
(4)	The applicant is a person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation where any manager, partner, officer, or director thereof has been convicted of or pled guilty to any felony; 
(5)	An application which is for an applicant with any of the above convictions shall be automatically denied by the director. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.090) 
Sec. 6-30. - Building and location requirements. 
(a)	No license shall be issued for a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the county commission because of traffic congestion, or general character of the neighborhood, or because of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
(b)	No license shall issue for a location within an area where, in the judgment and discretion of the county commission, the number of malt beverage or wine licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(c)	No license shall issue for a location at which the operation of such a licensed business would violate regulations of the county. 
(d)	No license shall issue for a location where a previous license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the county commission, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a licensed business at such a location indicate that it is not in the interests of public health, safety, welfare, or morals that the sale of malt beverages or wines be permitted at such a location. 
(e)	No license shall issue for a location where it would violate state or local law, regulations or resolutions. 
(f)	No license shall issue for a location where the main entrance of the main structure of the business is located within 500 feet of the main entrance of the main structure of any school or church as measured in a straight line between the two structures. The word "school" shall include kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, day cares licensed for more than 20 students, colleges and other educational institutions whether public or private; provided, however, this provision shall not apply where it would prohibit the renewal of an alcoholic beverage license for the sale of malt beverages and wine at a location where a license holder had been granted a license under the terms of any prior county resolution relating to the sale of malt beverages and wines. In the event a school or church subsequently locates within 500 feet of licensed premises, this provision shall not be applicable under such circumstances and such an event would not cause a license holder to be in violation of this provision or prohibit the renewal of a license. In such cases, the license may be renewed by the same license holder for the same place of business as long as all of the other provisions of this chapter are complied with. No license shall issue for any location in which the licensed premises contain a drive-in window for the sale of malt beverages and wine. 
(g)	The licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by authorized personnel of the county. 
(h)	Consumption on the premises licenses shall be issued only to restaurants with a minimum seating capacity of 60 individuals, at all times, and nonprofit private clubs and veterans' organizations and public venues as defined herein, or convention venues designed to accommodate more than 750 individuals in one area as defined herein. Retail package licenses shall not be issued to restaurants and nonprofit private clubs and veterans' organizations, convention venues or any other premises. 
(i)	Licensed premises must be open for business at least seven months of each calendar year. Licensed premises may close for seasonal or remodeling reasons only. Closures due to being out of business, or change in ownership will require an application for a new license. Once the business is "closed," the license ceases to be valid and is revoked and loses its priority. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.100) 
Sec. 6-31. - Required reports and notices. 
(a)	The licensee must report to the director within five days any change in any interests in the licensee's business, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Any change in the division of the profits of the licensed business; 
(2)	Any change in the division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
(3)	Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
(4)	Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
(5)	Any change in the ownership of stock of any corporation that has an interest in the licensed business except for the sale of stock over the counter or through a recognized stock exchange; 
(6)	Any change in the local managing agent or registered agent of a corporate business licensed under this chapter. 
(b)	Since licenses shall be revoked if gross sales of food products and merchandise (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below the sum of $3,000.00 monthly and if gross sales of food products and merchandise (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below 60 percent of the combined business volume of food products and merchandise and alcoholic beverages exceeds more than 39.9 percent sold monthly for three consecutive months, commencing the fifth month after license granted a report verifying those sales is required of each license holder on or before the 20 th day of each month for the preceding month. Each licensee shall furnish to the business license director an affidavit showing the gross sales of food products and merchandise (excluding sales of malt beverages and wines), the gross sales of malt beverages and wines, and the gross sales of other merchandise for the preceding month. The business license director will furnish the form for this affidavit. The licensee must attach to the affidavit a copy of the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Report for the same period. These reports shall remain confidential. 
(c)	Copies of summaries of sales and state form ATT-122 shall be furnished to the business license director not later than the tenth day of each month by wholesale dealers selling malt beverages and wines to licensees. The report shall apply to deliveries made during the previous month. Copies of these reports shall be submitted with the excise tax described in section 6-40. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.110) 
Sec. 6-32. - Hours of operation. 
(a)	The hours of sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and wine shall be 11:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No alcoholic beverage sales are permitted on Sunday, Christmas or such other days as are otherwise prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	In the event that a licensed business is open for less than the hours stated in the preceding paragraph, then sales of malt beverages and wines shall be restricted to those regular event/operational hours; however, in no event shall sales be made during hours other than described in the preceding paragraph. 
(c)	All licensed businesses for the consumption of malt beverages and wines on the premises shall remove the beverages from the area of the premises used by customers within 15 minutes after closing time for the sale of the beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.120) 
Sec. 6-33. - Advertising. 
Advertising of the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the regulations adopted by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.130) 
Sec. 6-34. - Minors. 
(a)	Any license holder, or agent or employee of a license holder, who fails to require proper identification and who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, may, at the sole discretion of the board of commissioners, be subject to the revocation or suspension of his/her license on the first offense; for a second offense, the board of commissioners may suspend the license for no less than 30 days. The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, may suspend the license for a longer period of time, or revoke the license depending upon the severity of the offense evidenced by the facts in each case, including but not limited to, consideration of prior violations of law by the license holder. In the event the board of commissioners determines a license holder and/or his/her agents and/or employees have failed to require proper identification and have sold alcoholic beverages to an underage person or persons on at least three separate occasions, then the license shall be revoked and application for a new license shall not be authorized until the expiration of 12 months following the date of revocation. 
(1)	All persons seeking to purchase alcoholic beverages within the unincorporated area of the county (regardless of their apparent age) shall be required to provide "proper identification" showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. "Proper identification" as defined for purposes of this subsection means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification and, driver's license and/or certified birth certificate. 
(2)	Any license holder, agent or employee of any license holder, who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years, without requiring proper identification as that term is defined in subsection (1) above, shall, upon first conviction thereof, be sentenced to a mandatory sentence of a minimum of one weekend (48 hours) in confinement and a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than allowed by § 1.50.020. Subsequent violations and convictions shall be punished as provided by section 6-43 of this Code. 
(b)	License holders may not allow a person under 18 years of age to deliver malt beverages or wine to any patron. 
(c)	No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, or otherwise procure for or furnish to a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as defined by state law, any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes upon the written prescription of a duly licensed physician under the laws of the state. 
(d)	It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever in violation of this chapter or applicable laws. 
(e)	It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverage or wine as defined herein in the county outside of any municipalities. 
(f)	It shall not be considered a violation of this chapter for a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverage or wine if such person is at the time bona fidely acting for and on behalf of law enforcement agencies conducting investigations of license holders and/or their employees. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.140) 
Sec. 6-35. - Gross sales requirement. 
(a)	Consumption on the premises licenses shall be revoked if gross sales of food products and merchandise (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below the sum of $3,000.00 monthly and if gross sales of food products and merchandise (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below 60 percent of the combined business volume of food products, merchandise and alcoholic beverages sold monthly for three consecutive months, commencing with the fifth month of operations. 
(b)	On or before the 20 th day of each month, each retail and consumption licensee shall furnish to the business license director an affidavit showing the gross sales of food products and merchandise (excluding sales of malt beverages and wine), the gross sales of malt beverages and wines, and the gross sale of other merchandise for the preceding month. This affidavit shall be on a form furnished by the business license department. The licensee shall attach a copy of the Georgia Sales and Use Report for the same period to his affidavit. 
(c)	These reports shall remain confidential. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.150) 
Sec. 6-36. - Sale on Sunday, Christmas Day, and election day. 
(a)	Except as specifically authorized by law, no person knowingly and intentionally shall sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages on Sundays or Christmas Day. 
(b)	Alcoholic beverages are authorized to be sold on any election day as defined herein. 
(c)	All licensees who open their place of business on Sunday for purposes other than the sale of alcoholic beverages shall post signs at all locations where alcoholic beverages are displayed and at each check out place stating in one-inch block capital letters: "NO SUNDAY SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES." 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.160) 
Sec. 6-37. - Sale, dispensing and miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)	License holders may not sell malt beverages or wines on the licensed premises to any person who is in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)	License holders shall not permit any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the licensed premises. 
(c)	License holders may not sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic or malt beverages and wines which a license holder is not authorized to sell under his license. The license holder shall not allow "brown bagging" on the licensed premises. 
(d)	Malt beverages or wines may not be sold or offered for sale through vending machines on the licensed premises. 
(e)	Deliveries of malt beverages and wines to the licensed premises may be made only by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer. 
(f)	No license holder shall accept delivery of malt beverages and wines from any wholesale dealer unless the wholesale dealer has fully complied with the state laws regulating and taxing the sale of such beverages at wholesale. 
(g)	No consumption license holder shall deliver malt beverages and wines at any location other than the licensed premises. 
(h)	All licensees shall store all malt beverages and wines in their possession only on the premises for which the license was issued. 
(i)	Every license holder shall have available on the licensed premises a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance with the ordinance from which this chapter derives by all persons on the premises. 
(j)	In any case of discrepancies, as to fees or requirements, the higher standard shall apply. 
(k)	No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises, upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at that place of business or elsewhere unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter. "Brown bagging" shall not be permitted in any restaurant located within the unincorporated area of Fannin County. 
(l)	No establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave those premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.170) 
Sec. 6-38. - Grounds for revocation or suspension of license. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a malt beverage and wine license. The existence of such grounds shall be determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, to wit: 
(a)	Violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors, or of any resolution or ordinance of the county, other than traffic violations. 
(b)	The failure of the licensee or his employees to report promptly to the sheriff's department any violation of law, regulation, county resolution or breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring on the premises. 
(c)	Any conduct on the part of the licensee or his employees contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(d)	Operating or conducting a business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(e)	The violation of any state or federal law or regulation, municipal ordinance, or county resolution or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic and malt beverages and wines. This ground specifically includes any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(f)	The violation by the licensee of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
(g)	The violation by the licensee of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale of pornographic materials. 
(h)	Failure of the licensee to furnish to the business license director any report required by this chapter or any report requested in writing by the director. 
(i)	Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who had an alcoholic beverage license revoked by any jurisdiction for violation of its laws or rules within a period of five years immediately preceding the filing of an application for a license under this chapter. 
(j)	Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude. 
(k)	Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years from date of conviction. 
(l)	Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has violated the provisions of this chapter or any law of the United States or any state law pertaining to the sale of malt beverages, wines or alcoholic beverages within the past five years from date of conviction. 
(m)	The conviction of the license holder or his employee(s) for driving under the influence within the past five years from date of conviction. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.180) 
Sec. 6-39. - Hearing on revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)	A license holder shall be entitled to a hearing by the board of commissioners concerning any alleged violation which could lead to revocation or suspension of the license. 
(b)	Upon the report of any violation of this chapter by the license holder or agents to the board of commissioners, the business license director shall give notice to the registered agent in writing that the managing agent shall show cause before the commission why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(c)	A written notice from the director shall specify the time and place for the hearing, which shall be not less than three days nor more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice. 
(d)	The board of commissioners shall have the power to suspend any license issued under this chapter for a period of time not to exceed 14 days pending the hearing before the board of commissioners on the question of whether or not the license shall be further suspended or revoked for cause. 
(e)	At the hearing the licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(f)	The board of commissioners shall hear relevant evidence as to the alleged violation of the chapter. 
(g)	The hearing need not be at a regular meeting of the commission but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
(h)	The decision of the board of commissioners shall be by majority vote of the members present at the hearing; provided, however, three members must concur to pass any order. 
(i)	Within three days from the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall render a decision in writing and furnish a copy of the decision to the registered agent. A decision of the board shall be effective immediately, whether or not the licensee, managing agent, or registered agent can be personally served with a written copy of the decision. 
(j)	Except as otherwise provided herein, a licensee who has had his license revoked may reapply for a license after 30 days have passed from the effective date of the revocation. Such a reapplication shall conform with all procedural requirements applicable to a new application. The board of commissioners shall consider all matters relevant to the application, including the previous revocation. 
(k)	If the sheriff of Fannin County shall find that a business holding a license under this chapter is in violation of a law of the State of Georgia, or in violation of a law or resolution of Fannin County, and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of Fannin County, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the license to the business license director on the next working day. The chairman of the board shall then schedule a special hearing of the board to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the business license director received the license from the sheriff. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.190) 
Sec. 6-40. - Excise taxes. 
(a)	There is levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages outside municipalities in the county an excise tax in the following amounts: 
(1)	Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in and from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)	Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)	There is levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling wine outside municipalities of the county an excise tax in the following amounts: 
(1)	An excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package which tax shall be $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(2)	Reserved. 
(c)	The taxes imposed by this provision shall not be levied with respect to any sales of wine or beer which are exempt from taxation by federal or state law. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.200) 
Sec. 6-41. - Use of revenue. 
(a)	Revenue produced from this chapter shall be used entirely for county uses outside municipalities. 
(b)	No revenue produced by this chapter shall be used for purposes within any municipality in the county. 
(c)	Ten percent of the revenue produced pursuant to section 6-40 shall be allocated to a library capital improvement/construction/materials account. 
(d)	Ten percent of the revenue produced pursuant to section 6-40 shall be allocated to recreation. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.210) 
Sec. 6-42. - Distribution of required forms. 
(a)	Any forms required by this chapter shall be printed by the county and furnished to applicants and license holders. 
(b)	License forms shall be printed by the county and signed by the person in charge of issuing licenses for the county. 
(c)	A copy of this chapter shall be furnished to each license holder by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.220) 
Sec. 6-43. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or state court of Fannin County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the by law for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.230) 
Sec. 6-44. - Additional remedies. 
In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.240) 
Sec. 6-45. - Prohibited activities. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in division 1 of this chapter, the following is strictly prohibited under the terms of this chapter: 
(a)	No person, firm or corporation owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter shall permit any person to drink any wine or malt beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any given date and 11:00 a.m. 
(b)	No person shall drink any wine or malt beverage or (any other alcoholic beverage) while upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places of the county, upon or within any vehicle upon the premises or in any adjacent parking area of any business establishment holding a license under this chapter. 
(c)	Curb service for consumption on the premises licensees under this chapter or delivery of any alcoholic beverages off the licensed premises, other than by wholesalers licensed by the state, is prohibited. 
(d)	Drive-in service windows at premises licensed under this chapter are prohibited. 
(e)	No bars as defined in this chapter shall be allowed within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(f)	No lounges separate from a restaurant shall be allowed within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(g)	No retail sales of packaged wine, malt beverage or distilled spirits of any type (with the exception of farm wineries hereinafter addressed) shall be allowed in the unincorporated areas of Fannin County. 
(h)	Lewd dancing prohibited. No licensee under this division shall permit professional belly dancers, strip dancing, exotic dancing or any exhibitions of any like kind by whatever name called in connection with the operation of a restaurant, lounge or private club. Neither shall any licensee sponsor or allow on its premises, any type of lewd dancing contest or exhibition by its patrons. This shall include activities such as a wet t-shirt contest. 
(i)	Dangerous weapons prohibited. 
(1)	No person, either employee or patron, shall have on his person any firearm or other dangerous weapon while on any premises licensed under this chapter. 
(2)	It shall be the responsibility of the owners, operators, managers and their employees to immediately report all violations of this section to the police department. Failure to report these violations shall be a violation of this section. 
(3)	This section shall not apply to county law enforcement officers 
(j)	Happy hour promotions. 
(1)	All on-premises licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
a.	Serving multiple drinks for a single price or offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. 
b.	Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. 
c.	Serving alcoholic beverages by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
d.	Offering free drinks or reduced-price drinks to any segment of the population for any period of time as an inducement to patronize the premises. 
e.	Selling alcoholic beverages for less than half the normal retail price, or selling alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes for less than the normal retail price. 
f.	Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes, provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business and the usual, customary or established retail price for such drinks shall not be reduced. 
g.	Using coupons or other special promotional items as an inducement to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
h.	Sponsoring, conducting or allowing contests or other promotions which have as their primary purpose increasing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
i.	Offering or delivering any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. 
j.	Offering alcoholic beverages under any special pricing or promotion of any nature whatsoever after 7:00 p.m. 
(2)	This section shall not apply to private functions not open to the public. The term "private function not open to the public" shall mean any function wherein the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm or organization for a set period of time for valuable consideration. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.250) 
Sec. 6-46. - Modification and amendment. 
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the governing authority to amend or modify the same so as to provide for additional licenses and to make modifications to the fee structure or any other provision herein. However, in no event will the same be modified more than once per calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 1.20) 
Sec. 6-47. - Severability. 
If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of this chapter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or if a provision of any part of this chapter is applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances in such a manner as to be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then any such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this chapter not held to be invalid and the application of this chapter to other circumstances shall not be held to be invalid. The Fannin County board of commissioners hereby declares the intent of the Fannin County board of commissioners is to provide for separable and divisible parts, and the Fannin County board of commissioners hereby adopts any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.080) 
Sec. 6-48. - Repealer. 
All resolutions or ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the terms of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.090) 
Secs. 6-49—6-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FARM WINERIES 

Sec. 6-71. - Farm wineries. 
Farm wineries shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.010) 
Sec. 6-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner shall have the meaning set forth and further defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(5). 
Farm winery shall have the meaning set forth and further defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(a)(1). 
Tasting room shall have the meaning set forth and further defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.020) 
Sec. 6-73. - Farm wineries lawful in unincorporated areas. 
Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, farm wineries shall be lawful in the unincorporated area of Fannin County, Georgia and shall be governed by this chapter in conjunction with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, et seq. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.030) 
Sec. 6-74. - Lawful activities permitted by farm wineries. 
A farm winery may conduct all of the lawful activities permitted unto it by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, et seq. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a farm winery may sell at retail samples of its wine and samples of the wine of any other Georgia farm winery licensee in tasting rooms on the premises of the winery. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.040) 
Sec. 6-75. - Licensee requirements and qualifications. 
A farm winery shall obtain and have a license as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, et seq. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.050) 
Sec. 6-76. - Notice requirements. 
Any farm winery in the unincorporated area of Fannin County, Georgia that has been duly licensed under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 shall provide written notice to the office of the commissioner of Fannin County of its intention to commence operations in the county as required by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40(a). 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.060) 
Sec. 6-77. - Sunday sales by farm wineries. 
Sunday sales shall be governed by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. 
(Ord. of 12-23-2008, § 2.070) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot defacto approach prohibition. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: Reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 10-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)	Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)	Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult store means a commercial establishment or other establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade (20 percent or more) or derives a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental for any form of consideration of any instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products, article or articles which are designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with specified sexual activities as defined herein, or which are sold or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion; or an assembly of persons united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 10-23. - Regulations. 
(a)	Adult entertainment establishment regulations are as follows: 
(1)	License required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this article, without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)	Maintenance and retention of employee information. An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed. 
(3)	Employing persons under 18 years of age. No adult entertainment establishment applicant shall employ or contract with a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)	Admitting persons under 18 years of age. No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(5)	Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this article, shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. 
(6)	Prohibited activities. No employee or agent of any adult entertainment establishment shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or any other employee or agent of any adult entertainment establishment. Nor shall the manager or owner of the adult entertainment establishment allow such activity. 
(b)	If any portion of this section or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 10-24. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or allow the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 10-25. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 10-26. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-8) 
Sec. 10-27. - Location. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is used for multifamily or single-family purposes. 
(2)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. 
(3)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)	Within 50 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-9) 
Sec. 10-28. - Qualifications for employees. 
Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined herein. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-10(a)) 
Sec. 10-29. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as set forth hereinafter. 
(b)	Violations of this article shall also be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the adult entertainment establishment license issued hereunder after a hearing before the administrative hearing officer pursuant to the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-19) 
Sec. 10-30. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult business establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Fannin County may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-20) 
Sec. 10-31. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity licensed under this article shall after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-21) 
Sec. 10-32. - Administrative hearing officer. 
(a)	Appointment. The administrative hearing officer shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. The initial appointment shall run until the first Monday in January 2003. Thereafter, beginning on the first Tuesday in January, all terms shall be for four years. The hearing officer shall be paid from the general fund of the county. The hearing officer shall be paid the sum of $250.00 for each hearing held. 
(b)	Duties. The duties of the administrative hearing officer shall be the hearing of all issues under the ordinances of Fannin County which would determine the granting, denial, probating, suspending or revoking of any license or permit granted under Fannin County ordinances. 
(c)	Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the hearing officer over the licenses or permits shall be in addition to and concurrent with that of the superior court of Fannin County, except that the hearing officer is specifically prohibited from awarding any punishment involving a fine and/or imprisonment. 
(d)	Procedures. Jurisdiction of and procedures for the administrative hearing officer: 
(1)	Any action against any licensee or permittee holding a license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Said action shall be brought by the Fannin County attorney, the chairman of the board of commissioners and sheriff. 
(2)	Any claim by any citizen aggrieved by an administrative decision made by the Fannin County board of commissioners authorized to make such decisions. 
(3)	Any hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be on a date and time certain which shall be reflected on the summons issued by the attorney or by the county clerk on behalf of any aggrieved citizen. 
(4)	The summons shall contain a date and time certain and shall be served on the responding party more than five days before any scheduled hearing. The summons shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service by an authorized person in the Fannin County sheriff's department. 
(5)	The administrative hearing officer shall have the authority to hear evidence and subpoena witnesses on behalf of Fannin County or the aggrieved citizen and shall generally conduct the hearings in accordance with the requirements of due process as required by the United States Constitution and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. The administrative hearing officer shall entertain any and all evidence relevant to the matter without regard to evidentiary rules regarding hearsay. 
(6)	The standard of review for a citizen aggrieved by an administrative decision is arbitrary and capricious. 
(7)	The standard for an action against a licensee or permittee is preponderance of the evidence. 
(8)	The administrative hearing officer may promulgate any rules of procedure not in conflict with this chapter or other law. 
(9)	Whenever, from any cause, the administrative hearing officer is unable to be in attendance, or it should appear that he/she is disqualified in any case, it shall be the duty of the administrative hearing officer to appoint a hearing officer pro hac vice to preside over the hearing in place and stead of the administrative hearing officer, and all actions of the appointee shall be binding as if performed by the administrative hearing officer. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 2-1-1) 
Secs. 10-33—10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-51. - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation or other entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within Fannin County any of the adult entertainment establishments, as defined in this article, without an adult entertainment establishment license so to do. No adult entertainment establishment license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 10-52. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult video store, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, encounter center or rap establishment, escort bureau or introduction service, adult business, adult store, adult dancing establishment or erotic dance establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required under this article, which adult entertainment establishment license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 10-53. - Application. 
(a)	Not authorization to conduct adult entertainment establishment. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)	Contents. Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The applicant's full true name. 
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)	Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(4)	Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation or other entity shall be furnished. 
(5)	The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other county/city, state or territory under license, has had such license for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(7)	If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors (if the applicant is a corporation) have been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)	If the applicant is a person, corporation, partnership or other entity doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit (if any), and current annual report filed with the Georgia secretary of state. 
(9)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The finance director shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(10)	Address of the premises to be regulated. 
(11)	Whether the premises are owned or rented by the applicant. 
(12)	A certified plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing that the location of the proposed premises complies with the provisions contained herein, which provide that no adult business or use restricted shall be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is used for multifamily or single-family purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 5,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located or within 50 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages. 
(13)	Additional information as may be required to adequately review the application. 
(14)	Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.	The individual, if the applicant is an individual; 
b.	The manager or general partner, if by a partnership; 
c.	The president of the corporation, if a corporation; 
d.	The chief administrative official, if any other entity, organization or association. 
(c)	Investigation. The Fannin County board of tax assessors shall refer the application to the sheriff's department of Fannin County for investigation; the sheriff's department shall have up to 21 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after an investigative report by the sheriff is furnished to the board of tax assessors, the board of tax assessors shall grant the adult entertainment establishment license if the majority of the board finds: 
(1)	The required fee has been paid; 
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)	The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)	The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his/her application; 
(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime, drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses; 
(6)	The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license, or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this county or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all distance laws; 
(8)	The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(9)	That the applicant, his/her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)	That on the date the business, for which an adult entertainment establishment license is required, commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)	That the proposed premises shall not be located within: 
a.	One thousand feet of any parcel of land which is for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; 
b.	One thousand feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; or 
c.	Fifty feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, §§ 1-1-10(b), 1-1-12, 1-1-13) 
Sec. 10-54. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
No adult entertainment establishment license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)	Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)	Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character; 
(4)	Any partnership, association, or other entity, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character; 
(5)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, State of Georgia or Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-14) 
Sec. 10-55. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the board of tax assessors, following review of the application and receipt of the investigative report from the sheriff department, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth herein, it shall notify the applicant of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report and written reason for the denial to the applicant by certified mail. Any applicant who is denied an adult entertainment establishment license may appeal such denial to the administrative hearing officer pursuant to the provisions hereinafter set forth by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the board of tax assessors. Said notice shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia. A hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-15) 
Sec. 10-56. - Renewal. 
(a)	Requirements. An adult entertainment establishment license may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the renewal application contains the same information required in the original application and that applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. 
(b)	Fee. The renewal fee of $500.00 for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be based on an amount needed to defray the costs of regulating adult entertainment establishments and enforcement of this article. 
(c)	Applications. Renewal applications shall be due by November 1 of the calendar year prior to the year for which such license is requested. 
(d)	License period. The adult entertainment establishment license shall be for a calendar year period or for a remainder of a calendar year if issued after January 1 of any calendar year. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-16) 
Sec. 10-57. - Transferability. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the applicant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such adult entertainment establishment license, and in such case, the adult entertainment establishment license upon notification to the chairman of the Fannin County board of commissioners, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an adult entertainment establishment license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned or at such time as the corporation is dissolved, be it either voluntarily or involuntarily. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-17) 
Sec. 10-58. - Change of location or name. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its adult entertainment establishment license until a new application pursuant to the provisions of this article has been filed with the board of tax assessors and approval has been obtained from the board of tax assessors. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained herein, have been met. 
(b)	No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his/her name and the name of the business as specified on his/her adult entertainment establishment license. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-18) 
Sec. 10-59. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)	The Sheriff of Fannin County, Georgia, shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event the sheriff of Fannin County seeks to suspend or to revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, the sheriff shall give written notice to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations upon which the suspension or revocation is based, shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall be served upon the licensee by certified mail or by personal service at least five days prior to the time set for the hearing before the administrative hearing officer as provided for herein. 
(b)	The sheriff shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any of one or more of the following: 
(1)	A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original or renewal application process; 
(2)	A licensee has knowingly allowed the possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
(3)	A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of Fannin County or a violation of any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; 
(4)	A licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article; 
(5)	A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol related crime by the State of Georgia or by Fannin County regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and 
(6)	A licensee fails to pay any fee, tax, fine, or other amount of money due to Fannin County under this article or any other taxing ordinance of Fannin County. 
(c)	In the event the sheriff of Fannin County shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the sheriff. Provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue in business until that date of the hearing scheduled pursuant to procedure hereinafter set forth. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing the administrative hearing officer shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on upholding, denying or modifying the suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2002, § 1-1-22) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-28-2008, §§ 1-1—1-19, adopted Oct. 28, 2008, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 14-19—14-39, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 1-1-2005, §§ 1—22. 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means an animal which has been knowingly and intentionally placed or left unattended or uncared for on either public or private property without the express permission of the owner, and in addition, any animal that has been knowingly and intentionally left unattended on or within the property of the owner without proper food and water for a period of time in excess of 36 hours. 
Animal means a dog, cat, or other pet or domesticated animal, actually in, or intended to be in, the custody and control of an owner (see definition of owner,) and does not include any wild animal or horse, goat, pig, or any livestock, unless specifically mentioned. The term "domesticated animal" shall have the same meaning as "animal." 
Animal control officer means an individual selected by the commissioner pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 to aid in the administration and enforcement of this chapter and all applicable state laws. 
Animal control means Fannin County Animal Control, and its officers and employees. 
At large means an animal, which is off of its owner's premises and not under the restraint or control of its owner or custodian. 
Dangerous animal means an animal that, according to the records of an appropriate authority, has inflicted severe injury on a human, without provocation, on public or private property; or any animal that aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans, without provocation, after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Governing authority means the Fannin County board of commissioners or other designated official. 
Humane care of animals means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter and proper food and water to an animal, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed as determined by a veterinarian or animal control officer. 
Impound means temporarily placing an animal in the care of an authorized person or shelter where the animal will receive humane care. 
Nuisance means an animal which damages private property other than its owner's property, or public property or recreation areas; or an animal which chases, molests, attacks, threatens, causes fear, or interferes with persons, vehicles or other domestic animals on public or private property. 
Owner means any person or legal entity who or which owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, cares for, feeds, maintains, has custody or control of an animal within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, cause injury or otherwise threaten the safety of humans; or any animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts injury on a person on public or private property, or chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or any animal which, according to the records of an appropriate authority, has killed a domestic animal without provocation. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal while on the owner's property securely confined, either indoors, in a securely enclosed and locked pen or within a fence. If the animal is confined in a pen or a fence, such enclosure must be suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. A pen shall have secure sides and a secure top. A fence must have all sides of sufficient height, and the bottom must be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape from over or under the fence. Any pen or fence must provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Public nuisance means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance" shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
(1)	Damages the property of anyone other than its owner. 
(2)	Attacks other domestic animals. 
(3)	Unprovoked, aggressively threatens pedestrians or passersby. 
(4)	Has been found by an officer of the department of animal control to be a public nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare, or safety. 
(5)	Is found sick, dead, or injured on public property. 
Records of an appropriate authority means the records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, animal control agency, county board of health, federal, state or local court, or animal control officer. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring extensive sutures or surgery, or cosmetic surgery, or a physical injury that results in death. 
Shelter means any facility operated by or under contract for the state, a county, a municipal corporation or any other political subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
Sterilized, sterilization means permanent removal of an animal's reproductive organs. 
Working dog means and includes, but is not limited to, seeing eye dogs; certified guard dogs; working cattle dogs; dogs whose primary function is hunting; and dogs which compete in conformation, agility or obedience competitions. 
Vaccination means a protection against rabies by inoculation with anti-rabies vaccine given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum or one year and be administered, per state law, by a licensed veterinarian. 
The terms "dangerous animal" and "potentially dangerous animal," as defined in herein, shall not include the following: 
(1)	An animal that inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out his official duties; and 
(2)	An animal that inflicts an injury upon a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 14-20. - Penalties. 
Any owner whose animal is found to be in violation of any of the provisions herein may be cited by an animal control or county law enforcement officer. 
Private citizens who are aware of violations of the provisions of this article may notify an animal control or county law enforcement officer for further investigation. Any owner found guilty of violating this article may be fined as provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 14-21. - Duties of animal owners and citizens. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of an animal within the county to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people and property from injuries and damage which might result from the animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. Every animal shall be restrained or controlled so as to prevent it from chasing vehicles or chasing, menacing, or attacking persons or other animals. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of all animal owners to prevent their animals from constituting a nuisance. 
(c)	If the owner of an animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	Any person within the jurisdiction of the county who is aware of any animal bite inflicted upon a human by any animal, including any wild animal, shall be required to report the bite to the animal control officer or a public health official pursuant to state law. 
(e)	It is advised that every animal owner notify animal control as soon as an animal is determined to be missing so as to ensure proper return of animal if found. Additionally, animal owners who find their animal, which was reported missing, are to immediately notify animal control of recovery. 
(f)	It shall be the duty of any animal owner or person residing with an animal owner to respond within 24 hours, or no later than 10:00 a.m. of the next business day, whichever is later, to a notice or request for information from animal control left or posted at the premises on or near where an animal is living or kept. The notice, which shall not be a citation, shall be posted prominently in full view, or left with an adult on the premises, may be delivered as part of an investigation, as the result of a complaint, or part of a follow-up, and requires a response, either in person or by telephone. If the response is by telephone, any message left must provide a return number or other reliable way to make contact. Each notice that is ignored shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)	It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any tracking collar or identification from any animal other than the person's own animal. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 3) 
Sec. 14-22. - Animal control officer. 
(a)	The governing authority shall either (1) appoint, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), one or more animal control officers, who shall serve at the pleasure of the governing authority, and whose compensation shall be established from time to time by the governing authority; or (2) may delegate responsibility for animal control to the Fannin County sheriff's office which shall then appoint, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), one or more animal control officers, and whose compensation shall be established from time to time by the Fannin County sheriff. 
(b)	The primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control officer who may call upon such other officers or employees of any law enforcement agency as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. The animal control officer shall notify the appropriate agency of any known violation of state enforced regulations or laws. 
(c)	The animal control officer shall be authorized to make whatever inquiry or investigation is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)	The animal control officer is authorized to ascertain that all animals of proper age, in which the officer comes into contact with during the normal course of their duties, are vaccinated against rabies with a current vaccination, and that all dogs are properly tagged or have an appropriate certificate of vaccination. 
(e)	All law enforcement agencies within the jurisdiction of the governing authority shall cooperate with the animal control officer in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)	It shall be a violation of this chapter, for any person to interfere with the animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 4) 
Sec. 14-23. - Enforcement contract. 
The board of commissioners is hereby authorized to negotiate and execute a contract with the board of health of the county to effectuate an identical plan for animal control of the county and further to provide that the department of animal control shall be authorized to enforce the animal control ordinance in other municipalities within the county, if such an agreement is entered into between the county and said municipality. The department agent shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 5) 
Sec. 14-24. - Vaccinations. 
(a)	Any dog, cat or ferret, which is more than three months of age, within the jurisdiction of the Fannin County board of commissioners must have a valid and current rabies vaccination which shall have been administered by a licensed veterinarian. The burden shall be on the owner to provide verifiable proof of vaccination to animal control. Animals being kept in a shelter shall be exempt from the requirement of a rabies vaccination for up to 30 days. 
The requirements of this subsection include the need for up-to-date revaccinations. An animal owner found in violation of this subsection shall be required to comply with this subsection within seven days, or the animal control officer is hereby authorized to impound the animal and have the animal vaccinated. Any animal impounded under this section shall not be released to the owner unless and until all of the requirements of this chapter are met. 
(b)	An owner of an animal which bites or scratches a human being with force sufficient to break the integrity of the skin shall be subject to impoundment, and shall be subject to citation if found either in violation of the requirement to have a current rabies vaccination, or in violation of quarantine requirements, and may be further subject to additional requirements and penalties pursuant to other provisions of this chapter as well as all Georgia state quarantine requirements. 
(c)	It is unlawful for anyone (other than a licensed veterinarian or animal control) to kill or release any animal under observation for rabies or suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal which has bitten a human being, or to remove such animal from the county without written permission from animal control and the director of public health. 
(d)	All owners of animals vaccinated against rabies shall obtain and keep available for each animal owned a valid certificate of vaccination, along with a rabies tag indicating the year it was issued. It is strongly recommended that the tag be securely fastened to a collar on the dog for which it was issued. It is assumed that an animal has not had a rabies vaccination if proof cannot be provided for the administration of such vaccination by either tag or certificate. 
(e)	All dog owners are strongly encouraged to affix identification to their animals, either on the dog's collar or by other means such as microchip, and such identification shall be sufficient to trace or locate the dog's owner. This recommendation exists to facilitate proper and timely return of missing dogs to their rightful owners. 
(f)	Any dog, cat or ferret that has been in an animal shelter is required to obtain a current rabies vaccination and be sterilized upon release for adoption. Return of owned animals requires current rabies vaccination and recommendation of sterilization. If the dog, cat or ferret is less than three months of age, the animal shelter shall require the owner to fulfill the requirement after animal has reached appropriate age. 
(g)	It is specifically prohibited within the jurisdiction of the Fannin County board of commissioners for an individual to impound for quarantine purposes any animal that the Fannin County board of health or the state board of health requires to be quarantined for potential rabies on private property. 
Any animal required to be quarantined shall be quarantined with either a veterinarian, state licensed facility, or health department approved location. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 6) 
Sec. 14-25. - Abandonment, cruelty, mistreatment and abuse. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or abuse, injure, neglect, torture, torment, maim, mutilate, beat, wound, poison or kill an animal, or to confine or tether an animal in an unsafe or non-humane manner, or to confine an animal without sufficient ventilation and protection from extreme temperatures. The allowance of any condition, or failure to provide any care, which shall endanger an animal's health shall constitute abuse. This shall also include having a number of animals that exceeds an owner's ability to provide proper care and shelter in the opinion of animal control or a licensed veterinarian, and failure to provide adequate food and water, failure to obtain needed veterinary care to relieve pain and suffering, failure to appropriately treat an animal for parasitic infestations, and failure to provide humane care. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for anyone to abandon any animal, owned by or in the possession, including temporary possession, of any person. Such abandonment shall include leaving or putting out any animal, whether the animal is healthy, sick, injured, or diseased, on any private or public property, or aiding or permitting such leaving or putting out. It shall be unlawful for anyone to abandon any dead animal on any private or public property, or to fail to bury or otherwise properly dispose of the carcass within 24 hours after an animal's death in accordance with applicable state and county health regulations. 
(c)	Animals may be confined by a chain, tether or combination thereof so long as it is of appropriate length, at the determination of an animal control officer, to permit the animal to reach shade, shelter, and a supply of fresh water and food. Animals confined by chain or fenced area shall be provided shelter which shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	The housing facilities shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury, to contain the animal, and to protect the animal from extreme temperatures or inclement weather conditions. 
(2)	Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained to provide sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of movement. 
(3)	Minimum standards of sanitation necessary to provide humanely clean conditions for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to remove excretions and other waste materials, dirt and trash to minimize health hazards. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to buy, trade, own, possess, keep, sell or train any animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting; or to build, make, maintain or keep a pit, or allow a pit to be built, for the purpose of an exhibition of animal fighting; or, in any manner, to encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal fighting; or charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participant or be present as a spectator to any exhibition of animal fighting. 
(e)	Upon a finding of extreme circumstances determined in conjunction with a veterinarian and applicable law enforcement officer, animal control may immediately impound any abandoned, mistreated or abused animals as described in this section and shall deal with the animal in accordance with animal control regulations and the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)	A person who commits any offense of abandonment, cruelty, mistreatment or abuse as delineated in the above provisions shall be subject to a citation in addition to the criminal penalties imposed by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. The animal shall be immediately evaluated by a veterinarian and be impounded in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 4-11-9.2—4-11-9.6. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 7) 
Sec. 14-26. - Animals disturbing the peace. 
It is unlawful for any person to allow any animal in his possession or control to persistently or continuously bark, howl, or make noise common to their species or otherwise to disturb the peace and quiet of a generally accepted residential neighborhood or subdivision. It shall likewise be unlawful to keep or maintain such animals in such a manner as to produce noxious or offensive odors or to otherwise endanger the health and welfare of surrounding inhabitants. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 14-27. - Cleanup requirement. 
The owner of any animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excrete deposited by such animal on public or private property. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 9) 
Sec. 14-28. - Keeping of sick or diseased animals. 
It is unlawful for any person to own any animal which is seriously sick or injured without providing proper veterinary care for such animal. This section shall not be construed to include animals under active veterinary care or veterinary hospitals. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the owner of an animal that is seriously sick or injured from having the animal put down or from putting down said animal. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 10) 
Sec. 14-29. - Animal fights. 
Except for lawful hunting activity, it is unlawful for any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on, train for, attend, or own any animal for the purpose of participating in any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one or more animals are engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming, or destroying themselves or any other animal. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 11) 
Sec. 14-30. - Animals in heat. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow the animal to run at large while in heat. Such animals must be confined so as to prevent access by intact males. ("In heat" is defined as a female animal in estrus.) 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 12) 
Sec. 14-31. - Destruction of property. 
No animal shall destroy or damage private or public property. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 13) 
Sec. 14-32. - Impoundment. 
(a)	Length of time prescribed. Any non-biting animal seized and impounded under any of the provisions of this article shall be detained for a minimum period of three working days (or longer space permitting), ten days for biting animals, and if the ownership of the animal is not determined within that period, the animal can be disposed of in such a manner as the animal control department may designate. Any animal seized that is wearing identification tags shall be kept for five days, ten days for biting animals, and the animal control department shall attempt to notify the owner by phone or in writing if possible. 
(b)	Waiver of time for well animals. If at any time during the required waiting period set forth above the owner indicates to the animal control department his intention to not reclaim the animal, the balance of the waiting period shall be waived and the animal shall be disposed of pursuant to this section. 
(c)	Waiver of time for sick and threatening animals. If at any time during the required waiting period, an examination of the animal by the animal control department indicates the animal to be severely sick and/or to be a threat to the health of other animals detained in the impoundment, the balance of the waiting period shall be waived and the animal shall be disposed of pursuant to this section. At any time the animal control officer has doubt as to the health or degree of illness of the animal in question; they shall obtain consultation from a licensed veterinarian. 
(d)	Authority to kill menacing animals. If it is deemed impossible or impractical to rescue, confiscate or seize by reasonable and normal means a dangerous, injured or sick animal due to its viciousness, suffering, or other unhealthful condition, it shall be the duty of any law enforcement agency or the animal control officer to immediately and humanely destroy the animal in the field if the officer deems such destruction is necessary for the protection of the public health and safety of the citizens of the county. The animal's owner, if known, shall be liable for a reasonable fee associated with such immediate destruction of such animal. 
(e)	Seizure and quarantining of animals that have been deemed harmful by the department of animal control. If an animal has harmed any person to the extent to where the skin is either scratched or punctured, that animal shall be seized and impounded in quarantine for a period of ten working days regardless of the knowledge of the ownership of that animal and the desire of such owner to release the animal. 
(f)	Destruction of animals seized three or more times. If any animal is seized and/or impounded under any of the provisions of this chapter on three or more occasions, the animal may be destroyed at the discretion of the animal control department. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 14) 
Sec. 14-33. - Unlawful interference by third parties. 
(a)	Holding animal without consent of owner. No person shall, without the knowledge or consent of the owner, hold or retain possession of any animal which he does not own for more than 72 hours without first reporting the possession of such animal to the animal control department. 
(b)	Causing animals to be in violation of article. No person shall willfully cause an animal to be in violation of any portion of this article. 
(c)	Attack, assault, or interfere with an officer of the animal control department. It shall be unlawful for any person to attack, assault, or in any way physically or verbally threaten or interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of those duties required to enforce this article. 
(d)	Motorist to notify animal control department and render assistance. Any motor vehicle operator who knowingly strikes any animal shall immediately give notice to the animal control department or appropriate law enforcement agency if unable to identify the owner immediately. If the animal needs veterinarian assistance, the owner shall be responsible for any veterinary bills under the circumstances. 
(e)	Cruelty to animals prohibited; defense allowed. No person shall perform a cruel act on any animal nor shall any person harm, maim, or kill any animal except for the animal control department as provided under section 14-35 or attempt to do so, except that a person may: 
(1)	Defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
(2)	Kill any animal causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry. 
The method used for killing the animals shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills an animal under the circumstances described herein shall incur no liability for such death. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 15) 
Sec. 14-34. - Magistrate jurisdiction. 
The magistrate court of the county shall have jurisdiction over all alleged violations of any portion of this article and shall have all powers granted to it which are necessary and incident to the hearing and disposition of the matters brought before the court, such powers to include the authority to issue citations and summons for witnesses. The following persons have standing to file complaints for violations herein: 
(1)	Animal control officers. 
(2)	Other law enforcement officers. 
(3)	Public health officials. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 16) 
Sec. 14-35. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as it exists or may be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of Fannin County, and upon conviction shall be punished at least as provided below for each violation, in the discretion of the court, to a maximum of $1,000.00 fine and 60 days in jail, or both. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute and shall be punishable as a separate offense. 
(b)	The following minimum fines and penalties shall be imposed for violations of this chapter. A second citation for the same owner for the same offense within two years, even if for a different animal, shall subject the owner to a fine of double the amount of the first fine. In the case of a third citation for the same owner for the same offense within two years of the second offense, even if for a different animal, the fine shall be double the amount of the second fine, and the animal may be confiscated. Animal control or law enforcement officers may issue warnings for minor and non-repeat violations. Officers shall issue citations upon follow up if violations are not corrected. 

 
(c)	A citation shall be personally served upon the animal owner or the alleged violator. 
(d)	Penalties provided in this chapter are in addition to those provided under state law. All fines imposed by this chapter do not include court costs which shall be an additional amount imposed by the court and added on to each fine. 
(e)	When an animal has been confiscated or surrendered for any reason and becomes the property of animal control, it shall be within the discretion of animal control to determine the best and most humane options for disposition of the animal. Animal control policy may include surrender to another shelter, euthanasia, or adoption, and previous owners are not entitled to any further information once the animal becomes the property of animal control. 
(f)	Upon issuance of a citation for nuisance, failure to take reasonable care or an animal has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous, animal control may require that an owner take special preventative measures on a case by case basis in addition to fines and penalties, including but not limited to leash requirements, fencing, enclosures, immediate sterilization, etc. In considering whether to impose a special preventative measure, animal control is authorized to consider additional factors as aggravating circumstances such as: 
(1)	Children under 13 years of age living near or found to usually walk by or are otherwise in close proximity to the animal; 
(2)	The animal has bitten a human being or other animal; 
(3)	A dog has been trained for fighting or attack; 
(4)	The animal, without provocation, has approached a person in an apparent attitude of attack; 
(5)	The individual animal has a known propensity, reputation, or tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings, domestic animals, livestock, or other animals. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 17) 
Sec. 14-36. - Trapping. 
(a)	Upon written request by a resident of the county that a trap is needed to be placed on the resident's property to aid in the seizure of an animal, if the animal control department determines that such request is in the best interest of public safety, the animal control department may provide the resident with a trap for placement on the resident's property. If a trap is provided to the resident requesting a trap, the resident shall deposit a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. The allotted time a resident will be allowed to retain the trap shall be limited to either such time as the animal is caught or two weeks, whichever comes first. 
(b)	The resident shall also agree in writing that after the issuance of a trap and the trap is subsequently stolen, destroyed, unable to be located, or is damaged or misused in any manner, the resident shall be responsible for the replacement of such trap up to but not exceeding $300.00. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 18) 
Sec. 14-37. - Maximum limits. 
No person or household shall own, possess, harbor or keep more domesticated animals than that person or household has the physical and financial ability to appropriately care for, unless such person is a licensed pet dealer as defined under O.C.G.A. § 4-11-2. Animal control shall seek the advice of law enforcement, health department and veterinary expertise if such a situation arises. An exception, not to exceed 70 days, will be granted for weaning and placement of new litters. No person or household shall be granted more than two exceptions within a 12-month period, unless otherwise exempted or prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008, § 19) 
Secs. 14-38—14-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-67. - Purposes. 
The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, hereby enacts a county ordinance in the furtherance of its responsibilities to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia, and to regulate the keeping of wild and exotic animals within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia; to provide severability; to repeal conflicting laws, ordinances, and resolutions; to provide an effective date; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. I) 
Sec. 14-68. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "An Ordinance Regulating the keeping of Wild and Exotic Animals within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia". 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. III) 
Sec. 14-69. - Regulation of wild and exotic animals. 
(a)	The General Assembly of the State of Georgia has found and declared that it is in the public interest to insure the public health, safety, and welfare by strictly regulating in the State of Georgia, the importation, transportation, sale, transfer and possession of those wild animals which pose a possibility of: 
(1)	Being harmful competition for wildlife; 
(2)	Introducing a disease or pest harmful to wildlife; 
(3)	Causing problems enforcing laws and regulations relative to wildlife; 
(4)	Threatening wildlife or other natural resources; or 
(5)	Endangering the physical safety of human beings. 
(b)	The State of Georgia prohibits the importation, transportation, sale, transfer, and possession of wild animals unless it can be clearly demonstrated that such actions can be accomplished in a manner that does not pose unnecessary risk to Georgia's wildlife and other natural resources or to the citizens of the State of Georgia or visitors to this state. 
(c)	The State of Georgia has in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 27-5-1 through 27-5-12 set forth the requirements which must be meet prior to a wild animal being imported, transported, sold, transferred or possessed within the State of Georgia. 
(d)	Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, does hereby affirm and adopt said requirements. In addition to meeting the requirements set forth by the State of Georgia for the importation, transportation, selling, transferring or possession of a wild animal, the terms and conditions set forth in the remaining provisions of this article must be met before a wild animal can be imported, transported, sold, transferred, possessed or maintained on property located within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. IV) 
Sec. 14-70. - Wild animals for which a license or permit is required. 
(a)	The State of Georgia has listed and has the specific authority to supplement the list of wild animals to which a permit or license, or both, is required. Said list is provided in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 27-5-5. 
(b)	Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, does by the enactment of this article adopt said list as it appears in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 27-5-5, and any subsequent modifications to said list as the list of wild animals to which the balance of this article is applicable. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. V) 
Sec. 14-71. - Requirements for the importation, transportation, sale, transfer, possession or maintenance of wild animals within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(a)	Notification to Fannin County, Georgia. 
(1)	Any person, business or entity desiring to own, keep, hold, or harbor a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which said list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, shall a minimum of 90 days prior to applying for a license or permit from the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the location of such wild animal within Fannin County, Georgia, notify the Fannin County land planning development officer of said intention. 
(2)	Prior to applying for a license or permit from the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the location of a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, said person, business or entity shall provide the Fannin County land development officer with a survey of the property that is to be the location of the confinement of the subject animals, indicating the minimum acreage as set forth hereunder. 
(3)	Prior to applying for a license or permit from the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the location of wild animals as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, said person, business or entity shall provide the Fannin County land development officer with a written statement as to the species to be maintained on said property and the anticipated number of animals to be maintained on said property. 
(b)	Maximum number of animals. The State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources sets forth, in its regulations, standards for the space requirement for wild animals set forth in Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 27-5-5. Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, hereby affirms said standards. No facility located within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia, shall be allowed to maintain animals in a number greater than that permitted by the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(c)	License requirements. A person, business or entity desiring to own, keep, hold, or harbor a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, must meet the licensing requirements of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 27-5-4. 
(d)	Certificate of health. Prior to being transported into Fannin County, Georgia, any person, business or entity desiring to own, keep, hold or harbor a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, must furnish the animal control officer for Fannin County, Georgia, with a certificate of health for said animal. Said certificate of health must indicate that the animal is not currently a carrier for any disease communicable to humans or to other animals. Said certificate must be issued by a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed to work with the species in question. 
(e)	Animal maintenance. Any person, business or entity desiring to own, keep, hold, or harbor a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which said list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, must meet the specifications for humane handling, care, confinement, and transportation of wild animals as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 27-5-6. 
(f)	Disposal of animal excreta. Any person, business or entity desiring to own, keep, hold or harbor a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, must insure that any excreta is disposed of in a manner that does not violate any provisions of the United States Environmental Protection Agency's clean drinking water standards, and/or such similar statues or regulations. 
(g)	Confinement of wild animals. Any person, business or entity desiring to own, keep, hold or harbor a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, must erect such confinement facilities as directed by the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide for the safety of the general public as well as for the safety of the permitted animal. 
(h)	Minimum acreage. In order to provide for the welfare of adjacent property owners, to insure privacy, and to avoid any claim of nuisance, no person, business, or entity shall be authorized to own, keep, hold or harbor animals or wild animals as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which said list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, on a parcel or tract of land containing not less than 100 acres. 
(i)	Minimum setback to adjacent property owners. 
(1)	In order to provide for the welfare of adjacent property owners, to insure privacy, and to avoid any claim of nuisance, no facility designed for the confinement of a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which said list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, shall be located within 500 feet of the property line between the property (a minimum of 100 acres) on which the facility is to be housed and any adjacent property owner. 
(2)	A minimum of 100 feet between the adjacent property owner and the subject parcel shall be maintained in its natural vegetative state. 
(3)	For the purpose of establishing the commencement point from which setbacks should be calculated, the location of the outer barrier or fence for the area in which the subject wild animal is normally housed shall be said point. Boundary fences, perimeter fences or similar such devices can be located within the minimum setback area. 
(j)	Waiver by adjacent property owners. 
(1)	This article notwithstanding, any adjacent property owner shall be entitled to waive the setback requirement of this article. 
(2)	Said waiver or setback must be permanent and perpetual in nature, and must be binding on the heir, executors, successors and assigns of any person claiming under, by or through the person or entity executing the waiver of setback. 
(3)	Said waiver must be executed in such a format that meets the requirements for recordation on the deed records of Fannin County, Georgia, as maintained in the office of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia. 
(4)	Said waiver must be recorded on the deed records of Fannin County, Georgia, as maintained in the office of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia and cross referenced against the source of title for the adjacent property owner who is waiving the setback requirements of subsection (i) of this section. 
(5)	In the event that any adjacent property owner electing to execute a waiver of setback has a security interest in said property held by a third party, the consent of said third party must be obtained and recorded in accordance with the provisions of subsection (i)(4) of this section in order to constitute a valid release from the within required setback requirements. 
(k)	Requirements of the Fannin County, Georgia, land development ordinance (chapter 42 of this Code). Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to exclude any person, business or entity which shall be engaged in land disturbing activity from meeting the requirements of the applicable ordinances of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. VI) 
Sec. 14-72. - Liability insurance. 
Liability insurance is required for the possession of any wild animal that is classified as being inherently dangerous to people in subsection (a) of the Official Code of Georgia section 27-5-5 or as required by regulation of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. A minimum of 15 days prior to possessing any wild animal that is classified as being inherently dangerous to people in subsection (a) of the Official Code of Georgia section 27-5-5 or as required by regulation of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, any person, business or entity desiring to own, maintain, keep or possess such animal must provide proof of liability insurance from a company licensed to do business in this state. Said insurance must be maintained in force and effect and cover claims for injury or damage to persons or property in an amount equal to $100,000.00 for each inherently dangerous animal up to a maximum of $1,000,000.00. Liability insurance is not required for animals not considered by the State of Georgia as inherently dangerous to people. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. VII) 
Sec. 14-73. - Exhibition exception. 
(a)	Permitted purposes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prevent the displaying of wild or exotic animals within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia, in conjunction with an educational program, fair, circus, or animal exhibition, or a similar such program. 
(b)	License requirements. Any person, business or entity bringing a wild or exotic animal into Fannin County, Georgia, in conjunction with an educational program, fair, circus, or animal exhibition or similar program shall be the holder of such licenses or permits as may from time to time be required by the department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. VIII) 
Sec. 14-74. - Rehabilitation exception. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prevent an individual or organization from keeping or maintaining not more than three wild or exotic animals, which weigh not more than 50 pounds each, within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, for a period not to exceed 30 days in conjunction with the rehabilitation of an injured animal. It being the intention of this section to allow for the care of an otherwise wild animal, with the goal of reintroducing said animal to its natural habitat. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. IX) 
Sec. 14-75. - Prohibition on biomedical research. 
Absolutely no animal will be allowed to be owned, kept, held, harbored or maintained within Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, which has ever been involved in any manner in any biomedical research involving a contagious or communicable disease that is still present (in an active or dormant form) in said animal. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. X) 
Sec. 14-76. - County approval and variances. 
(a)	Approval of facility. In conjunction with the goal and duty of the Fannin County board of commissioners to insure the safety, health and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia, the board of commissioners shall have the right to review each application for the location of a facility to house wild or exotic animals within Fannin County, Georgia, to insure that said facility meets the requirements contained within this article; that the location of said facility within Fannin County, Georgia, will not be counter productive to the overall good of Fannin County, Georgia, and to insure that the location of said facility is not counter productive to the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia. In the event that the board of commissioners determines, after review of the application that additional safeguards are required, it shall have the option of imposing said safeguards. Moreover, in the event that the Fannin County board of commissioners determines that such a facility cannot be operated within Fannin County, Georgia, in a manner to insure the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of this county, then the board of commissioners shall have the right to reject said application. The decision of the board of commissioners in any individual case, shall be final. 
(b)	Variances. In conjunction with the goal and duty of the Fannin County board of commissioners to insure the safety, health and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia, the board of commissioners shall have the right to grant a variance to the minimum lot size for location of a facility to house wild or exotic animals within Fannin County, Georgia, if in the opinion of the board of commissioners, the granting of said variance will not be counter productive to the overall good of Fannin County, Georgia. The decision of the board of commissioners in any individual case, shall be final. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. XI) 
Sec. 14-77. - Violations. 
(a)	Inspection; animal control officer to be notified of suspected violations. The Fannin County animal control officer shall be authorized to inspect any facility erected for the purpose of owning, maintaining, keeping, holding or harboring a wild animal as listed by the State of Georgia as being such, which said list has been reaffirmed by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. Any suspected violation of this article shall be reported by the Fannin County animal control officer to the Fannin County board of commissioners and the department of natural resources. 
(b)	Board of commissioners to be notified of violations or license revocation. Any violation of this article or any revocation of a license or permit noted or made by the Department of Natural Resource of the State of Georgia shall be forwarded to the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(c)	Issuance of cease and desist orders. The Fannin County board of commissioners, can on its own initiative or at the request of the Fannin County animal control officer, prior to a hearing, issue a cease and desist order or other appropriate order to any person who is violating the provisions of this article. 
(d)	Hearings. Any alleged violation of this article shall be appealable in the same manner as alleged violations of the permit and license requirements of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. XII) 
Sec. 14-78. - Severability; repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
(a)	Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be declared invalid for any reason, the remainder of said article shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1998, art. XIII(a), (b)) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - National Electrical Code adopted by reference. 
(a)	The National Electrical Code, the most current edition, as the same from time to time may be amended, shall be and is the code that will be utilized by Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, as the electrical code for Fannin County, Georgia. 
(b)	All provisions of the original ordinance not in conflict with the ordinance from which this section is derived are readopted by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12-28-1998, §§ 1, 2, 12-28-1998) 
Secs. 18-2—18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-21. - Technical codes adopted. 
The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced by the county: 
(1)	Standard Building Code. 
(2)	Standard Mechanical Code. 
(3)	Standard Gas Code. 
(4)	International Plumbing Code. 
(5)	National Electrical Code. 
(6)	Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(7)	Southern Building Codes One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code. 
(8)	Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, § B) 
Sec. 18-22. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Until all inspections have been approved, no electrical service will be permitted. 
(b)	Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this article or of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article or of the technical codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state and local laws through magistrate court. 
(c)	The jurisdiction for actions brought pursuant to this article shall be in the magistrate court of the county. 
(d)	In case any building is erected, constructed, altered, installed, demolished or moved in violation of this article or of the technical codes, the building inspector, or any other appropriate county authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies contained herein, may seek injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate relief to prevent the violation. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, § E) 
Secs. 18-23—18-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 18-48. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as allowed and heretofore adopted. Hereinafter, all of the codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes." 
(b)	Codes remedial. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(c)	Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this division, except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 1) 
Sec. 18-49. - Scope. 
(a)	Applicability. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(1)	Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(2)	Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(3)	Gas. The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA pamphlet 54/57/58 shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this article. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(4)	Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. If fiber duct board is used, it shall be prominently labeled as such. ANSI approved dated duct tape shall be used. 
(5)	Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(6)	Fire prevention. The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance of every commercial building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(7)	Energy. The provisions of the Georgia State Energy Code shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(8)	Southern building codes one- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(9)	Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(10)	Standard Housing Code. The provisions of this code establish minimum standards and requirements for dwellings. 
(b)	Federal and state authority. The provisions of this article shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)	Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(d)	Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)	Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 3) 
Sec. 18-50. - Permitting and inspection. 
The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of this article shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 2) 
Sec. 18-51. - Building inspection department. 
(a)	Established. There is hereby established a department to be called the building inspection department, and the person in charge shall be known as the building inspector. 
(b)	Responsibilities. The building inspector and his/her department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions contained within this article. 
(1)	Records. The building inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(2)	Liability. Any employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting on the behalf of the county in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 4) 
Sec. 18-52. - Existing buildings. 
(a)	Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building inspector shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)	Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building inspector. 
(c)	Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building inspector to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within the county. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 5) 
Secs. 18-53—18-77. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permits 

Sec. 18-78. - Application. 
(a)	When required. Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building inspection department and obtain the required permit for the work. Accessory buildings or remodeling, which are ten feet by 12 feet or less and valued at less than $1,000.00, do not require a permit. However, any accessory building, which requires a branch circuit panel board and/or a utility service, shall be required to have a building permit. Accessory buildings, which do not require a building permit, are still required to meet all setback requirements as defined in this article. 
(b)	Exceptions. 
(1)	Mechanical work. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
a.	Any portable heating appliance; 
b.	Any portable ventilation equipment; 
c.	Any portable cooling unit; 
d.	Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this article; 
e.	Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
f.	Any portable evaporative cooler; 
g.	Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(2)	Electrical work. Permits shall not be required for the following electrical work: Any 120-volt branch circuit work involving two circuits or less, provided that this work is done in an existing structure which did not require an additional permit. 
(c)	Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(d)	Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building inspector without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(e)	Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building inspection department on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent, and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)	The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)	The size of the building to be erected; 
(3)	The location of the building on the lot; 
(4)	The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
(5)	The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
(6)	The layout of off-street parking and loading spaces; 
(7)	Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this article are being observed; and 
(8)	Such other information as may be requested by the building inspector or required by any other county ordinance(s). 
(f)	Time limitations. 
(1)	An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building inspector for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(2)	Any building permit or other permit issued pursuant to this article shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(A)) 
Sec. 18-79. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)	Requirements; exception. 
(1)	When required by the building inspector, one copy of the specifications, and drawings, drawn to scale, with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)	No drawings or specifications shall be required for: 
a.	Accessory buildings, except engineered metal buildings shall require design data from the manufacturer which indicates meeting load requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
b.	Agricultural buildings, except engineered metal buildings shall require design data from the manufacturer which indicates meeting load requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
(b)	Additional data. The building inspector may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building inspector to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)	Design professional. 
(1)	The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his/her official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
a.	All group A (assembly), group E (educational), and group I (institutional) occupancies. 
b.	Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.	Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet or more in area. 
(2)	For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(3)	Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)	Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)	Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building inspector may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)	Hazardous occupancies. The building inspector may require the following: 
(1)	General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)	Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous material stored. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(B)) 
Sec. 18-80. - Examination of documents. 
(a)	Plan review. The building inspector shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)	Affidavits. The building inspector may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building inspector may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building inspector copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and, upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building inspector relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(C)) 
Sec. 18-81. - Issuing permits. 
(a)	Action on permits. The building inspector shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building inspector is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building inspector shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)	Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building inspector shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his/her refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(D)) 
Sec. 18-82. - Contractors' responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who makes contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. When the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before the contractor is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with the contractor's license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(E)) 
Sec. 18-83. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)	Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this article. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Permission for extensions shall be in writing by the building inspector. 
(b)	Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions, which, in the opinion of the building inspector, are hazardous or complex, the building inspector shall require that computations [be submitted by the architect or engineer who] shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building inspector a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his/her stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building inspector. 
(c)	Plans. When the building inspector issues a permit, he/she shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, on the set of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." The set of drawings so reviewed shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work during normal business hours and shall be open to inspection by the building inspector or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(F)) 
Sec. 18-84. - Fees. 
(a)	Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the necessary fees for such permit have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the size of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. All fees shall be as established from time to time by the board of commissioners and shall be posted in the building inspection department. 
(b)	Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, etc., before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)	Accounting. The building inspection department shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)	Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing of the application, in accordance with the fees as established by the board of commissioners. 
(e)	Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building inspector. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(G)) 
Sec. 18-85. - Inspections. 
(a)	Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building inspector may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He/she shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He/she shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)	Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building inspector, he/she shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)	Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. The county shall not issue certificates of occupancy as to one-family dwellings or two-family dwellings. 
(d)	Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building inspector or his/her representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building inspector. 
(e)	Required inspections. The building inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or his/her agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his/her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)	Building. 
a.	Foundation inspection. 
1.	To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and before concrete is poured. All footings should be on firm ground with a minimum width of 16 inches and a minimum poured depth of eight inches. 
2.	The builder shall request an inspection by means of a telephone call or fax to the office of the building inspector. 
3.	The building inspector shall inspect the site within 48 hours of the request or two business days, whichever is longer. 
b.	Frame inspection. 
1.	To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, and the house is dried-in. 
(i)	Foundation walls of no less than eight-inch block, which if the same are to be backfilled against, shall have concrete poured at least every four feet. A recommendation of 12-inch block is made for extensive areas requiring backfill. Six-inch block can be used for the brick offset but not to extend more than 12 inches below the backfill. 
(ii)	Sills are to be constructed of pressure treated materials. 
(iii)	All crawl spaces shall be a minimum of 24 inches above grade and vented every eight to ten feet at a minimum. 
(iv)	Floor framing to be two inches by eight inches on 16-inch centers to a maximum of 12 feet; any longer spans shall be at a minimum of two feet by ten feet or a truss system. 
(v)	Subflooring to be two-inch plywood or OSB if on 16-inch centers with at least a three-fourths-inch total if carpet or vinyl is to be used; five-eighths-inch subfloors shall be required if hardwood floors are to be used. 
(vi)	All outside walls and load bearing walls to be framed with two-inch by four-inch material on 16-inch centers. 
(vii)	All outside walls and load bearing walls shall be double plated. 
(viii)	All load bearing headers to be at least double two inches by ten inches. 
(ix)	All rafters to be at least two inches by six inches to a maximum span of 16 feet; with two-inch by eight-inch rafters being required if the span is greater than 16 feet. (Span charts are available at building supply centers.) 
(x)	Decking shall be a minimum of two-foot centers with H clips required on two-foot centers. 
(xi)	All roofs are to be properly vented. 
(xii)	All decking shall be made of materials labeled for exterior use and are to be secured or bolted at least every four feet and by at least three 40-penny nails every 16 inches. All decking shall be properly flashed. 
(xiii)	Rough in plumping to be inspected to ascertain adequate fall. 
2.	The builder shall request an inspection by means of a telephone call or fax to the office of the building inspector. All requests received shall immediately have a time and date stamp affixed to them. 
3.	The building inspector shall inspect the site within 72 hours of the request or two business days, which ever is longer. 
(2)	Electrical. 
a.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
b.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.	Underground service. Nothing herein is deemed to require underground electrical service. 
(3)	Plumbing. 
a.	Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. This inspection is optional. 
b.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. This inspection shall include a pressure test, which shall be performed by the contractor. 
c.	Water pipes in outside walls. No water pipes are to be installed in the outside walls except for those servicing outside faucets. 
(4)	Mechanical. 
a.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
b.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)	Gas. 
a.	Gas fuel installation shall follow the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA pamphlet 54/57/58. 
b.	A "Gas Check" form shall be placed on file with the building inspection department following completion of the installation. 
(f)	Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building inspector. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(g)	Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building inspector. 
(h)	Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his/her agent shall notify the building inspector after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building inspector has been received. 
(i)	Service utilities. 
(1)	Certificate of occupancy or completion required prior to connection No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building inspector and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)	Temporary connections. The building inspector may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)	Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building inspector shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building inspector shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, C, § 6(H)) 
Secs. 18-86—18-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 18-114. - Established. 
There is established the Fannin County building inspection office. This office shall be staffed as prescribed by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, A, § 1) 
Sec. 18-115. - Appointment. 
The board of commissioners of Fannin County shall appoint the Fannin County building inspectors and staff. Said individual(s) shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. The compensation paid to said individual(s) shall be set by the members of the board of commissioners of Fannin County. In the event that a building code inspector is not available, an elected member of the Fannin County board of commissioners may act as said inspector. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, A, § 2) 
Sec. 18-116. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The building inspector and his/her department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions contained herein. 
(1)	Records. The building inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(2)	Liability. Any employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting on the behalf of the county in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, A, § 3) 
Sec. 18-117. - Applicability of technical codes to existing buildings. 
(a)	Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building inspector shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)	Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building inspector. 
(c)	Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building inspector to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within the county. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, A, § 4) 
Sec. 18-118. - Powers and duties of the building inspector. 
The powers and duties of the building inspector are as follows: 
(1)	Enforcement and interpretation of technical codes. The building inspector and his/her department are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building inspector and his/her department are further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(2)	Right of entry. 
a.	Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building inspector may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building inspector by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
b.	When the building inspector shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(3)	Stop work orders; notice required; exception. Upon notice from the building inspector, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his/her agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. In no case may work be resumed without the prior approval of the building inspector. Where any emergency exists, the building inspector shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. 
(4)	Revocation of permits. 
a.	Misrepresentation on application. The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, in any case where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
b.	Violation of provisions. The building inspector may revoke a permit upon determination by the building inspector that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this article. 
(5)	Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide an adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(6)	Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(7)	Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternative has been reviewed by the building inspector. The building inspector shall approve any such alternative, provided the building inspector finds that the alternative for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building inspector shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternative. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, A, § 5) 
Secs. 18-119—18-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 18-150. - Established; members. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the board of appeals, which shall consist of three members. The board shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, D(a)) 
Sec. 18-151. - Membership. 
(a)	Appointment; pay; vacancy. The board of appeals shall consist of three members; one member appointed by each of the three commissioners. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for any reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred while representing the board. Any vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the board of commissioners upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(b)	Terms. Members appointed shall serve for terms of three years. Members shall be allowed to succeed themselves at the discretion of the board of commissioners following the expiration of their term. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, D(1), (2)) 
Sec. 18-152. - Quorum and voting. 
A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this article, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than two affirmative votes, shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building inspector, not less than two affirmative votes, but not less than a majority of the board, shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, D(b)(3)) 
Sec. 18-153. - Secretary of board. 
The building inspector, or his/her designee, shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, D(b)(4)) 
Sec. 18-154. - Powers. 
The board of appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 18-155, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building inspector and to consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, D(b)(5)) 
Sec. 18-155. - Appeals; variances. 
(a)	Decision of the building inspector. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his/her duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building inspector to the board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)	The building inspector rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)	The provisions of this article do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)	That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)	The true intent and meaning of this article or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)	Variances. The board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)	That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)	That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or service systems. 
(4)	That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)	That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)	Conditions for granting variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Any variance, which is granted by the board, shall be for only that specific matter, which is presented to the board, and shall not apply to other situations or circumstances, which are not before the board. Any applications for a variance must be presented to the board on a case-by-case basis. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(d)	Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 15 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building inspector. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building inspector. 
(e)	Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system, which, in the opinion of the building inspector, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building inspector may, in his/her order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, D(b)(6)) 
Sec. 18-156. - Procedures of the board. 
(a)	Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet on the call of the chairman. The board shall meet within seven calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)	Decisions. The board shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building inspector or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the building inspector shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building inspector and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building inspector for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2004, D(b)(7)) 
Secs. 18-157—18-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE 

Sec. 18-181. - Dangerous buildings defined. 
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings: 
(1)	Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)	Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)	Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)	Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(5)	Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)	Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)	Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(8)	Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)	Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this county. 
(10)	Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the building code of this county, or any provision of the fire prevention code, or other ordinances of this county. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. I) 
Sec. 18-182. - Violations; penalty for disregarding notices or orders. 
(a)	The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish said building given by any person authorized by this article to give such notice or order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $200.00 for each offense and a further sum of $10.00 for each and every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance. 
(b)	The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any notice to vacate or who fails to repair said building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $200.00 for each offense and a further sum of $10.00 for each and every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance. 
(c)	Any person removing the notice provided for in section 18-185(8) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not exceeding $200.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. VI) 
Sec. 18-183. - Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition. 
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspector and the building commissioner in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition: 
(1)	If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)	If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)	In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article, or any ordinance of the county or statute of the State of Georgia, it shall be demolished. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. II) 
Sec. 18-184. - Declared nuisances. 
All dangerous buildings within the terms of section 18-181 are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. III) 
Sec. 18-185. - Building inspector. 
Any member of the board of tax assessors of Fannin County shall be a designated building inspector for Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. The building inspector shall: 
(1)	Inspect or cause to be inspected biannually, all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing, or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such places dangerous buildings within the terms of section 18-181. 
(2)	Inspect any building, wall, or structure about which complaints are filed by any persons to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article. 
(3)	Inspect any building, wall, or structure reported (as hereinafter provided for) by the fire department or sheriff's department of this county as probably existing in violation of the terms of this article. 
(4)	Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, and/or the tax records of the County of Fannin, or the public utilities or by any other means available to the building commissioner of any building found to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in section 18-181, that: 
a.	The owner must vacate, or repair, or demolish said building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article; 
b.	The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession; 
c.	The mortgagee, agent, or other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, may, at his/her own risk, repair, vacate, or demolish said building or have such work or act done, provided that any persons notified under this subsection to repair, vacate, or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 45 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice provided for herein. 
(5)	Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (4) of this section a description of the building, or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not exceeding 45 days, as is reasonable. 
(6)	Report to the building commissioner any noncompliance with the "notice" provided for in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. 
(7)	Appear at all hearings conducted by the building commissioner, and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings. 
(8)	Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: "This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building inspector division of the board of tax assessors. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records in the office of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, and/or the tax records of the County of Fannin and/or such other records as may be available to the building inspector division of the board of tax assessors. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with." 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. IV) 
Sec. 18-186. - Duties of building commissioner. 
Any member of the board of commissioners of Fannin County or the board collectively shall serve as the designated building commissioner of Fannin County, Georgia. The building commissioner shall: 
(1)	Upon receipt of a report of the building inspector as provided for in section 18-185(6), give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, and/or the tax records of the County of Fannin, or such other public records as may be available to them to appear before said board on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building inspector's notice provided for herein in section 18-185(6). 
(2)	Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building inspector or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, or any other person having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records in the office of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, and/or the tax records of the County of Fannin, shall offer relative to the dangerous building. 
(3)	Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection (2) of this section as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of section 18-181. 
(4)	Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection (3) of this section commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, and/or the tax records of the County of Fannin, to repair, vacate, or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this article and provided that any person, except the owner, so notified shall have the privilege of either vacating or repairing said dangerous building; or any persons not the owner of said dangerous building but having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, and/or the tax records of the County of Fannin, may demolish said dangerous building at his/her own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land upon which said dangerous building stands by the city as provided in subsection (5) of this section. 
(5)	If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order provided for in subsection (4) of this section, within ten days, the building commissioner shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards hereinbefore provided for in section 18-183, and shall, with the assistance of the county attorney, cause the costs of such repair, vacation, or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a lien or cause such costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment, or to be levied as a special tax upon the land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner, provided that, in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of this county, the building commissioner shall notify the county attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all necessary repairs or demolish the building. 
(6)	Report to the county attorney the names of all persons not complying with the order provided for in subsection (4) of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. V) 
Sec. 18-187. - Duties of the county attorney. 
The county attorney shall: 
(1)	Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices provided for herein in section 18-185(5) and (6) and the order provided for in section 18-186(4). 
(2)	Appear at all hearings before the building commissioners in regard to dangerous buildings. 
(3)	Bring suit to collect all county liens, assessments, or costs incurred by the building commissioners in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished dangerous buildings. 
(4)	Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(5)	In the event that a person charged with violating this article files a demand for a jury trial, coordinate with the district attorney for the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, for the prosecution of said individual in accordance with the applicable criminal procedures regulations for the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. VII) 
Sec. 18-188. - Emergency cases. 
(a)	In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined herein is immediately repaired, vacated, or demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the building commissioners and the building commissioners shall cause the immediate repair, vacation, or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 18-186(4). 
(b)	In any case deemed an emergency by the building commissioner, the building commissioner shall cause a notice to be placed upon the subject property identical to that specified in section 18-185(8). The notice shall further specify that the subject building will be repaired, vacated or demolished at the expiration of ten days from the date of the posting of the subject notice. The notice shall further state that all expenses associated with said repair, vacation of demolition shall be charged against the record property owner. 
(c)	A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the record property owner at the address last indicated on the tax records of Fannin County, Georgia, certified mail, return receipt requested, for the sole purpose of placing said owner on notice of the proposed actions of the building commissioner. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. VIII) 
Sec. 18-189. - Owner absent from the county. 
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee is absent from the county, all notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent by certified mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records in the office of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia, and/or the tax records of the County of Fannin, to the last known address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service. In cases where desirable, this article provides for service of the notices and order provided for herein in the same manner a summons is served in the courts of general jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. IX) 
Sec. 18-190. - Administrative liability. 
No officer, agent, or employee of the County of Fannin shall render himself/herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the County of Fannin as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this article shall be defended by the county attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. X) 
Sec. 18-191. - Duties of fire department. 
The employees of the fire department shall make a report in writing to the building inspector of all buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be, dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. Such reports must be delivered to the building inspector within 24 hours of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the fire department. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. XI) 
Sec. 18-192. - Duties of sheriff's department. 
All employees of the sheriff's department shall make a report in writing to the building inspector of any buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be, dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. Such reports must be delivered to the building inspector within 24 hours of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the sheriff's department. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. XII) 
Sec. 18-193. - Separability. 
It is the intention of the board of commissioners that each separate provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the board of commissioners of Fannin County that, if any provision of this article be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1993, art. XIII) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 22-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "An Ordinance Regulating the Maintenance, Keeping and Preservation of Cemeteries within the Unincorporated Areas of Fannin County, a Political Subdivision of the State of Georgia." 
(Ord. of 1-23-2001, art. III) 
Sec. 22-2. - Adoption of state regulations. 
(a)	The General Assembly of the State of Georgia has set forth in the provisions of the Official Code of Georgia sections 44-3-131 through 44-3-134 rules and regulations for the establishment and maintenance of cemeteries within the State of Georgia. 
(b)	Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, does hereby affirm and adopt said regulations, to the extent applicable to cemeteries located within Fannin County, Georgia, including by reference any and all definitions set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 44-3-131. 
(c)	Said provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated in section 44-3-131(4) specifically states that the aforesaid regulations do not include any governmentally owned cemeteries, fraternal cemeteries, church and synagogue cemeteries or family burial plots. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2001, art. IV) 
Sec. 22-3. - Maintenance of cemeteries. 
Any cemetery subject to the provisions of this chapter which is situated in an area that is accessible to livestock shall be fenced in order to prevent said livestock from trampling or grazing on any grave site. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the livestock to provide said fencing in a manner adequate to achieve the objective stated herein. Said fence shall include a gated means of access to the cemetery. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2001, art. V) 
Sec. 22-4. - Requirements for the creation of cemeteries. 
(a)	Minimum acreage. In order to provide for the welfare of adjacent property owners, to insure privacy, and to avoid any claim of nuisance, no person, business, or entity shall be authorized to establish or maintain a cemetery within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia, on a parcel or tract of land containing less than 25 acres and shall be established as a perpetual care cemetery. 
(b)	Minimum setback to adjacent property owners. 
(1)	In order to provide for the welfare of adjacent property owners, to insure privacy, and to avoid any claim of nuisance, any tract of land designed for utilization as a cemetery within Fannin County, Georgia, shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet within the property line boundary of said 25-acre tract and any adjacent property owner. Any adjacent property owner shall be required to maintain a 25-foot minimum setback from their property and the property line boundary. The net result being a 50-foot buffer area between any third party development and any cemetery. 
(2)	No internment of human remains shall be allowed within said buffer zone. 
(c)	Requirements of the Fanning County, Georgia, land development ordinance (chapter 42 of this Code). Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to exclude any person, business or entity which shall be engaged in land disturbing activity from meeting the requirements of the applicable ordinances of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2001, art. VI) 
Sec. 22-5. - Violations. 
(a)	Notification of violations. The Fannin County Land Development officer shall be authorized to inspect any tract designated for the establishment and maintenance of a cemetery. 
(b)	Issuance of cease and desist orders. The Fannin County land development officer can on his/her own initiative or at the request of the Fannin County board of commissioners, prior to a hearing, issue a cease and desist order or other appropriate order to any person who is violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Hearings. Any alleged violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted by the Fannin County land development officer in the magistrate court for Fannin County, Georgia. 
(d)	Fines. Any person or entity found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2001, art. VII) 
Sec. 22-6. - Severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared invalid for any reason, the remainder of said chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2001, art. IX) 
Chapter 26 - CRIMINAL CODE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INDIGENT DEFENSE SERVICES 

Sec. 26-19. - Submission of application. 
Each person lacking the financial ability to provide for themselves representation in his/her defense in criminal proceedings in the state court, magistrate court or probate court of Fannin County, and desiring that the county provide such services to him/her, shall submit an application to the county requesting indigent defense representation and setting the specifics supporting their needs for such indigent representation. The application shall be submitted to the magistrate on a form approved by the board of commissioners of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 26-20. - Application fee. 
Each applicant for indigent defense services shall pay an application fee of $50.00 to the clerk of the court in which indigent representation is being sought. Such fee must be paid either at the time the application is submitted or at the time the representation is provided. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 26-21. - Waiver of fee. 
The fee required by section 26-20 may be waived only upon order of the presiding judge scheduled to hear the case in which the applicant is seeking a waiver of the application fee. The judge may order a waiver of the fee only upon a finding by the court that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying the fee would cause hardship to the defendant. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, § 3) 
Sec. 26-22. - Transfer of funds to county. 
Within ten days after the end of each month, the clerk of the court in receipt of the application fees required by section 26-20 shall remit the total of all application fees collected during the previous month to the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 26-23. - Funds to be kept in separate account. 
The funds remitted to the board of commissioners pursuant to section 26-22, shall be maintained in a separate fund for indigent defense services and shall be expended only for the purpose of providing legal representation to indigent defendants in the state court, magistrate court and probate court of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, § 5) 
Chapter 28 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Emergency services fees. 
The board of commissioners has established fees for the following services: 
SERVICE LEVEL      FEE   
(a)	BLS Non-Emergency ..... $300.00 
(b)	BLS Emergency ..... 350.00 
(c)	ALS Non-Emergency ..... 400.00 
(d)	ALS Level 1 Emergency ..... 450.00 
(e)	Miles (Patient Loaded) ..... 10.00 
(f)	Refusal with Medications ..... ½ of applicable base rate 
(g)	Non-Transport Recovery Fee ..... 50.00 
(Ord. of 11-10-2009, § I) 
Sec. 28-2. - Severability. 
If any paragraph, sub-paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional then such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of the article not held to be invalid or the application of the resolution to other circumstances not held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the board of commissioners of Fannin County to provide for separable and divisible parts, and the board of commissioners hereby adopts any and all parts not held invalid. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2009, § II) 
Sec. 28-3. - Repealer. 
All resolutions or ordinances or parts of resolutions or ordinances in conflict with the terms of this article are hereby repealed, but it is hereby provided that any resolution or ordinance that may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out or making effective the intent, purpose, and provisions hereof, which shall be liberally construed to be in favor of Fannin County, is hereby adopted as a part hereof. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2009, § III) 
Secs. 28-4—28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADDRESSING ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - TITLE; PURPOSE; AUTHORITY; JURISDICTION 

Sec. 28-31. - Title. 
The ordinance from which this article derives shall be known and maybe cited as the Property Address Ordinance for Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. I(101)) 
Sec. 28-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a uniform property numbering system along both public and private streets and roadways in order to facilitate provisions of adequate public safety and emergency response services. This article is further designed to eliminate duplicate or phonetically similar street names, to provide for the uniform making of streets and roadways, and to provide for the assignment of identifying numbers for all properties and buildings throughout the county. It is further designed to establish an official map and listing of all streets and roadways in Fannin County, and to establish the procedures by which a street or roadway may be named or by which an existing name maybe changed. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. I(102)) 
Sec. 28-33. - Authority. 
The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, is charged with providing for the safety and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia. To that end, it is imperative that the various emergency services of Fannin County be able to identify the location of any business or residence in Fannin County in order to facilitate the delivery of services. In addition the ordinance from which this article derives is adopted under the authority and provisions of the O.C.G.A. 25-3-4G and any modifications thereto. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. I(103)) 
Sec. 28-34. - Jurisdiction. 
This article, the regulations, and the procedures contained herein shall apply to and govern each and every lot, parcel or tract of land and improvement thereon, within the County of Fannin. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. I(104)) 
Secs. 28-35—28-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Sec. 28-40. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain terms of words used herein shall be defined as follows: 
Board of commissioners. the governing body of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, which includes the chairman, and two post commissioners, designated as post one commissioner, and post two commissioners. 
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of person, animals, chattels or equipment. For the purpose of this article, the term "building" may also include other manmade structures. 
911 address. A number assigned to any "building", house, residence, business, or other structures by the addressing authority in prescribed manner to identify a physical location. 
Developer. A person, firm, or corporation submitting an application for development for a subdivision, planned unit development, industrial park or mobile home park and upon whose final responsibility for ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of this article rests. 
Driveway. A private way, beginning at the property line of a lot abutting a public road, private road, easement or private right-of-way, and leading to a building, use or structure on that lot. A driveway may not serve more than two residences, businesses or industries. 
Dwelling, single-family. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one family. 
House number. Number assigned to any house, residence, dwelling, business, warehouse, or other structure or property in a sequential manner. The house number is also known as a 911, street, or physical address. 
Mailing address. Number assigned or used by the U.S. Postal Service for the purpose of delivery of the U.S. mail. Mailing addresses may or may not be identical to the property address. 
Manufactured home. A portable manufactured housing unit designed for transportation on its own chassis and placement on a temporary or semi-permanent foundation having a measurement of 32 feet or more in length and eight feet or more in width. As used in the article, mobile home also means a double-wide home which is two or more portable manufactured housing units designed for transportation on their own chassis, which connect on a site for placement [on] or a temporary or semi-permanent foundation having a measurement of 32 feet or more in length and eight feet or more in width. 
Manufactured home park. The land leased or rented, being used or proposed to be used by manufactured homes occupied for dwellings or sleeping purposes. 
Official name. The name of any roadway in the unincorporated area of Fannin County, as approved by the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. 
Private manufactured home park road. Any street, roadway, or driveway which serves two or more manufactured homes for residential purposes, and which has not been dedicated to the public use. 
Property address. The house number or building number and roadway name shall serve as the property address. The property address can also be known as the 911, street or physical address. The Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division shall only assign this address. 
Property address coordinator. An employee of the county working in the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. 
Public road. A street not maintained by the Fannin County department of roads which is not intended to become a public street but which shall be used for access to a particular site, group development or business. 
Roadway. Any road, street, drive, lane, cartway, tramway, easement, right-of-way, access area, thoroughfare, highway, boulevard, or any other corridor used for or having the potential use as a means of conveyance by motor vehicle. 
State road number. A number assigned by the Georgia Department of Transportation; also known as the SR number for secondary state maintained roads. 
Street name. The official name of any roadway, public or private, designated by Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. 
Suffix. The following may be used after a roadway name: avenue, boulevard, circle, court, crossing, drive, gardens, heights, highway, lake landing, lane, park, place, plaza, point, ridge, road, roadway, square, street, terrace, trace, trail, village or way. 
Travel trailer. A vehicular portable structure less than 32 feet in length primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation uses. 
Trailer. As used in this article, trailer means any portable housing unit designed for transportation on its own chassis and placement on a temporary or semi-permanent foundation and having a measurement of 32 feet or more in length and eight feet or more in width. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. II) 
Secs. 28-41—28-44. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREET NAMES 

Sec. 28-45. - Master street address guide. 
The Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division shall maintain a listing of all official street names, or master street address guide (MSAG) in Fannin County, as well as, maintain an official county map, exhibiting the approved names and location of all roads in Fannin County, and shall serve as a clearinghouse for all information regarding the names and location of roadways in Fannin County. 
(1)	Any amendment to such list shall be made only by Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division, unless additions to such lists are made through the procedure for approval of new subdivisions, planned unit developments, manufactured home parks or through other land development regulations. 
(2)	A sign showing the official name and/or state road number shall identify all public roadways in the unincorporated areas of Fannin County. These road signs shall be placed at all intersections and shall identify intersecting street. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. III(301)) 
Sec. 28-46. - Street naming procedures. 
(a)	Under the authority and provisions of the O.C.G.A. 25-3-4G and any modifications thereto, a county may by ordinance name or rename any road within the county and not within a city, and may assign or reassign street numbers for use on such a road. In naming or renaming a public road, a county may not: 
(1)	Change the name, or identification number if any given to the road by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(2)	Change the identification number assigned to the road by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(b)	The Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division is authorized to determine the need for road names and name changes and to make such additions, changes, or deletions, to the master street address guide for both private and public roads within the county. 
(1)	If the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division determines that a private road provides access to three or more residences, businesses, industries or combination thereof, regardless of the length of such road it will be named and addressed. This may be done by following the guidelines set forth in this section. 
(2)	Exceptions: Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division is not responsible for road naming within any municipality. 
(3)	Private roads: Residents may submit a road name suggestion form, provided by the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. All residents on the road must sign the form. Residents who are renting must have it signed by the property owner. Once Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division receives the form, residents will be contacted, to verify the validity of the form. The road name choice, will be adopted if 100 percent agreement has been determined, and the name is in accordance with sections 28-47 and 28-49. If 100 percent agreement cannot be reached, within ten working days from the time the form was issued, Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division will name the road, and the name may be subject to final approval from the Fannin County board of commissioners. All decisions of the board of commissioners shall be final. Once approved, the county will erect and maintain the road sign(s). 
(4)	New subdivisions: Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division will assign address numbers to new subdivisions which are developed in conformance with the Fannin County land development ordinance, as the same now exists or may hereinafter be amended and in which new streets are proposed. In conjunction therewith, the following items must be submitted: 
a.	A copy of an approved plat from the land development office. 
b.	The names proposed for each identified street on the plat. 
The Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division will review the proposed street names. Names will be approved, if there is no duplication and if the same is in accordance with this article. The developer will be required to erect and maintain street signs within the development. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. III(302)) 
Sec. 28-47. - Street name duplications. 
(a)	The county may not assign a road name that is deceptively similar to the name of any other public or private road. 
(b)	Street names should not closely approximate phonetically the name of any street within the county, irrespective of a differing suffix. 
(c)	To the extent that a road current exists in the form of Joe Doe Road and also Joe Doe Connector or Street, the same shall not be renamed. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. III(303)) 
Sec. 28-48. - Manufactured home park, condominiums, apartment, planned unit developments, public housing developments, and travel trailer parks. 
Owners of existing manufactured home parks, condominiums, apartments, planned unit developments, public housing developments and travel trailer parks, shall submit a legible map or approved plat of their development, the location, name and width of each roadway to the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. Each lot or building within the development must also be identified. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. III(304)) 
Sec. 28-49. - Street name requirements. 
The Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division may disapprove newly proposed street names that fall under the following categories. 
(1)	Street names which have numbers as a part of the name. 
(2)	Street names which are difficult to pronounce. 
(3)	Street names which are over 16 characters in total length, including spaces and suffixes. 
(4)	Street names using surnames unless the name is well known and there is a general acceptance of the name. 
(5)	Street name that is similar to the name of an existing subdivision unless the street lies within that subdivision. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. III(305)) 
Sec. 28-50. - Changing an established road name. 
Residents may petition to change the name of their road by submitting a road name change form as provided by the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. The primary petitioner must send a copy of the petition to all residents. All structural property owners must sign the petition. Residents renting must have it signed by the property owner. Only one resident per household may sign the petition. Once the petition has been completed, it must be returned to the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. Once received, residents will be contacted to verify the validity of the signed petition. If all residents are in 100 percent agreement the new road name will forwarded to the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division for approval. If 100 percent agreement cannot be reached, no action will be taken. If the road is a county road, the request will be forwarded by the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division to the board of commissioners for discussion, and it is the board's decision to approve or deny the request for change. Only one petition will be accepted per road in a 12 month period. All decisions of the Fannin County board of commissioners are final. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. III(306)) 
Secs. 28-51—28-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROPERTY ADDRESSING 

Sec. 28-55. - Property identification numbers. 
This article requires that the owner of any residence, industry, business, or other structure, have property identification numbers posted on the property for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia. 
Property addressing includes the assignment of street numbers to residences, businesses and other property within Fannin County, Georgia. 
Exceptions: 
(a)	This does not include the assignment of numbers to interior offices and rooms in houses, buildings and other structures. 
(b)	Motor homes, campers, and 5 th wheel campers shall not be assigned a 911 address unless the same is deemed to be permanent or semi-permanent in nature by virtue of utilities, septic, phone and/or foundation be established for the same on a continuous, ongoing, non-rental basis. 
(c)	Vacant property. 
(d)	Municipalities will be addressed accordingly by the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division and in coordination with the governing authority of the given municipality. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. IV) 
Sec. 28-56. - Authorization. 
The Fannin County addressing and mapping department is hereby authorized to assign property addresses on streets which are not presently numbered, and to re-address streets, which are not numbered in accordance with section 28-57 using the guidelines set forth in section 28-46. The Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division shall have the discretion to determine the property addresses to be assigned and posted in concordance with section 28-32. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. IV(401)) 
Sec. 28-57. - Assigning addresses to buildings and property. 
Minimum requirements for property addressing: 
(1)	In order to address a property in accordance with the addressing schematic there must be a minimum of construction that consists of a permanent driveway. To obtain an address for a new construction, the property owner must call the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division to apply for a property number. This process takes two to four workings days, as the site must be physically visited. 
(2)	Manufactured home parks and trailer parks must have lots identified by clearly posted lot numbers, and construction of no less than a permanent driveway for each lot. 
(3)	As a matter of general policy, using the linear addressing system, even numbers shall be assigned to properties on the right side of the street and odd numbers shall be assigned on the left side of the street beginning from the point of origin. 
(4)	One property identification number shall be assigned at an interval of 5.28 feet (the equivalent of 1,000 addresses for each mile of roadway) 
(5)	Property addresses for corner lot properties shall be determined by where the driveway entrance meets the street. 
(6)	If a property has more than one driveway the property address will be determined by the first driveway. 
(7)	Road sections shall be addressed on a block by block basis using generally accepted property-addressing standards. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. IV(402)) 
Secs. 28-58—28-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 28-61. - Compliance with addressing regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to: 
(1)	Name or designate the name of any public road, neighborhood public road, private subdivision street or private manufactured home park road, in the unincorporated areas without compliance with this article. 
(2)	Erect any street sign on a public road, neighborhood public road, private subdivision street or private manufactured home park road in the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, without compliance with this article or expressed permission of the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. 
(3)	Remove, deface, damage or obscure a street sign in the jurisdiction of this article. 
(4)	Number or assign a number to any structure without compliance of this article. 
(5)	Name a private street or road which duplicates or is substantially similar to the name of an existing street or within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. V) 
Sec. 28-62. - Display of property address numbers. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the property owner of the house, building or manufactured home fronting on a street to properly display the number that has been assigned by the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division. 
(b)	The property address number must be displayed by the main entrance to the building or structure on the street end of the building nearest the road so it is clearly visible from the street. 
(c)	If the structure is more than 75 feet from the roadway to which the structure fronts, or if the structure is not visible from the roadway, the property address number shall also be displayed at the end of the driveway nearest the road which provides access to the structure. The numbers should also be visible from both directions on the street. 
(d)	Manufactured home or trailer parks shall have the park address number clearly displayed at the entrance of the park. Each lot should have a lot number posted at the lot entrance. 
(e)	Numbers placed on a mailbox for U.S. Postal delivery shall not serve as a substitute for display of the property address unless the mailbox is at the entrance of the property driveway. The numbers must be displayed on each side of the mailbox as to be seen from either direction. 
(f)	Single-family dwelling numbers shall be at least three and one-half inches in height and shall be posted and maintained so as to be visible from the road or in compliance with Section 501c if applicable. 
(g)	Numbers for multiple dwelling units and nonresidential buildings shall be at least five inches in height and shall be placed on the front of the building facing the road or in compliance with Section 501c if applicable. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. V(501)) 
Secs. 28-63—28-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY; CIVIL REMEDIES 

Sec. 28-66. - Enforcing officers. 
(a)	Any peace officer of the State of Georgia or Fannin County or the Fannin County board of commissioners may name, by appropriate resolution, an employee of Fannin County to serve as its designee and to oversee all matters concerning the enforcement of this article. 
(b)	The Fannin County board of commissioners may name by appropriate resolution such other persons to be under the designee described in section 28-66(a) to ensure enforcement of this article. 
(c)	The designee of the board of commissioners shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this article or to the owner or any other person who may be in the possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of provisions of this article. 
(d)	Such citations shall be on a form approved by the Fannin County board of commissioners and shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have the identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, and shall be signed by the representative of Fannin County who completes and serves it. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. VI(601)) 
Sec. 28-67. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this article or any part thereof, upon conviction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the following punishment as provided by the O.C.G.A. 15-10-60. 
(1)	Owners of the property which do not comply with this article will be notified and requested to meet these requirements within 30 days from the date of notification. A warning notice will be issued after 30 days if the requirements have not been met. 
(2)	Any person violating the provisions of this article after having been issued a warning notice upon conviction will be guilty of a misdemeanor, and will be fined $50.00 for the first offense. 
(3)	Any subsequent violations after the first offense upon conviction will be subject to a fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. VII(701)) 
Sec. 28-68. - Civil remedies. 
Any violation of this article may be subject to civil remedies as set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 15-10-40 to 15-10-51 Article 3. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. VII(702)) 
Secs. 28-69—28-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LEGAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 28-71. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid such decisions shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. VIII(801)) 
Sec. 28-72. - Conflict. 
Insofar as the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions or any other local laws, the provisions of this article shall control. Insofar as the provisions of the article are inconsistent with provisions of any state or federal law, the state or federal law shall control. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. VIII(802)) 
Sec. 28-73. - Appeal. 
Any action taken by the Fannin County 911 department, mapping and addressing division, with the exception of a citation, or under the guidelines set forth in this article may be appealed by the property owner(s) to the Fannin County board of commissioners. Such an appeal must be filed in writing within 30 days of the action from which the property owner takes objection and filed with the Fannin County clerk. 
(Ord. of 07-26-2011, Art. VII) 
Secs. 28-74—28-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 28-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by Fannin County to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
Monitoring services. The term "monitoring services" means an alarm contractor in the business of receiving signals from an alarm system that is responsible to contact the alarm user to verify the nature of the alarm and/or to contact the emergency communications center for a law enforcement response. 
Alarm company means a person subject to the licensing requirements, and/or a company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems; this person shall be licensed in compliance with Fannin County ordinances and state laws. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by Fannin County allowing the operation of an alarm system within the county. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visible, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any signal device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Fannin County 911 system a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response. 
Cancellation means the process whereby response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies Fannin County 911 that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring deputy response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to a deputy arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
County means Fannin County or its agent. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Fannin County sheriff's office, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued. 
Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The Fannin County sheriff's office may in its discretion discontinue law enforcement responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction". 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-102. - Alarm permit. 
(a)	Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system in the County without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the County. A $10.00 fee will be required for the initial registration with no renewal fee. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. 
(b)	Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the county. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an application from the county. 
(c)	Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable. 
(d)	Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the county within 30 days of the change. In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders will receive from the county a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the county when any of the requested information has changed. Failure to comply will constitute a violation and may result in a civil penalty. 
(e)	Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each alarm system. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 28-103. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)	Register and obtain a permit according to section 28-101. 
(b)	Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(c)	Provide the alarm company the permit number; (the number must be provided to the communications center by the alarm company to ensure dispatch). 
(d)	Must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes when notified by Fannin County sheriff's office to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. 
(e)	Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(f)	An alarm user must obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or residence. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 28-104. - Duties of the alarm company. 
(a)	Any person engaged in the alarm business in the county, shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Obtain and maintain the required state and county license(s). 
(2)	Be able to provide name, address, and telephone number of the license holder or a designee, who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a day; and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified, within two hours. 
(3)	Be able to provide the most current contact information and permit number for the alarm user. 
(b)	Ninety days after enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives the alarm installation companies shall, on all new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
(c)	Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide verbal and written instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user. 
(d)	Provide written information of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system. 
(e)	An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)	Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
(2)	Provide alarm user permit number to the communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations. 
(3)	Communicate any available information about the alarm. 
(4)	Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 28-105. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	Failure to obtain an alarm permit or renew. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. This shall include monitored and unmonitored systems. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the Fannin County sheriff's office or 911 dispatch. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 5) 
Sec. 28-106. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)	Excessive false alarms/failure to register. It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarms within a permit year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for false alarms within a permit year may be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
First and second false alarm ..... No Charge 
Third false alarm ..... $ 50.00 
Fourth false alarm ..... 75.00 
Fifth and over false alarm ..... 100.00 
$100.00 Fine for failure to register alarm system. 
(b)	Other civil penalty(ies). Violations will be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies) in the amount of $100.00 per violation. 
(c)	Payment of civil penalty(ies). Civil penalty(ies) shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
(d)	Discontinuance of law enforcement response. The failure of an alarm user to make a payment of any civil penalty(ies) assessed under this article within 30 days from invoice shall result in discontinuance of law enforcement response to alarm signals that may occur at the premises described in the alarm user's permit until payment is received. 
(e)	Civil non-criminal violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a civil violation. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 6) 
Sec. 28-107. - Alarm user awareness class. 
(a)	Alarm user awareness class. The County may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. The county may grant the option of attending a class in lieu of paying an assessed fine. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 7) 
Sec. 28-108. - Appeals. 
(a)	Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalty(ies) and other enforcement decisions made under this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Fannin County sheriff's office within 30 days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the county. The hearing officer's decision is subject to review in the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(b)	Appeal standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalty(ies) or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 8) 
Sec. 28-109. - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications, no response records, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 9) 
Sec. 28-110. - Government immunity. 
Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Fannin County sheriff's office response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of the calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 10) 
Sec. 28-111. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. If a court determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision. 
(Ord. of 7-15-2009, § 11) 
Secs. 28-112—28-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 28-131. - Definitions. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the Fannin County emergency operations plan. 
Disaster means any natural, technological or civil emergency that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by The Fannin County board of commissioners, the Governor or the President of the United States. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the Governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the Fannin County chairman, answering to the Fannin County chairman and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the Fannin County local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters of man-made or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, sheriff's services, medical, health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, [nuclear power] plant protection, temporary restoration of public service utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for the carrying out of the foregoing functions. (O.C.G.A. Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, as amended December 1992, Chapter 3, Article 1, 38-3-3.) 
(Ord. of 10-23-2012, § I) 
Sec. 28-132. - Local organization for emergency management. 
Fannin County emergency management agency has been established. The Chairperson of the Fannin County board of commissioners shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the Fannin County emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the director shall have responsibility for the organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the chairman of the board of commissioners and shall serve at the pleasure of the chairman of the board of commissioners. When appointed, the Fannin County local emergency management agency director is charged with the following duties: 
(a)	Represent the Fannin County governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(b)	Assist governing officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(c)	Reassess, as is warranted, in conjunction with county and city departments, the Fannin County emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be consistent with the Georgia emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the board of commissioners of Fannin County for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
(d)	Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-today administration of the Fannin County emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(e)	Submit reports as required by Fannin County governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
(f)	Obtain, with the authority of the Fannin County governing officials, a facility to be used as the Fannin County emergency operations center. 
(g)	Coordinate the activities of the Fannin County emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of Fannin County governing officials. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2012, § II) 
Sec. 28-133. - Fannin county emergency management agency. 
The Fannin County emergency management agency was established around existing county departments. Heads of county departments are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operation procedures (SOPs) for inclusion in the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local elected officials' approval. Such annexes and/or SOPs, will be updated annually or when necessary and submitted to the emergency management director for appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2012, § III) 
Sec. 28-134. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a man-made or natural disaster or any other emergency which may affect lives and property of the citizens of Fannin County, The Fannin County board of commissioners may declare that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)	To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes. 
(2)	To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from man-made or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management agencies. 
(3)	To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, and auxiliary fire personnel and other emergency management workers. 
(4)	To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster. 
(5)	Subject to the order of the Governor, to assign and make available for duty employees, property, or equipment of Fannin County relating to fire-fighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical, and related services, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes within or outside the physical limits of Fannin County and to coordinate with the Fannin County sheriff for law enforcement services. 
(6)	In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase or lease sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims, and to enter into any necessary arrangements, including purchase of temporary housing units and payments of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such site to utilize the housing units. 
State Law reference— (OCGA, Georgia Emergency Management Act 1981 as amended Chapter 3, Article 2, 38-3-27.) 
(7)	Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)	OCGA 38-3-56. Registration of businesses during emergency. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the governing authority of any county or municipality may provide by ordinance for a program of emergency registration of all or certain designated classes of businesses doing business in the county or municipality during a state of emergency declared by the Governor. Such ordinance may be implemented for a period during which the state of emergency continues and for a subsequent recovery period of up to three months at the direction of the governing authority. In any county or municipality adopting such an ordinance, no business subject to the ordinance may do business in the county or municipality without first registering in conformance with the provisions of the ordinance. 
Before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person (other than the owner of the property in question), firm, partnership, corporation or other entity charging for services rendered must register with the Fannin County land development secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in Fannin County without complying with this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)	The cost of the emergency building permit shall be waived. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(8)	Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or the Fannin County board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. The temporary suspension of ordinances for the purposes of emergency or disaster will not include the suspension of this article. 
(9)	Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of the state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area for any person or business located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
O.C.G.A. 10-1-393.4 Pricing practices during a state of emergency. 
(a)	It shall be an unlawful, unfair, and deceptive trade practice for any person, firm, or corporation doing business in any area in which a state of emergency, as such term is defined in Code Section 38-3-3, has been declared, for so long as such state of emergency exists, to sell or offer for sale at retail any goods or services identified by the Governor in the declaration of the state of emergency necessary to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property at a price higher than the price at which such goods were sold or offered for sale immediately prior to the declaration of a state of emergency; provided, however, that such price may be increased only in an amount which accurately reflects an increase in cost of the goods or services to the person selling the goods or services or an increase in the cost of transporting the goods or services into the area. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section, a retailer may increase the price of goods or services during a state of emergency if the price charged for those goods or services is no greater than the cost to the retailer of those goods or services, plus the retailer's average markup percentage applied during the ten days immediately prior to the declaration of a state of emergency. 
(10)	Entry onto private property prohibited. It is prohibited for any director, officer, staff or authorized volunteer of the Fannin County emergency management organization to enter on the private property of a citizen or enter into the private dwelling of a citizen to assess damage or any other purpose without having first obtained the permission of said owner. 
(11)	Life/safety issue. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 28-134(10), any director, officer, staff or authorized volunteer of the Fannin County emergency management organization may enter upon private property or into a private dwelling to complete such rescue and safety procedures as might be required to save a life; render first aid or otherwise prevent the loss of property. 
(12)	Confiscation of private property prohibited. It is prohibited for any director, officer, staff or authorized volunteer of the Fannin County emergency management organization to enter on the private property of a citizen or enter into the private dwelling of a citizen and obtain any personal property located thereon or therein without having first obtained the permission of said owner. 
(13)	Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
a.	To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare and safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other public place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chairman until the curfew is lifted. 
b.	To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chairman shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain public areas. The chairman shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the Fannin County emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
c.	The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(i)	Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(ii)	Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(iii)	Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(iv)	Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(v)	Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(vi)	Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the Fannin County emergency management agency (EMA); 
(vii)	Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(viii)	Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(ix)	Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, the director of public safety and/or the sheriff of the county. 
d.	Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
e.	Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2012, § IV) 
Sec. 28-135. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of Fannin County, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve without compensation; however, while engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. (O.C.G.A. Chapter 3, Article 2, 38-3-35) 
(Ord. of 10-23-2012, § V) 
Sec. 28-136. - Penalties. 
This article shall be strictly adhered to as specified. 
To the extent that any provision of this article is in conflict with the United States Constitution, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, federal or state law, the same shall control over the within ordinance. 
Any county employee found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to immediate termination. 
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall, upon conviction thereof be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2012, § VI) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance (as defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-51). 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) (as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government (as defined in section 391-3-4-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect (as defined in section 391-3-4-.19 (2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility (as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments (as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing (as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires (as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § I) 
Sec. 30-20. - Scrap tire management. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in Fannin County including, and without limitation, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in Fannin County unless such scrap tires originate in Fannin County or other areas authorized by the Fannin County board of commissioners and: 
(1)	The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)	The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)	The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(c)	All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-20, et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq. applicable to solid waste, except where the requirements of this article are more stringent. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § II) 
Sec. 30-21. - Accumulation. 
No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impair the air quality; impair the quality of the groundwater or surface water; impair the quality of the environment; or likely create other hazards to public health, safety, or well-being as may be determined by the land development officer, environmental compliance officer or any designee of Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § III) 
Sec. 30-22. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the magistrate court of Fannin County, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	For the first offense. By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 (as provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-43(b.1)), or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)	For the second or more offense(s). The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; 
(3)	The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article; 
(4)	The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation (as provided in O.C.G.A. section 16-7-53(d)); 
(5)	In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. Fannin County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(6)	The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this article. 
(b)	In addition to actions filed by Fannin County for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 30-23. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Fannin County board of commissioners, the environmental education and enforcement officer or his/her designee, and/or the Fannin County land development office and/or the Fannin County sheriff's office. 
(b)	Any person(s) authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this article, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)	Appeals for the violation of this article may be made to the magistrate court of Fannin County, or higher court if the person so chooses. The person always has the right to consult his/her attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § V) 
Sec. 30-24. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)	In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation (as provided in O.C.G.A. sections 16-7-52, 16-7-53). In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county-issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)	Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the Court as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or the board of commissioners may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)	Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)	When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)	This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § VI) 
Sec. 30-25. - Severability. 
Should any sentence, section, subsection or provision of this article or application of a provision of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court or other competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § VII) 
Sec. 30-26. - Repeal of conflicting resolutions or ordinances. 
All conflicting resolutions, ordinances or parts or sections of resolutions or ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § VIII(A)) 
Chapter 34 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
The Legislature of the State of Georgia has in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 36-1-20, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, does ordain this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 34-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 34-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increase in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 34-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and; 
(7)	To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 1) 
Sec. 34-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common ensure wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter ensure walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before (the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard) or (specific date). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community (before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard) or (specific date). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland waters; 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance, which was October 1, 1990. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial damage means damage or any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during the life of a building, a 30-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)	The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)	In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 2) 
Sec. 34-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 34-7. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated August 1991, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 34-8. - Development permit required. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § C) 
Sec. 34-9. - Compliance with chapter provisions. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § D) 
Sec. 34-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § E) 
Sec. 34-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § F) 
Sec. 34-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, or by an officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § G) 
Sec. 34-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants or variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $300.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the board of commissioners of Fannin County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 3, § H) 
Secs. 34-14—34-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 34-45. - Designation of the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office. 
The building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 34-46. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office on forms furnished by him/her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest living area floor, excluding basement and/or storage area, of all buildings; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
c.	Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 34-102(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as result of proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest living area floor is completed, or instances where the building is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lower floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 34-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office. 
(a)	Duties of the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)	Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)	Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest living area floor, excluding basement and/or storage area, of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 34-46(2). 
(6)	Certify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 34-46(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 34-102(2). 
(8)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(9)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-7, then the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 2 of article III of this chapter. 
(b)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 34-48. - Variance procedures. 
(a)	The members of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The members of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Inspection Division of the Fannin County land development office in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the members of the board of commissioners of Fannin County or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Fannin County superior court, as provided in the applicable sections of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, applicable regulations, and applicable local ordinances. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (see definition) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	In passing upon such applications, the members of the board of commissioners of Fannin County shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)	The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including the maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this chapter, the board of commissioners of Fannin County may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(g)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)	Conditions for variances: 
(1)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(2)	Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.	A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The building inspection division of the Fannin County land development office shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 34-49. - Severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared invalid for any reason, the remainder of said chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 6, § A) 
Sec. 34-50. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 6, § B) 
Secs. 34-51—34-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-72—34-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-101. - General standards. 
(a)	In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(3)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)	New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)	Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	No electrical appliances, such as water heaters, electric stoves, etc., shall be permanently installed in basements or storage areas below the base flood level; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter. 
(b)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which are not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 5, § A) 
Sec. 34-102. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 34-7, or section 34-47(9), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest living area floor, excluding basement and/or storage area elevated no lower than the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest living area floor, excluding basement and/or storage area, elevated no lower than the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 34-47(9). 
(3)	Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
b.	Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.	All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
b.	All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade, 
3.	The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, 
4.	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of subsections (4)b.1 and (4)b.3 of this section. 
c.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
2.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (4)a or, (4)b.1 and (4)b.3 of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures. 
(5)	Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-7, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
b.	If subsection (5)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
c.	Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of section 34-101(a)(2), and the elevation standards of subsection (1) of this section and the encroachment standards of subsection (5)a of this section are met. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 5, § B) 
Sec. 34-103. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-7, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 34-47(9). 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 5, § C) 
Sec. 34-104. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
Standards for subdivision proposals are as follows: 
(1)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimized flood damage; 
(3)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Ord. of 6-8-1993, art. 5, § D) 
Chapter 38 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Purpose. 
The board of commissioners hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of commissioners means the board of commissioners of Fannin County. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Commission means the Fannin County historic preservation commission created by this chapter. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all of those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural or environmental character as designated by the board of commissioners. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of an historic property or any structure, site or work of art within an historic district, and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)	A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of an historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details; 
(2)	Demolition of an historic structure; 
(3)	Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)	A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; 
(5)	The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 8) 
Sec. 38-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter provisions. 
Violations of any provision of this chapter may be enjoined by an appropriate action filled in the superior court of the appropriate jurisdiction, upon application for same by the commission or the county. Violations of any provisions of this chapter may also be punished to the maximum extent allowable by law for the violation of county ordinances, the same declared to be misdemeanor offenses. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 7) 
Secs. 38-4—38-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 38-25. - Created. 
The title of the commission shall be the "Fannin County Historic Preservation Commission." Commission members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and will have only advisory authority in recommending landmark and historic district designation. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 2(a)) 
Sec. 38-26. - Position within the Fannin County government. 
The historic preservation commission shall be considered a part of the planning functions of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 2(b)) 
Sec. 38-27. - Members. 
(a)	Number; appointment. The historic preservation commission shall consist of five members appointed by the board of commissioners, who shall be residents of the county who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(b)	Terms. Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two full three-year consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be two for one year; two members for two years; and one member for three years. 
(c)	Compensation. Members do not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses if approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 2(c)) 
Sec. 38-28. - Authority. 
(a)	The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)	Prepare an inventory of all property within Fannin County having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)	Recommend to the board of commissioners specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)	Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)	Recommend to the board of commissioners that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure or work of art as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)	Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the county, with the approval of the board of commissioners; 
(6)	Promote the acquisition by the county of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the "Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976," 1976 Ga. Laws, page 1181; 
(7)	Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within Fannin County; 
(8)	Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the board of commissioners may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes or preserving historic resources; 
(9)	Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the board of county commissioners concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)	Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)	Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the county historic preservation program, with the consent of the board of commissioners; 
(12)	Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property, and acquire and sell historic properties; the commission shall not obligate the county without the board of commissioners' prior consent; 
(13)	Review and make comments to the state historic preservation office concerning the nomination of properties within Fannin County to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(b)	The commission shall not financially obligate the county in any manner without prior approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 2(d)) 
Sec. 38-29. - Rules of procedure. 
The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and consideration of applications and shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedure without amendment to this article. A quorum shall consist of a majority of its members. The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 2(e)) 
Sec. 38-30. - Funding. 
The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that these funds do not displace appropriate governmental funds. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 2(f)) 
Sec. 38-31. - Records of commission meetings. 
A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 2(g)) 
Secs. 38-32—38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LANDMARKS 

Sec. 38-51. - Preliminary research by the commission. 
(a)	Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the county. 
(b)	Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the board of commissioners for designation. The commission shall present to the board of commissioners its nominations for historic districts and local landmarks. 
(c)	Preparation of a report on proposed designation. The commission shall prepare formal reports when nominating historic districts or local landmarks. These reports shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designation. The report will follow guidelines for nominating structures of the National Register of Historic Places (National Preservation Act of 1966), and shall consist of two parts: 
(1)	A physical description; and 
(2)	A description of historic significance. 
This report will be submitted to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 3(a)) 
Sec. 38-52. - Designation of historic district. 
(a)	Criteria for selection of historic districts. An historic district is a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof, which: 
(1)	Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
(2)	Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the county, state or region; 
(3)	Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the county. 
(b)	Boundaries of an historic district. Boundaries of an historic district shall be specified on tax maps; these boundaries will be included in the separate ordinances designating local districts. Boundaries specified in legal notices shall coincide with the boundaries finally designated. Districts shall be shown on the official zoning map (if one is available) as a public record. 
(c)	Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(1)	Historic (more than 50 years old); 
(2)	Nonhistoric (less than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
(3)	Intrusions (structures less than 50 years old which do not contribute to the historical character of the district). 
(d)	Affirmation of existing zoning. This article is not a use ordinance, and local zoning laws remain in effect until modified by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 3(b)) 
Sec. 38-53. - Designation of a landmark. 
(a)	Criteria for selection of landmarks. An historic landmark is a structure, site or work of art, including adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the county, state or region, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)	It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)	It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
(3)	It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the county, the state or region. 
(b)	Boundary description. Boundaries shall be clearly defined for individual properties on tax maps and located on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 3(c)) 
Sec. 38-54. - General matters affecting designation of both historic districts and landmarks. 
(a)	Application for historic district or landmark. 
(1)	Historic district. An historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners may apply for designation. 
(2)	Landmark structure. An historical society or property owner may apply for designation. 
(b)	Required public hearings. The historic preservation commission and the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance for designation. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least two consecutive issues in the legal organ of the county, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A letter sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shall constitute legal notification under this article. 
(c)	Notification of property owners of proposed designation. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall describe each property to be designated, set forth the names of the owners of the designated property or properties, and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property. 
(d)	Requirements regarding district boundaries. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map and kept as a public record to provide notice of such a designation. 
(e)	Notification of historic preservation section. Prior to designating any property or district as historic, the commission must submit a report on the historic, cultural, architectural or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site, building/structure, or work of art to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources. Thirty days will be allowed to prepare written comments. 
(f)	Acceptance or denial of ordinance for designation. A decision to accept or deny the ordinance for designation shall be made within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(g)	Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such historic district designation by the board of commissioners; which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(h)	Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the county of the ordinance for designation, including the local historic organization. 
(i)	Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(j)	Authority to amend or rescind designation. The commission has the authority to amend and/or rescind the designation if necessary. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 3(d)) 
Secs. 38-55—38-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 38-82. - Approval of alterations of new construction in historic districts or involving landmarks. 
After the designation by ordinance of an historic property or of an historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(a)) 
Sec. 38-83. - Approval of new construction within designated districts. 
The historic preservation commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts. These structures shall conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the commission's design guidelines. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(b)) 
Sec. 38-84. - Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. 
When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the secretary of the interior's standards of rehabilitation shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(c)) 
Sec. 38-85. - Submission of plans to commission. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(d)) 
Sec. 38-86. - Acceptable commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)	The historic preservation commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangements, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(b)	The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(e)) 
Sec. 38-87. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. 
At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(f)) 
Sec. 38-88. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangements or uses having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(g)) 
Sec. 38-89. - Technical advice. 
When dealing with difficult technical questions, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek expert advice; however, no financial commitments may be made on behalf of the county without the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(h)) 
Sec. 38-90. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)	The historic preservation commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within not more than 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property, or of a structure, site or work of art located within an historic district. Evidence of approval shall be made by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. 
(b)	Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(i)) 
Sec. 38-91. - Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)	In the event that the historic preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he/she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(b)	In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector, if applicable, or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permits shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(j)) 
Sec. 38-92. - Variances. 
Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such hardship or difficulty; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be preserved, conserved and substantial justice done. In granting a variance, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall be a situation not of the persons own making, which is a problem unique to a specific property, or in order to comply with this article, the person will conflict with another ordinance of the county or city. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(k)) 
Sec. 38-93. - Requirements of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
Work not in accordance with an issued certificate of appropriateness shall be halted before it is completed, and the work shall be rectified to come in conformity with the certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(l)) 
Sec. 38-94. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and is renewable. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(m)) 
Sec. 38-95. - Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said applications. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(n)) 
Sec. 38-96. - Acquisition of property. 
The historic preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the board of commissioners of Fannin County, and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(o)) 
Sec. 38-97. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the board of commissioners; the appeal must be applied for within 15 days after notification is sent. The county may approve, modify or reject the determination made by the commission if the board of commissioners finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching the decision. Appeals from decisions of the board of commissioners made pursuant to the Georgia Historic Preservation Act may be taken to the superior court of the county, in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 4(p)) 
Secs. 38-98—38-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEMOLITION OR RELOCATION APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 38-123. - Authority to comment on demolition permit applications. 
The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to comment on any request for a permit to demolish or relocate a structure within a historic district, or classified as an historic landmark. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 5(a)) 
Sec. 38-124. - Actions acceptable in reaction to application for demolition or relocation permit. 
The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to delay, or merely comment on, demolition or relocation permits within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 5(b)) 
Sec. 38-125. - Consideration of predemolition plans. 
A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for demolition that is challenged by the historic preservation commission prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 5(c)) 
Sec. 38-126. - Consideration of post demolition plans. 
The historic preservation commission should take into account, when reviewing demolition permits, the plans for the building that would replace the structure. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 5(d)) 
Sec. 38-127. - Demolition or relocation criteria. 
Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the historic preservation commission shall make a determination, supported by a written report, whether one or more of the following criteria are met: 
(1)	The structure is of such interest or quality that it would reasonably meet national, state or local criteria for designation as an historic or architectural landmark. 
(2)	The structure is of such unusual or uncommon design, texture or material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense. 
(3)	Retention of the structure would aid substantially in preserving and protecting a structure which meets the criteria of subsection (1) or (2) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 5(e)) 
Secs. 38-128—38-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 38-153. - Ordinary repair. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an historic property that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof is excluded from review. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 5(a)) 
Sec. 38-154. - Conformity to existing building and other codes. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners or property from complying with existing county building codes or any other existing county ordinance, or regulation, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his/her property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. This article is cumulative to other county ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-27-1996, § 6(b)) 
Chapter 42 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Purpose, authority, jurisdiction. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing minimum development standards and administrative procedures for insuring compliance with these standards. 
(b)	Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article XI, Section IV of the Georgia Constitution. (Ga. Code Annotated, 12-7-1) 
(c)	Jurisdiction. This chapter shall apply to the unincorporated areas of Fannin County and to any incorporated area electing to adopt this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. I, art. I) 
Sec. 42-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as an individual; the term "shall" is always mandatory and not directory; and the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be constructed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access means the right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property. 
Accessory building means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main building and located on the same lot therewith. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Alteration of a building means any change in the support members of a building except such change as may be required for its safety; an addition to a building; or of a building from one location to another. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the land development officer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-729. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. These are illustrated in the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual for Georgia. 
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Bond means a legal instrument with a clause which establishes a sum of money fixed as a penalty, binding the parties to pay the same; conditioned, however, that the payment of the penalty may be avoided by the performance by the parties of certain acts. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation systems. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in their natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer strip means a land area of appropriate design providing a visual and noise separation between incompatible land uses. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, mobile homes, manufactured homes and similar structures whether stationary or moveable. 
Building setback line means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or nonmoveable landscaping shall be placed except as otherwise provided. 
Campground means a parcel of land used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Committee means the state soil and water conservation committee. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas. 
County road/street means any road or street that is officially accepted by the Fannin County board of commissioners into the Fannin County road system. 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use, and designed to provide access to adjacent roads and lots. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also know as excavation. 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Design standards means the specifications to landowners or subdividers for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots. 
Developer means a person, firm, corporation, or legal entity submitting an application for the development of a subdivision, planned unit development, industrial park, or mobile home park and with whom final responsibility for ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter rest. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Blue Ridge Mountain soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Driveway means a private way, beginning at the property line of a lot which abuts a public road, a private road, easement or private right-of-way, which gives access from said public road, recorded easement, recorded private road or private right-of-way and leading to a building, residence, use or structure on said lot. A driveway can serve no more than two residences. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, exclusive of mobile homes as herein defined, used for residential purposes. 
Dwelling, multiple, means an attached building designed for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building designed to be occupied exclusively by one family. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms and a single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by only one family for cooking, living, and sleeping purposes. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the specific purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities; including, but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainageways and gas lines. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan, good for a year from the date of issue, on all sites of 1 1/10 acres or greater which presents a complete understanding of the proposed land disturbing activity and measures to prevent soil erosion and water pollution. 
Escrow means a legal agreement between a developer and Fannin County or the appropriate agency or utility in lieu of actual performance and intended to assure performance. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before 1993. 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 1993. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Filling means the placement of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
Final plat means a finished drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements of these regulations in such form as required by the local jurisdiction and showing, completely and accurately, all legal design and engineering information, and certificates necessary for recording. 
Finished grade means the final grade or elevation of the ground surface forming the proposed design. 
Flood means an overflow of lands not normally covered by water that results in significant adverse effects in the vicinity. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community have been delineated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway fringe areas means areas lying outside the floodway district but within the area that would be flooded by the regional flood. 
Floodways means the natural channel and the portion of the floodplain along the channel that must be retained solely for the passage of floodwaters to prevent an undue increase in flood heights upstream. Water travels at a high velocity in the floodway. 
Frontage means all the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end street. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities. 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Fannin County, Georgia. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
Grading means altering surfaces to special elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261.3. (This is the same definition as used in the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act.) 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements of individual listing on the national register. 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district. 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Hydrology study means a study to estimate the base flood elevation (B.F.E.) of a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure of surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile, sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device other than a public treatment system approved by the Fannin County health department. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended. 
Land development office (officer) means a department within the governing authority, which is answerable to the board of commissioners. The staffing within said office to be in accordance with the staffing of any other department within the jurisdiction of the chairman of the Fannin County board of commissioners, with the individual employees being under the direct supervision of the chairman of the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Local planning commission means the Fannin County board of commissioners until otherwise designated by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
Lot means a piece, parcel, or plot of land in one ownership, which may include one or more lots of record. 
Lot area means the total surface areas of land included within the lot lines. 
Lot, corner, means a lot of which at least two adjoining sides abut their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
Lot depth means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction to the sidelines of the lot. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines means the boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent lots. 
Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the superior court clerk's office. Or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the superior court clerk's office prior to the date of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Lot width means the width of a lot at the building setback line measured at right angles to the centerline of its depth. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not a building's lowest floor. 
Manufactured home/mobile home/trailer means a detached single dwelling unit with any or all of the following characteristics: 
(1)	Designed for longterm occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(2)	If the metal frame is completely removed from a unit and the unit meets the building codes, it shall be classified as a modular unit. If the entire metal frame cannot be removed, it shall be classified as a trailer (mobile home). 
(3)	Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling unit including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like. 
(4)	Designed to be freestanding and does not require a foundation for occupancy. 
(5)	By chapter 46, article III, Fannin County prohibits bringing manufactured homes that are more than ten years old from the date of the original certificate of occupancy into the county. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Minimum floor elevation means the lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor including a basement floor. 
Mobile home park means all mobile homes are subject to the Fannin County mobile home park ordinance set out in chapter 46, article II of this Code. 
Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of not more than one mobile home of single-family occupancy. 
Modular home means a factory fabricated dwelling over 32 feet in length and at least 24 feet wide designed and constructed without carriage or hitch collar, a stationary house construction for placement upon permanent foundation, to be permanently connected to utilities, for year round occupancy. It can consist of two or more components that can be separated when transported but designed to be jointed into one integral unit. Modular homes shall meet the minimum standards for house construction as specified in the Southern Building Code, the FHA Minimum Property Standards, the state factory built housing rules, and have a roof with at least a 3/12 pitch. 
Multifamily dwelling means a structure that contains multiple dwelling units. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum , as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavating or filling. 
Natural vegetative buffer means a river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "The Natural Environments of Georgia." Habitats for endangered species may require human management of the river corridor to maintain those species. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after 1993. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed is completed on or after 1993. 
Percentage of grade, on street centerline, means the distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance. 
Perennial stream/river means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGA Quad map. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to begin a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, and interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Plat map means a large-scale map that shows the location of tracts of land within a jurisdiction, and the tax status of such tracts. 
Plats means soil erosion, preliminary and final. 
(1)	Soil erosion means a tentative drawing of a proposed subdivision containing sufficient information (topographical intervals, prospective roads, erosion prevention measures, etc.) to insure the requirements of the soil conservation service are known to the developer. 
(2)	Preliminary means a tentative drawing of a proposed subdivision meeting the requirements herein enumerated and showing the proposed layout in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability. 
(3)	Final means the final map or as-built drawing and accompanying materials, described in this chapter, on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented to the land development office or the planning commission for approval and which, if approved by the land development office or the planning commission is recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
Preapplication review means an initial and informal stage of subdivision review at which the developer may make known preliminary plan proposals and the county may respond and/or advise the developer concerning the subdivision regulations. 
Private street means a street over which the general public has no right of use. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Property owners association (POA) means a legally constituted association of property owners who commonly own and are responsible for the maintenance of commonly owned property and improvements in a development. 
Protected river means any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of river covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. 
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties or conditions recorded with an approved plat and running with the land, specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the view to protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Public utilities means a service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity which provides such services or service and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
Public water system means any water distribution system which has 15 or more service connections or serves more than 25 people. 
Quadrangle map means the most recently published U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute topographic map prepared at a scale of 1:24,000. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable; 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel and seasonal use. 
Reforestation plan means a plan, prepared by a registered forester, for the replacing of harvested timber by replanting (as described in the Recommended Best Management Practices for Forestry in Georgia, published by the Georgia Forestry Commission) or by natural regenerative processes (such as coppicing, seed trees, etc.). 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into water of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Reserve strip means a strip or parcel of land along, around, or between properties, the purpose of which is to restrict access. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Resubdivision means a change in a map of any approved or recorded subdivision plat altering the number of lots incorporated within the confines of the original plat. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land designated, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
River bank means the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor means all the land, inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 through 12-5-457), or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. 12-5-280 through 12-5-293), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both side of the river as measured from the river banks. The 100-foot buffer shall be marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot-wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by the local governments in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the river corridor protection district. Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, river bank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the Fannin County Joint Comprehensive Plan. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the review period will be shown by revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next comprehensive plan review by the department of community affairs. 
Roadway means the actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities including ditches, curbing and guttering, which is utilized to transport motor vehicles. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity; the product of erosion. 
Sensitive natural area means any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)	Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)	Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)	Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geologic features; or 
(4)	Other significant areas so designated by the department of natural resources; and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Setback line (or building line) means a line beyond which no foundation wall, eave, or other part of any building shall project, unless specified exceptions are made elsewhere in these regulations. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
Slope means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent of degree. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Blue Ridge Mountain soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction (building permit) means and includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footing or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other than a mobile home) without a basement or poured footings, the actual start includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivisions, the actual start is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including at a minimum the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the installation of utilities) is completed. 
Start of construction (development permit) means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, or construction of columns, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land clearing nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, alley or otherwise. 
(1)	Arterials. Roads designated to carry rapid, continuous traffic to major magnets within the urban area. Routes will usually pass through or near the heart of a city, connecting residential, commercial, industrial and public areas. 
(2)	Bypass. A highway designated for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic between highways and widely separated parts of the urban area. Bypasses generally have limited or controlled access and are usually grade separated at railroads and major crossings. 
(3)	Collector streets. Streets that bring traffic to arterial streets, or interconnect arterial streets. They provide for relatively easy movement at moderate speeds from homes and businesses to arterial streets. 
(4)	Local streets. Streets that provide direct access to abutting properties. 
(5)	Alley or service drive. A minor accessway used for service access, or property access under specified circumstances, to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(6)	Marginal access street. A residential street parallel and adjacent to major thoroughfares or arterial streets and which provide access to abutting properties with protection from traffic. 
(7)	Cul-de-sac. A local street or road with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
(8)	Half street. A street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
Street line or right-of-way means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls or bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
Structural practices means soil and water conservation measures, other than vegetation, utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Including but not limited to riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level, spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. The term shall include such things as gasoline pumps, signs, mobile homes, and other portable vehicles or structures from which products are vended, and similar objects. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes resubdivision and, when appropriated to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. This shall include the selling of a tract or tracts from a larger piece on a demand basis with no specific intent to divide into a set number of lots or parcels. 
(1)	Major subdivision means all subdivisions of land that are not classified as a minor subdivision. 
(2)	Minor subdivision means a subdivision of land in which there are no new roads developed and contains seven or less lots. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means: 
(1)	A structure built prior to the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.	Before the improvement or repair is started; 
b.	If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred; or 
c.	Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; 
(2)	Approximately 80 percent completion of the soil and erosion plan. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvements of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout streams are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs. All streams in Fannin County are considered trout streams by the department of natural resources/environmental protection division. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroad and other utilities identified by a local government. 
Variance means a grant of relief form the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Vegetative practices means measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting producing longterm vegetative cover; 
(2)	Shortterm seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod forming grass. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Tennessee Valley Authority. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reasons of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and under duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas). 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by a portion of a structure from the ground upwards, provided herein. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the most protruding portion of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the most protruding portion of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building located between the side of the most protruding portion of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. II, arts. I, II) 
Sec. 42-3. - Variances. 
(a)	When a developer feels that special circumstances or conditions are peculiar to his/her property, he/she may request that he/she be given a variance from certain standards in this chapter. 
(b)	The developer shall make the request for a variance to the Fannin County development officer. The officer shall make a study of the variance request and make a recommendation, in writing, to the Fannin County board of commissioners who shall have the authority to grant the variance. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VI, art. I) 
Sec. 42-4. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VI, art. II) 
Sec. 42-5. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law or impose any liability upon Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VI, art. III) 
Sec. 42-6. - Public hearings; notice. 
Two public hearings shall be held on the adoption of all proposed amendments to this chapter. The notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the county. The public hearing must be advertised at least 15 calendar days prior to the public hearings. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VI, art. IV) 
Sec. 42-7. - Penalties. 
The Fannin County land development officer, or his/her authorized designee, shall have the authority to: 
(1)	Inspection. Subject to constitutional limitations, enter or inspect any building, land, structure or premises in the county for the purpose of inspection of the land or premises associated therewith for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of all codes and ordinances of the county; provided, however, that: 
a.	Efforts shall be made to conduct inspections during normal business hours, if practicable, or unless, in the discretion of the code land development officer, an emergency is deemed to exist. 
b.	All land development personnel shall present themselves, if necessary, to gain entrance or access to the property, at the front door or entrance in order to identify themselves prior to accessing the premises. The land development officer shall present official identification upon reasonable request. 
c.	The land development officer will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he/she shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
d.	The issuing authority, Fannin County, or its designated officers and representatives, including the Fannin County land development officer; employees of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, the Soil and Water Conservation District governing Fannin County, Georgia, or such other designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(2)	Withholding permits. The land development officer is authorized to withhold the issuance of building permits or to refuse approval of a plan to any building contractor, developer or property owner, until such time as such contractor or person has resolved satisfactorily all outstanding violations from previously issued permits with the inspection department. 
(3)	Enforcement. Upon ascertaining, being advised by another department or citizen, or believing that a violation of any portion of this chapter or ordinance exists, the land development officer shall cause a written notice to be directed to the owner of the property or such other appropriate representative, unless in the opinion of the land development officer an emergency is deemed to exist. 
a.	The notice shall state the following: 
1.	The owner or controller of the property. 
2.	The location, including district, land lot and parcel. 
3.	Nature of the violation and penalties, if applicable. 
4.	A provision for rectifying the violation without further proceedings. 
5.	A time frame for compliance. 
6.	A date for reinspection for compliance or mechanism for rescheduling an inspection, as applicable. 
b.	Following the expiration of the time set forth in the notice, the land development officer shall cause a reinspection to be performed. 
c.	If the violation has not been remedied, the land development officer shall issue a citation to the owner of the property and/or the responsible party, or refer the matter to the county attorney's office for their handling in accordance with the applicable code section or ordinance. 
d.	If the land development officer believes that an emergency is deemed to exist such that imminent harm or peril to life or property is likely or is authorized by this chapter or ordinances, the land development officer shall be authorized to immediately refer these matters, without notice to the owner, to the county attorney for immediate action as set forth under the applicable Code section or ordinance. 
e.	In any matter where a court order was previously rendered regarding a similar subject matter, the land development officer shall immediately issue a citation without the necessity of another notice. 
f.	A notice described in this section shall be effective against the person noticed, for substantially the same violation for a period of one year from the issuance of the notice. 
(4)	Penalties and fines. 
a.	Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining the permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of any previously issued building permits for other projects or such activity may result in the withholding of future permits. 
b.	Stop work orders. For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the land development officer shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the land development officer shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; for a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and all stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
c.	Notice of noncompliance. If, through inspection, it is determined that the person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan or failed to comply with the applicable general design principles of best management practices, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he/she shall be deemed in violation of this article and deemed to have forfeited any required performance security if required to post one. The issuing authority (Fannin County) may call the performance security or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
d.	Civil monetary penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, permitting conditions or stop work order shall be liable for a civil penalty or fine not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, but in no event less than $250.00. There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his/her own occupancy; and there shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each day for each violation involving land disturbing activities other than as provided above. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any civil penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be payable to the county, shall commence on the date of issuance of any stop work order or other notice of noncompliance and shall not be affected by the filing of any appeal; however, an appellant may, upon filing an appeal, post an appeal bond with the issuing authority in an amount equal to double the cost of any and all corrective work to be determined by the issuing authority; further, any civil penalty imposed pursuant to this section may, at the discretion of the issuing authority, be waived or reduced if, in the discretion of the issuing authority, the violator has taken sufficient and timely curative and corrective action. No inspections, certificate of occupancies, building permits or soil erosion permits will be granted to any person who has an outstanding fine for violating this chapter. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. Each day that the violation continues shall be and is deemed to be a separate offense. 
e.	Alternative penalties. Any violation of this chapter may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court of the county. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties, which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, the magistrate court of the county shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that the fines that would be imposed in the event that the citation or accusation was upheld by the court, then the citation or accusation may be returnable to the superior court of the county. 
f.	Criminal misdemeanor. Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months or both. 
g.	Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in sections are not exclusive remedies. Fannin County reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant property owner/developer/individual. Fannin County reserves the right to take other action against any property owner/developer/individual when the circumstances warrant. Further, Fannin County is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant owner/developer/individual. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VI, art. V) 
Secs. 42-8—42-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-29. - Subdivision defined. 
Subdivision is defined in section 42-2 as the division of a single parcel of land into two or more parcels. All future subdivisions of land in Fannin County shall comply with the applicable provisions of this article. The subdivision approval process and submission requirements vary with the magnitude of the subdivision. All minor subdivisions shall be submitted to and approved by the Fannin County development officer as provided for in section 42-30. All major subdivisions of land shall be submitted to the Fannin County development officer for review and approval as outlined in section 42-31. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. III, art. I) 
Sec. 42-30. - Minor subdivision approval. 
All minor subdivisions of land in Fannin County shall be submitted to the Fannin County land development officer for review and approval. The subdivision of one tract into two tracts or the division of property among immediate family members does not require the preparation of a plat; however, the subdivision must be approved by the Fannin County land development officer and the board of assessors office. All minor subdivisions that contain three or up to seven tracts shall submit a final plat that complies with the provisions outlined in section 42-113. The Fannin County land development officer shall review the proposed subdivision for compliance with this article. Any variance from the standards in this article must be approved by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.100) 
Sec. 42-31. - Major subdivision approval. 
All major subdivision proposals shall be submitted to the Fannin County land development officer for review and approval. The major subdivision approval process is a four-step process. The process is designed to provide a logical sequence of reviews and events in the subdivision development process. The major subdivision review process shall be as follows: 
(1)	Erosion and sedimentation land disturbing application plat/plan. The process begins with the preparation of a plat by a registered land surveyor who is licensed in the State of Georgia (see section 42-567). The plan shall contain the information outlined in section 42-57 and in article X, division 2 of this chapter and shall be reviewed by the Fannin County land development officer and the soil and water conservation commission. This plat/plan is to be approved before any roads or land disturbing activity is started. 
(2)	Construction of improvements. The second step in the subdivision process shall be the construction of the necessary improvements to the subdivision (i.e., streets, lot corner stakes, drainage and water systems, if applicable). The developer may wish to involve the health department before the construction phase to help insure against any lot being rendered useless because of the placement of roads or drainage. Construction may be in phases. 
(3)	Preliminary plat. Preparation of the preliminary plat must be done by a registered surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. The plat shall contain the information outlined in section 42-82. The preliminary plat may also be completed in phases. The developer may choose to exercise the provisions of division 8 of this article in the third step of this review process. 
(4)	Final plat. Upon completion of the necessary improvements, or following the compliance with the provisions contained in division 8 of this article, the developer shall prepare a final plat, which will serve as an "as-built" drawing for the subdivision. The final plat shall contain the information outlined in section 42-113 and be reviewed and approved as outlined in section 42-114. Upon obtaining approval of the final plat, the developer shall be authorized to record the plat in the Fannin County office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.101) 
Sec. 42-32. - Tracts three acres or larger. 
Parcels being sold tract by tract or sold according to purchasers desire or request, require a boundary survey with an approved erosion and sedimentation control plat/plan. The lots must be three acres or larger. If the roads are not up to county specifications and are not to be accepted into the county road system or if the roads are private, a valid POA (property owners association) or a properly recorded protective covenants and restrictions which clearly establish responsibility for road maintenance must be reviewed and approved by the county attorney. Each lot is subject to Fannin County land development officer and the health department approval before the sale is finalized and cannot be resubdivided without their written approval. When the project is 80 percent complete, the developer shall provide the Fannin County land development office six copies of the entire project with the remaining 20 percent of the lots laid out in three-acre or larger parcels. However, if within two years of the date of completion of the erosion and sedimentation control plat the project is not 80 percent completed, a final plat must be completed of all lots sold and the reminder in three-acre or larger tracts and recorded in the clerk of the superior court of Fannin County's office. Where five or more acres are being subdivided on a stream, a detailed hydrology study must be preformed before construction can take place on the streams. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.102) 
Sec. 42-33. - Penalties for not following proper platting procedures and soil erosion measures. 
Penalties for not following proper platting procedures and soil erosion measures are as follows (see division 4 of article X of this chapter): 
(1)	Denial of building permits until the necessary plat is completed; 
(2)	A fee equal to ten times the cost of a building permit that was issued; 
(3)	A stop work order; 
(4)	Suspension of the building permit; and/or 
(5)	Civil penalties being sought in accordance with sections 42-7 and 42-360. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.103) 
Sec. 42-34. - Variances. 
Where there is a written request from the subdivider, developer, or individual property owner outlining the particulars on how strict compliance of these regulations would cause him/her extraordinary or unnecessary hardships, the subdivider, developer, or individual may apply to the Fannin County board of commissioners or such body as it may by appropriate resolution indicate, to vary certain parts of the regulations of this article, provided that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the regulations and provided the public interest, health, safety and general welfare is protected. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.1000) 
Secs. 42-35—42-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAT 

Sec. 42-57. - Standards and review (step 1). 
(a)	An erosion and sedimentation land disturbing plat must be submitted to and approved by the Fannin County land development officer and the soil and water conservation commission. 
(b)	After the approval is obtained, a land disturbing permit will be issued and the land disturbing improvements can begin. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.200) 
Sec. 42-58. - Items required on plat. 
Items required on the erosion and sedimentation land development plat: Site plan (see article X, division 2 of this chapter). 
(1)	Graphic scale and north arrow. 
(2)	Vicinity map. A small map showing the site relative to the surrounding area, including the designation of the specific phase, if necessary. 
(3)	Existing and planned contours, shown to a maximum contour interval of five feet. 
(4)	Adjacent areas neighboring areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected. 
(5)	Location of erosion and sediment control practices using uniform coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6, practices, may include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Construction exit. 
b.	Sediment barrier. 
c.	Stormwater management structures. 
d.	Grassed waterway (swale). 
(6)	Location of the 100-year floodplain, if any, must be delineated on the plat. FEMA procedures will be followed in determining the floodplain. (If a detailed study is not available at the time of the start of the preliminary plat, then the developer must begin work to have a study made. Building permits cannot be issued without a detailed hydrology study if any portion of the property is in the 100-year floodplain.) 
(7)	Fifty-foot setback on streams marked; 50-foot on spring branches marked. 
(8)	Setbacks from all state waters shall be those as set forth in separate state statute or duly adopted county regulations or ordinances. 
(9)	Proposed roads with classifications noted on the plat (public or private). 
(10)	Estimate of the number of lots to be serviced by each road. 
(11)	Sixty-foot right-of-way with a 15-foot setback from the right-of-way marked, or on roads with only 40 feet of right-of-way, 25-foot setback must be marked on the plat. 
(12)	The name of the subdivision and the name of all roads. 
(13)	Who is responsible for the maintenance of roads and utilities. 
(14)	Certifications in section 42-61, which are applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.201) 
Sec. 42-59. - Narrative, notes and other information. 
Notes or narratives are to be located on the site plan under general notes or under erosion and control notes needed: 
(1)	Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
(2)	Name, address and phone number of developer. 
(3)	Name and phone number of a 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
(4)	Size of project or phase under construction. 
(5)	Activity schedule. Show anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the following statement in bold letters: "The installation of erosion control measures and practices shall be installed prior to any land disturbing activities." 
(6)	Sediment basins and/or retrofitted stormwater management structures-storage capacity, hydrology study, and calculations, including off site drainage areas. 
(7)	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. Vegetative plan should show options for year round seeding. 
(8)	Detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications must, at a minimum, meet the guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(9)	Maintenance statement: "Erosion controls will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control will be installed as deemed necessary by on-site inspection." "Best management practices will be followed (BMPs)." 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.202) 
Sec. 42-60. - Review process. 
(a)	Submission of copies of plat. The developer shall submit six copies of the Soil Erosion and Land Disturbing Plat to the Fannin County land development officer. The development officer shall keep two copies for review and the others are to be distributed as follows: One copy to the 911 mapping office, one to the Limestone Valley soil conservation service, one to the county attorney for the property owners association or covenant review if necessary together with a recordable copy of the same, and one for the developer. 
(b)	Time period for review process. The soil erosion and land disturbing plat review process shall be undertaken as expediently as possible and in no case shall the review period exceed 45 working days unless it is done so with the consent of the developer. Failure of the Fannin County land development officer to take action on the process within the time period shall constitute approval of the soil erosion and land disturbing plat. 
(c)	Length of time plat/plan shall be valid. The soil erosion and land disturbing plat/plan shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. If the land disturbing activity is not completed within this time frame, the plat/plan shall be null and void. If however, substantial work has been done on the development within this time period, the preliminary plat/plan may be renewed. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.203) 
Sec. 42-61. - Certificates. 
The following certificates shall be placed on the soil erosion and land development plat, or on a cover sheet, and signed by the proper authorities prior to submission of the plat to the Fannin County land development officer for its approval: 
(1)	Survey and design certificates. 
I hereby certify that this Soil and Erosion and Land Disturbing Plat correctly represents the data complied or verified through a survey completed by me or under my direct supervision. I certify that the design of the proposed improvements comply with the minimum design standards of the Fannin County Subdivision Standards. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Registered Land Surveyor License Number ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Name, Address And Telephone Number ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(2)	Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan certificate. 
I hereby certify that I have reviewed a Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan for the (subdivision name) ____________ subdivision and have found the plan to meet the design requirements of the Fannin County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Standards. This certificate is for plan approval only and does not certify implementation. 
(3)	Certificate of approval of responsibility for road maintenance. 
I hereby certify that I have reviewed the legal documents establishing responsibility for the maintenance of the roads and common areas in the named subdivision and have found that the covenants, conditions and restrictions are sufficient to insure the continued maintenance of the commonly owned property, the roads and improvements in the named subdivision, Said documents are recorded in Deed Book ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , Page ____________ in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court for Fannin County, Georgia. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Fannin County Attorney: ____________ ____________ ____________ 
(4)	Approval from Fannin County land development office. 
I hereby certify that the Soil Erosion and Land Disturbing Plat shown hereon has been properly reviewed and approved. The developer is hereby authorized to begin the physical development of roads and improvements and the installation of proper soil erosion prevention techniques, per this approved plan. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Fannin County Land Development Officer: ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(5)	Developer agreement. 
I hereby certify that I have met the requirements found in the Fannin County Development Ordinance, dated January 1996 and as revised since, and have obtained a copy for my records. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Owner or legal agent: ____________ ____________ ____________ 
Signed: ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.204) 
Secs. 42-62—42-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRELIMINARY PLAT/PLAN 

Sec. 42-81. - Standards and review process. 
The purpose of the preliminary plat/plan is to provide the Fannin County land development officer, the county health department and other reviewing parties an opportunity to review the proposed subdivision for street design standards, utility easements, flood hazard potential, adequacy of the lot size for septic tank use, soil erosion control measures and the adequacy of a potable water supply. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.300) 
Sec. 42-82. - Information required on plat. 
The following information is required for the preliminary plat review (see article X, division 2 of this chapter): 
(1)	The proposed layout of lots, streets, and utilities shall be shown on a drawing of a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. 
(2)	The drawing shall contain a graphic scale, north arrow, date, acreage to be subdivided, and the owner/developer's name, address, and telephone number. 
(3)	A location sketch map shall be provided which shows the location of the site in relation to existing public roads, streams, power transmission lines, etc. 
(4)	Topography shall be shown at vertical intervals of not more than five feet, and the soil types listed and highlighted. 
(5)	The names of the adjoining property owners shall be shown in relation to the proposed development. 
(6)	The plat shall contain the proposed name of the development and streets and a statement as to whether the streets are county, public or private, and who is responsible for maintenance. 
(7)	If the development has five or more acres on a stream, a detailed hydrology study must be completed before lots are approved. 
(8)	Lot sizes in square footage. 
(9)	Describe the type of water system, and the proposed location of community well sites marked but not as a part of any lot. 
(10)	Lots of less than 60,000 square feet not on a water system must note well sites on each lot. 
(11)	A property owners' association (POA) established and approved by the county attorney describing maintenance of private roads, utilities and other improvements, or recorded protective covenants stating who is responsible for road maintenance. 
(12)	Recorded easements for access to the development over nonpublic county roads. 
(13)	Fifty-foot setback on streams, 25-foot setback on state waters with an average flow of less than 25 gallons/minute. 
(14)	Certificates in section 42-84 that are applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.301) 
Sec. 42-83. - Review process. 
The preliminary plat/plan review process is as follows: 
(1)	The developer shall submit six copies of the preliminary plat/plan to the Fannin County land development officer. The land development officer shall keep one copy for his/her review and distribute the other copies to the health department sanitarian, the county commissioners office, the 911 office, the developer and the board of assessors. 
(2)	The preliminary plat/plan review process shall be undertaken as expediently as possible and in no case shall the review period exceed 45 working days unless it is done so with the consent of the developer. Failure of the Fannin County land development officer to take the action on the preliminary plat within this time period shall constitute approval of the preliminary plat. 
(3)	The preliminary plat approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval, at which time a recordable final plat must be submitted for review and approved. If substantial work has been done on the development within this time period, the preliminary plat may be renewed. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.302) 
Sec. 42-84. - Preliminary plat certificates. 
The following certificates shall be placed on the preliminary plat, or a cover sheet to the preliminary plat, and be signed by the appropriate authorities prior to submission of the preliminary plat to the county land development officer for approval: 
(1)	Preliminary survey and design certificate. 
I hereby certify that this preliminary plat correctly represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me or under my direct supervision. I further certify that the design of the proposed streets, lots and other improvements comply with the minimum design standards of the Fannin County Subdivision Standards. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Registered Land Surveyor License Number: ____________ ____________ ____________ 
Name, Address and Telephone Number: ____________ ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(2)	Certificate of approval of property owners' association. 
I hereby certify that I have reviewed the legal document creating the Property Owners' Association for (name of development) ____________ and I have found that the Association and/or the protective covenants legally constitute and that the covenants, conditions and restrictions incorporated in the Association are sufficient to insure the continued maintenance of the commonly owned property and improvements in (name of development) ____________ . Said documents are recorded in Deed Book ____________ , Page ____________ in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court for Fannin County, Georgia. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Fannin County Attorney: ____________ ____________ ____________ 
(3)	Tentative approval for private subsurface sewage disposal. 
I hereby certify that the lots proposed hereon are generally suitable for subsurface sewage disposal with the listed and/or attached restrictions. 
This certification does not constitute final approval of the sewage disposal system for this subdivision. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Fannin County Health Department Representative: ____________ ____________ 
(4)	Preliminary plat approval. 
I hereby certify that the preliminary subdivision plat hereon has been properly reviewed and approved. The developer is hereby authorized to begin the necessary steps to gain Final Plat approval; soil test, etc. Lots may be sold which have not been listed by the Fannin County Health Department as needing further testing and you have one (1) year from this approval to submit a Final Plat for approval. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Fannin County Land Development Officer: ____________ ____________ ____________ 
(5)	Road name approval. 
I reviewed the proposed road names in (subdivision) ____________ and find no conflicts with any existing road names in Fannin County. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
E911 Director: ____________ ____________ ____________ 
All roads listed on this plat are considered private and are not the responsibility of Fannin County. At the time of the completion of the Final Plat, roads that meet the requirements for local streets in section 42-197 are eligible to be considered by the Fannin County Board of Commissioners for acceptance into the county road system one (1) year from acceptance of the Final Plat. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.03) 
Secs. 42-85—42-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 42-112. - Standards and review process. 
The purpose of the final plat is to provide an as-built drawing which accurately reflects the size and layout of lots, streets, water system, easements and other important information, which is necessary for the public record. The approval of the final plat by the Fannin County land development officer certifies to the developer that all of the provisions of the Fannin County subdivision standards have been met and the final plat is approved for recording in the Fannin County office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.400) 
Sec. 42-113. - Information required on final plat. 
The following information is required for final plat review: 
(1)	The final plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. The sheet size shall not exceed 17 inches by 20 inches. If more than one sheet is necessary to show the area, the sheets shall be edge matched. 
(2)	The plat shall contain sufficient engineering date to enable a surveyor to duplicate the plat on the ground. 
(3)	The final plat shall show: 
a.	Name of the subdivision. 
b.	Location map. 
c.	Graphic scale, north arrow, date. 
d.	Total number of acres being subdivided. 
e.	Location and description of monuments and lot numbers, lot lines by bearings and distances, and lot size in acres and feet. 
f.	Name of streets and a designation as to whether the streets are public or private streets and the number of lots serviced. 
g.	Total length of streets in the subdivision by street class (public or private) and right-of-way marked. 
h.	Designation of any flood hazard areas. 
i.	Fifty-foot setbacks on streams, 25-foot setbacks on state waters with an average flow of less than 25 gallons/minute. 
j.	Certifications in section 42-115 which are applicable. 
k.	A statement as to who is responsible for the maintenance of the private or public roads, improvements, property owners association, etc. 
l.	For lots under 6,000 square feet, without community water, must have well sites marked. 
m.	Community wells marked not as a part of any lot. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.401) 
Sec. 42-114. - Review process. 
The plat review process is as follows: 
(1)	The developer shall submit six copies of the final plat to the Fannin County land development office. The land development officer shall distribute the copies as appropriate. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to obtain the appropriate signatures on the applicable certificates. These signatures must be obtained before the Fannin County land development officer can grant final approval to the development. 
(2)	The county land development officer shall review and take action on the final plat within ten working days of the developer notifying the county land development office that all of the applicable signatures have been secured for the required certificates. Failure of the county land development officer to take action within this time period shall constitute approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.402) 
Sec. 42-115. - Certificates. 
The following applicable certificates shall be placed on the final plat, or a cover sheet attached to the final plat, and be signed by the appropriate authorities prior to submission of the final plat to the county land development officer for approval: 
(1)	Final engineering certificate. 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and contains sufficient engineering information to permit the plat to be duplicated on the ground. All monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location, size and type are correctly shown. I further certify that all engineering requirements of the Fannin County Subdivision Standards have been complied with. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Registered Land Surveyor License Number: ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Name, address, and telephone number: ____________ ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(2)	Certificate of approval of responsibility for road maintenance. 
I hereby certify that I have reviewed the legal document establishing responsibility for the maintenance of the roads and common areas in the named subdivision and have found that the covenants, conditions and restrictions are sufficient to insure the continued maintenance of the commonly owned property, the roads and improvements in the named subdivision. Said documents are recorded in Deed Book ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Page ____________ in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court for Fannin County, Georgia. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Fannin County Attorney: ____________ ____________ ____________ 
(3)	Certificate of approval of streets and drainage structures. 
I hereby certify that the streets and drainage structures shown on this final plat and listed as follows: ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Have been installed in an acceptable manner and conform to the Fannin County Subdivision Standards. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Chairman, Fannin County Board of Commissioners: ____________ ____________ 
(4)	Certificate of county health department. 
This plat has been preliminarily approved by the Fannin County Health Department for subsurface sewage disposal barring any unseen complications such as rock, steep slopes or underground water sources (wet weather springs, high water tables, etc.). 
Each lot owner shall apply for a permit and final approval to the Fannin County Health Department before beginning construction. This shall include approval of house (size and location), driveway, water and gas lines, well, and any other construction that could affect the placement or the function of the subsurface sewage disposal system. Construction shall also mean any disturbing of the ground surface such as cutting or filling. 
This certificate does not imply a blanket approval for every lot in this subdivision. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Health Official, Fannin County Health Department: ____________ ____________ 
(5)	Certificate of approval for private subsurface sewage disposal. 
I hereby certify that each lot shown hereon, unless otherwise noted, is suitable for subsurface sewage disposal. 
Before the initiation of construction, plans for the location of the house or other structures and the sewage disposal system shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Fannin County Health Department. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Health Official, Fannin County Health Department: ____________ ____________ 
(6)	Certificate of approval of water system. 
The central water system in the (name of subdivision) ____________ is a (private system/public system) which has been approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division and has been accepted by the (name of public utility) ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ or, if private, a copy of the property owner's association legal document guaranteeing the operation and maintenance of the system is attached. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Utility System Engineer/Private System Engineer: ____________ ____________ 
(7)	Final plat approval. 
I hereby certify that the final subdivision plat shown hereon has been properly reviewed and approved as evidenced by the signed certificates. I hereby certify that all of the applicable requirements as determined by the undersigned of the Fannin County Subdivision Standards have been met and the plat is hereby approved for recording in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Fannin County. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Fannin County Land Development Officer: ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.403) 
Secs. 42-116—42-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN 

Sec. 42-142. - Suitability of area proposed for subdividing. 
Land which the Fannin County land development office finds to be excessively steep (greater than 40 percent) subject to flooding, poor drainage or having adverse geologic conditions present, shall not be subdivided unless the developer, through the use of engineering reports, demonstrates that the measures he/she proposes to undertake will mitigate the adverse natural features and will not endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the land of surrounding areas. (See also articles VI—IX of this chapter.) 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.500) 
Sec. 42-143. - Compliance with applicable local ordinances and state statutes. 
(a)	In addition to the minimum standards outlined in this chapter, all proposed subdivisions shall comply with all applicable local and state ordinances and statutes. 
(b)	The Fannin County land development officer will withhold approval of any subdivision that is known to be in conflict with any known ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.501) 
Sec. 42-144. - Restrictive covenants. 
If the developer wishes to place restrictive covenants on the subdivision, such covenants shall be submitted along with the final plat and shall, upon approval, be recorded on a separate form along with the final plat. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.502) 
Sec. 42-145. - Naming subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision shall be at the discretion of the subdivider so long as the name does not closely approximate the name of a previously platted subdivision in Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.503) 
Sec. 42-146. - Streets. 
The streets in the subdivision may be either public or private. All proposed public streets shall be contiguous to the existing public streets and meet the public street standards that are outlined in division 6 of this article. Streets proposed as private streets shall meet the private street standards as outlined in division 6 of this article. All streets which are proposed as private streets shall comply with the ownership and maintenance provisions outlined in division 9 of this article and are so noted on the final plat. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.504) 
Sec. 42-147. - Lots. 
All residential lots that shall hereafter be established in Fannin County shall comply with the following design standards: 
(1)	City limits and lot lines. Lots created after the initial adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be divided by corporate boundary lines. 
(2)	Lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
(3)	Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the building setback lines from both streets. 
(4)	Double frontage. Double frontage lots, (i.e., lots having street frontages both in the front and the rear) shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from a railroad or major street right-of-way or where necessary due to the topography. Where a railroad or major street right-of-way, as shown on the major thoroughfare plan, abuts or runs through any portion of the subdivision, the subdivision plan shall provide for either a marginal access or lots backing in said right-of-way having a minimum depth of 200 feet. 
(5)	Building lines. 
a.	Residential building setback lines shall be at least 35 feet from the right-of-way line on the front property line on roads having a right-of-way of 40 feet or less from the road centerline and at least 25 feet from the right-of-way line on the front property line on roads having a right-of-way of more than 40 feet from the road centerline and at least 15 feet from the side and rear property lines. The front property line shall be deemed to be the property line that is the property line contiguous to the road or street providing access to the lot. The building shall be setback from side and rear lot lines a minimum of 15 feet. 
b.	As to any property or lot in which one of the lot lines is either a body of water (including lake, stream, branch, creek or river), the setback line shall be that as required by article X of this chapter, soil erosion and sediment control; article VIII of this chapter, wetlands protection; article VI of this chapter, mountain protection; article IX of this chapter, Toccoa River corridor protection; and article VII of this chapter, water supply/watershed protection. No additional setback shall be imposed. As to any property or lot located on Lake Blue Ridge, the property line (for construction purposes only) shall be deemed to be the 1,700-foot contour line and no construction shall be allowed below the 1,700-foot contour line except as permitted by the Tennessee Valley Authority or its designee. No additional setback shall be imposed as to the 1,700-foot contour line of Lake Blue Ridge. 
(6)	Lot width. The minimum lot width for residential use shall be as follows: 

 
(7)	Panhandle or flag lots. Panhandle or flag lots, of required width and area will be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 20 feet wide and the panhandle access shall not be more than 300 feet long. Not more than two such panhandle access points shall abut each other, and if so combined, the width of each panhandle may be reduced to not less than 15 feet. All such access points or combinations thereof shall be separated from each other by the frontage of a standard lot required under to other provisions of these standards. 
(8)	Lot area. Subdivision lots shall have a minimum lot size as outlined in Table I. Where public water and sewer are present the minimum lot area shall be as follows where the property is not zoned: 
a.	Single-family: One-third acre (14,505 sq. ft.). 
b.	Duplex: One-half acre (21,780 sq. ft.). 
c.	Multifamily: One acre; maximum 12 units/acre (43,560 sq. ft.). 
TABLE I 
MINIMUM LOT SIZES FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE, IN SQUARE FEET, UTILIZING INDIVIDUAL WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS OR A PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM WITH INDIVIDUAL SEWER SYSTEMS. 

 
Notes: 
1 To be determined by the Fannin County health department on a case-by-case basis. 
W = Individual wells 
P.W. = Public water system 
(9)	Street access. Every lot created after the initial adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall have access by one of the following means: 
a.	Have direct access from a public road (see division 6 of this article); 
b.	Have access from a private road, which easement is of record, meeting the private road standards set forth in division 6 of this article; or 
c.	Lots of ten acres or larger can have access from a private easement provided the easement has a minimum width of 40 feet and has an all weather surface which can be traveled by emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.505) 
Sec. 42-148. - Easements. 
Easements may be required in subdivisions for the following purposes: 
(1)	Utility easements. When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in other than the street right-of-way, easements shall be shown on the plat for such purposes. Such easements shall not be less than 40 feet in width and where possible, shall be centered on rear or side lot lines. 
(2)	Drainage easements. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, or stream, appropriate provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. Such easement shall conform substantially to the lines of said watercourse and be of sufficient width or construction, or both, as to be adequate for the purpose. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.506) 
Secs. 42-149—42-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STREETS 

Sec. 42-180. - Purpose of division. 
This division outlines the design and construction standards for public and private roads constructed in subdivisions in Fannin County after the initial effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. III, art. VI) 
Sec. 42-181. - Continuation of existing street pattern. 
Wherever topography will permit, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the alignment and continuation or projection of existing streets in adjoining areas. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.600) 
Sec. 42-182. - Culs-de-sac. 
Culs-de-sac shall terminate in a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of 100 feet in diameter and a minimum outside diameter surface width of 80 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.601) 
Sec. 42-183. - Access to arterials and collectors. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector route, as defined on the Georgia Department of Transportation functional classification map, the county land development officer may require that access to such street be limited by: 
(1)	The subdivision of lots so as to back on the arterial or collector route and front on a parallel minor route. 
(2)	A series of culs-de-sac, "U" shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial or collector routes. 
(3)	A marginal access or service street, separated from the arterial or collector route by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points. 
(4)	The number of residential or local streets entering on arterial or collector routes shall be kept to a minimum. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.602) 
Sec. 42-184. - Access from state highway. 
All developments which are proposed to be accessed from a state-maintained highway must submit plans to the Georgia Department of Transportation office in Cartersville, Georgia, and have said plans approved before the development will be approved by the Fannin County land development office. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.603) 
Sec. 42-185. - Reserve strips. 
The creation of reserve strips adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street shall generally not be permitted. However, in extraordinary circumstances, the Fannin County land development officer may allow creation of a reserve strip to enable a more appropriate pattern of lots or streets. Where such is created, the Fannin County board of commissioners must agree to any and all future dispositions of same. A notation to this effect shall be entered on the final plat or approved as an auxiliary instrument attached thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.604) 
Sec. 42-186. - Arrangement of continuing and dead-end streets. 
Where a subdivision will contain temporary or permanent dead-end streets, they shall be designed as follows: 
(1)	Arrangements of continuing streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of major streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movements of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient provisions of utilities, and when such continuation is in accordance with the major street and road plan. If the adjacent property is underdeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de-sac, temporary "T"- or "Y"-shaped turn about shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets as required in the following turnabout standards, with a notation on the subdivision plat that the land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutting property owners whenever the street is continued. The county land development officer may limit the length of temporary dead end streets in accordance with the design standards of this division. 
(2)	Dead-end streets. Where a street does not extend beyond the boundary of a subdivision and its continuation is not required by the county land development officer for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such a boundary than 50 feet. However, the county land development officer may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.605) 
Sec. 42-187. - Intersections. 
(a)	Intersections of new streets in a subdivision shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)	Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two streets at an angle of less than 60 degrees shall not be permitted. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the county land development officer. 
(2)	Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall coincide, wherever practicable, with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Jogs within streets having centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected streets have separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect arterial or collector routes, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersections of arterial or collector streets shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
(3)	Minimum curve radius at the intersection of two minor streets shall be 25 feet, and minimum curve radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be 30 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(4)	Where a street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the subdivider shall cut such ground or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the street right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance. 
(5)	Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leaving area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent grade for a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
(b)	The land development officer can deny any roadway layout that it considers to be dangerous to the traveling public. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.606) 
Sec. 42-188. - Additional right-of-way on proposed streets. 
The right-of-way widths in section 42-197 are minimums, and in areas of cut or fill the right-of-way must be increased two feet for each one foot of material removed from the cut or added for the fill. This additional right-of-way must be added to the side or sides where the cut or fill takes place. The minimum allowable degree of slope on a back slope shall be 1.5 to one and on a fill slope, the degree of slope shall be two to one or less. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.607) 
Sec. 42-189. - Additional width of existing streets. 
In subdivisions that adjoin existing streets, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements as follows: 
(1)	The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street. 
(2)	When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one half of the required right-of-way measured from the centerline of the existing roadway shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.608) 
Sec. 42-190. - Naming streets. 
Streets or roads that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing streets shall bear that name. The names of new streets and roads shall be subject to the approval of the E911 mapping office and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names in that ZIP code, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place or court. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.609) 
Sec. 42-191. - Railroads and limited access highways. 
Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
(1)	In residential areas, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normally required depth of the lot may be required adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip is reserved for screening; the placement of structures hereon is prohibited. 
(2)	In commercial or industrial areas, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, whenever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to insure suitable depth of commercial and industrial sites. 
(3)	Streets parallel to a railroad, when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade, shall to the extent practical, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of approach gradients. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.610) 
Sec. 42-192. - Bridges. 
The engineering design and hydrology studies of all bridges and culverts being used to bridge streams shall be submitted to the Fannin County board of commissioners for review and approval prior to construction. The Fannin County board of commissioners may consult with the department of transportation, or other consultants, on the design of proposed bridges. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.611) 
Sec. 42-193. - Half streets. 
Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.612) 
Sec. 42-194. - Split level streets. 
Streets which are constructed so as to have two traffic ways, each at different levels within the same right-of-way of 32 feet and such additional right-of-way as necessary to meet the requirements of section 42-188 and paved traffic surface of ten feet. The slope between the two traffic ways would not be less than two to one. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.613) 
Sec. 42-195. - Alleys. 
Alleys or service drives may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial developments but not be provided in one- and two-family residential developments unless the alley or service drive is to provide secondary access to a lot (lots) whose natural grade is more than 12 feet above the finished street grade, or unless the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the county land development officer of the need for an alley or service drive. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.615) 
Sec. 42-196. - Geometric design standards for streets. 
Geometric design standards for streets are as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.616) 
Sec. 42-197. - Right-of-way, surface width, type and shoulder requirements. 
Right-of-way, surface width and type, and shoulder requirements for all streets: 

 
No private or public road will be accepted into the Fannin County road system unless it meets all standards for county owned and maintained roads as outlined in this division. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.617) 
Sec. 42-198. - Inspections. 
The developer shall coordinate his/her road construction with the superintendent of the Fannin County road department. The base, grading, drainage and utilities shall be approved by the Fannin County road department before any surface base shall be applied to the road. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.618) 
Sec. 42-199. - Minimum surface type. 
(a)	Class I and II streets. These streets shall have four inches of aggregate base. Class A and B chert may be approved by the county board of commissioners in certain instances in place of graded aggregate base. 
(b)	Public road. These roads shall have a base of four inches of aggregate base. Class A and B chert may be approved by the county board of commissioners in place of aggregate base in certain instances. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.619) 
Sec. 42-200. - Drainage. 
Water shall be diverted across the road by use of pipe of suitable size (Corrugated steel, concrete or plastic). The pipe shall be a minimum of two feet below the bottom of the road base unless a variance is granted by the Fannin County board of commissioners. The backfill material shall be clean and solidly tamped about the pipe. The discharge end of the cross drain shall be stabilized using riprap rock for a distance eight times the diameter of the pipe. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.620) 
Sec. 42-201. - Stabilization of right-of-way. 
The right-of-way shall be stabilized as specified in article X of this chapter, soil erosion and sedimentation control, before final plat approval will be granted. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.621) 
Sec. 42-202. - Signs. 
The developer shall install street name signs, traffic control signs and any other signs deemed necessary by the county land development officer. The sign design, material and method of installation shall be approved by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.622) 
Sec. 42-203. - Monuments. 
The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein and as approved by a licensed surveyor. Monuments shall be located and set as follows: 
(1)	Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections and at the beginning and ending points of a curve. 
(2)	The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete not less than four feet in length; not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter; and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded. These monuments shall be placed not more than 2,400 feet apart. 
(3)	All lot corners not following on any of the above described points shall be marked by iron rods, pipe, or pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter. 
(4)	The line of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 18 inches long. Such pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream and lot line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
(5)	All monuments and pins shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a surveyor or an engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering prior to the time the county land development officer approves the final plat or release of the bond is made in lieu of improvements. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.623) 
Sec. 42-204. - Acceptance of roads into county road system. 
Roads that are built to the standards outlined in this division and that are maintained in that condition by the developer or homeowner's association for a period of one year from the date of certification will be considered for acceptance into the county road system. Roads that are paved under county road department supervision will be given priority for acceptance into the county road system. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.624) 
Secs. 42-205—42-231. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - UTILITIES AND DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 42-232. - Water. 
(a)	When the Fannin County Land Development officer determines that public water is within a distance of 1,000 feet of the subdivision, the developer shall be required to extend the water system into his/her development at his/her expense with the approval of the appropriate water authority. The water extension shall be approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division and installed according to the standards set by the utility. Each subdivision that uses public water shall at a minimum have one fire hydrant at the entrance to the subdivision and one every 1,000 feet using six-inch pipe. 
(b)	A private water system for in excess of 14 lots shall be approved by the department of natural resources and installed using generally accepted construction practices. A private water system, at a minimum, shall have one centrally located fire hydrant and shall comply with the ownership and maintenance provision outlined in division 9 of this article. 
(c)	When a water main is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve abutting lots, all connections shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot before the street base is applied. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.700) 
Sec. 42-233. - Electric and telephone systems. 
The developer is encouraged to contact the electric co-op and telephone company during the design phase of the subdivision to work out the details of where the service lines will be run. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.701) 
Sec. 42-234. - Driveways. 
(a)	Sloping. Any developer or individual installing a driveway that will connect to either a public or private road shall make such a connection so as to prevent runoff from said driveway onto the public or private road. The installation shall be done so that the driveway is an extension of the slope of the public or private road for a minimum of five feet. 
(b)	Notification of land development office prior to construction. Any developer or individual installing a driveway shall notify the Fannin County land development office, in writing, in advance of said installation. A driveway that will be installed in conjunction with the construction of a building can be so noted on the application for a building permit and the same shall be deemed written notice to the Fannin County land development office. 
(c)	Period for inspection. The Fannin County land development office shall have a period of 60 days from the date of the written notice or application to inspect said driveway and determine if the installation, sloping or angle of the driveway is such that it forms an extension of the slope of the public or private road in a manner so as to prevent run off from the driveway onto the public or private road. 
(d)	Notification of unacceptable driveway. The Fannin County land development office shall notify the party or individual named on the building permit application or the individual who provided written notification of the installation of the driveway of any factors of nonacceptability in writing, via certified mail, together with the modifications that would need to be made in order to comply with the designated goal of preventing runoff onto the public or private road. 
(e)	Responsibility for modifications. The developer or individual installing said driveway shall be solely financially responsible for the installation of said driveway in a manner that conforms with this division. In the event that the title to the property has changed from that of the installing individual or entity, the original installing party shall be responsible for the required modifications. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, §§ 3.702—3.706) 
Secs. 42-235—42-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SECURITY 

Sec. 42-262. - Maintenance security. 
(a)	Required; surety bond. All public improvements which are to be dedicated to Fannin County shall be maintained by the developer for a period of one year after the final plat approval by the county land development officer. The developer shall be required to post a surety bond or letter of credit with the Fannin County board of commissioners in the amount of ten percent of the cost of the improvements being dedicated to the county to insure the faithful maintenance of said installations and improvements. 
(b)	Correction of deficiencies. If, upon proper notification of failure of the dedicated improvements, the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within ten days of notice, it shall be deemed to be a failure of the security, and the Fannin County board of commissioners shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the surety shall liable for the full amount of the cost of said repairs. 
(c)	Release. If after a period of one year the Fannin County board of commissioners finds the dedicated improvements are holding with only normal wear and tear, the maintenance security shall be released. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. III, art. VIII) 
Sec. 42-263. - Performance security. 
(a)	Purpose. In lieu of the completion of the required improvements necessary for final plat approval, the Fannin County board of commissioners may accept a bond or letter credit in a form and amount satisfactory to them, providing for and securing to the county the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a specified period of time, not to exceed one year. 
(b)	Letter of credit required. The developer shall provide to the county land development officer from a bank or other reputable institution, subject to the approval of the Fannin County board of commissioners, a letter of credit using the forms which follow. This letter shall be deposited with the clerk of the superior court and shall certify the following: 
(1)	The creditor does guarantee funds in an amount equal to the cost, as estimated by the developer and approved by the Fannin County board of commissioners, of completing all required improvements. 
(2)	That, in the case of failure on the part of the developer to complete the specified improvements within the required time period, the creditor shall pay to the Fannin County board of commissioners immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. 
(3)	That the letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.900) 
Sec. 42-264. - Time limits. 
Prior to the granting of the final plat approval, the developer and the county land development officer shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all required improvements, such deadline not to exceed one year from the date of final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.902) 
Sec. 42-265. - Release of guarantee. 
Upon acceptance by the appropriate official of the dedication of the final portion of the improvements, the Fannin County board of commissioners shall authorize the release of the letter of credit. 
FANNIN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
LETTER OF CREDIT—DEVELOPERS FORM 
WHEREAS ____________ , Principal herein, is the owner and developer of the ____________ Subdivision, Unit ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , located in Fannin County, Georgia; and 
WHEREAS the Preliminary Plat plans and specifications of said Subdivision showing the location, construction, and installation of improvements therein have been filed with and approved by the Fannin County Board of Commissioners, and which are hereby referred to and made part of this instrument, as if fully copied and set forth herein; and 
WHEREAS the Principal herein does hereby obligate itself and does agree to complete the construction and installation of said improvements in the said Subdivision in accordance with the said Preliminary Plat plans and specifications now on file, and as bounded and modified by the final plat of ____________ Subdivision, Unit ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , approved by said Commission. 
NOW THEREFORE, ____________ , as Principal does hereby firmly bind itself, its heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns unto the Fannin County Board of Commissioners in the sum of $ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ conditioned upon ____________ Subdivision, Unit ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , in the construction and installation of all improvements to be completed on or before the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , and upon the completion thereof this obligation to be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
If the Principal fails to complete the construction and installation of all the improvements of said Subdivision as shown and provided for by said plans and specifications herein referred to or has not obtained an extension of the above completion date prior to the completion date herein above specified, the Fannin County Board of Commissioners shall be entitled to perform the construction and installation of the improvements herein above referred to and the Principle shall pay or cause to be paid to the Fannin County Board of Commissioners such sums as may be necessary to complete said improvements, as secured by an irrevocable Letter of Credit, terminating no sooner than ____________ weeks after the completion date for said improvements above mentioned, executed with this instrument, but not to exceed the amount referred to herein. 
WITNESS OUR HANDS this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

 
FANNIN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
LETTER OF CREDIT—CREDITORS FORM 
____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ 
Fannin County Board of Commissioners 
Fannin County Courthouse 
Blue Ridge, Georgia 30513 
We hereby establish an irrevocable and unconditional Letter of Credit in your favor for the account of ____________ , for a sum or sums not exceeding $ ____________ available by your draft or drafts on us at sight. 
Drafts drawn pursuant to this Letter of Credit or guaranty must be accompanied by a statement signed by your authorized agent stating that the amount of the draft is due for the construction and installation of the improvements in ____________ , Fannin County, Georgia, under the terms of the Performance Bond executed by ____________ to you on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
Partial drawings are permitted, but the combined draws cannot exceed the amount of this Letter of Credit. This Letter of Credit shall terminate upon the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
All drafts drawn hereunder must be marked "Drawn under ____________ / ____________ / ____________ of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , Letter of Credit dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ ." 
We hereby agree with the drawers, endorsers and bona fide holders of drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of the Letter of Credit that the same be duly honored if presented to us before the termination hereof as above provided. 
The amount of each draw shall be inscribed on the back hereof, and this Letter of Credit must itself be attached to any draft which exhausts the full amount of the credit set forth in the first paragraph above. 
This Letter of Credit shall be assignable. 

 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.903) 
Secs. 42-266—42-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PROTECTIVE COVENANTS AND RESTRICTIONS OR PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION 

Sec. 42-294. - Required for commonly owned areas in private developments; delivery of document to clerk of superior court. 
For each development or subdivision created in Fannin County, Georgia, an agreement setting forth restrictions, covenants and, if deemed appropriate by the developer, provisions for a property owners association shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia. The restrictions and covenants or if created, the property owners association shall establish the legal responsibility for the maintenance of the roads which service the development and all commonly owned property. Easements granting access for individuals and utilities shall also be set forth. Said document is to be delivered to the county attorney, in recordable form, together with the cost of recording, the review fee, and an otherwise fully executed plat, whereby subsequent to review, the document and the plat can be simultaneously delivered to the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fannin County, Georgia, for recording. 
FANNIN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
PERMIT 
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY 
THIS PERMIT IS GOOD FOR ONE YEAR FROM THE DATE OF ISSUANCE AND CAN BE RENEWED UPON APPLICATION TO THE LAND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE. 

 

 

 

 
In accordance with the provisions of the Fannin County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance and this chapter, this permit is issued for the land disturbing activity as recorded and presented on the attached Approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan which is hereby made a part of this permit. 
This permit is subject to modification or revocation on a finding of noncompliance with any of the provisions of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance or this chapter or with any representation made in the application or the statements and supporting data entered therein or attached thereto. 
This permit is effective from the date issued until the completion of the aforementioned land disturbing activity. This Permit is good for one year from the date of issue and can be renewed upon application to the land development office. 
The permittee shall comply with the conditions included in the following "General Permit Conditions." 

 
GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS 
A.)	Unless otherwise exempted, persons engaged in land disturbing activities shall apply erosion and sediment control measures which conform to the specifications contained in the publication entitled "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the State Soil and Water Conservation, or shall apply alternative design criteria which are equivalent and which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. 
B.)	Practical combinations of the following requirements shall be utilized, as a minimum, in any land disturbing activity: 
1.)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in such a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
2.)	Cut-fill operations shall be kept to a minimum. 
3.)	Erosion and sediment control plans shall conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
4.)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
5.)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
6.)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
7.)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
8.)	Permanent vegetation, and erosion and sediment control structures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
9.)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar structures until the disturbed area is stabilized. 
10.)	Adequate provisions shall be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of hills. 
11.)	Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property. 
12.)	Fills shall not encroach upon the natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner that adversely affects other property owners. 
13.)	Grading equipment shall cross-flowing streams by the means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any case, that such crossing are kept to a minimum. 
14.)	All erosion and sediment control measures, whether temporary or permanent, shall be maintained by the permittee. 
15.)	Hazardous sediment basins and floodwater retention structures shall be fenced and posted to avoid danger to life or property. 
APPLICATION FOR LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY PERMIT 
Fannin County Land Development Office 
Fannin County Courthouse 
Blue Ridge, Georgia 30513 
INSTRUCTIONS: An application for a permit must include the applicants Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and must be factual and complete. Upon completion, the application must be submitted in triplicate to the above shown address. 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Fannin County Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance and the Fannin County Land Development Ordinance, the undersigned hereby applies for a permit for the land disturbing activity as indicated hereon and represented by the attached plans. 

 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 3.1100) 
Secs. 42-295—42-321. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCESS CONTROL 

Sec. 42-322. - Purpose of article. 
In order to expedite the movement of traffic, to promote the safety of the motorists and pedestrians, and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, it is necessary to regulate the points of vehicular access to public roads. To accomplish this goal the following standards shall apply to access control points in Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 4.100) 
Sec. 42-323. - Access plan—Required. 
All commercial and industrial establishments and residential complexes of four or more dwelling units must file an access plan with the Fannin County land development officer when applying for a building permit. The plan shall contain the information required in section 42-324 and shall meet the minimum standards outlined in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 4.101) 
Sec. 42-324. - Same—Scale; contents. 
An access control plan shall be drawn to scale and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The street name, right-of-way, surface width and surface type of the road from which access is desired. 
(2)	The desired point of access in relation to property lines, and any existing access points within 500 feet in both directions of the desired access point on both sides of the road. 
(3)	The drainage system of the road from which access is desired within 500 feet in either direction of the point of access and how the proposed access will drain into the road drainage system. 
(4)	The distance of sight in each direction from the point of access for a distance of 500 feet. 
(5)	The design of the access point to include the width, alignment and surface type. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 4.102) 
Sec. 42-325. - Rural access regulations. 
(a)	The maximum width of all access points shall be 30 feet measured at the property line except when the development requiring access generates high overall or high peak traffic volumes, the county land development officer may approve a wider channeled access point to allow various turning movements for greater traffic control and safety. 
(b)	Temporary accessways may be granted by the county land development officer at locations other than those specified for permanent access where it is expedient for the purpose of staged development. Temporary accessways shall be closed when permanent access to the property is completed. 
(c)	No off-street vehicular storage or parking area shall be allowed where arrangement requires that vehicles back directly into a public right-of-way. 
(d)	In all commercial developments where a lot abuts more than one street, the county land development officer may require that the access be from the street of lowest classification when necessary to lessen serious congestion on the major street. 
(e)	Gasoline service stations shall be allowed two access points onto the same street to allow proper circulation past gasoline pumps. This is regardless of lot width or street classification provided the required plan is approved by the county land development officer. 
(f)	In order to limit the number of individual access points to an arterial or collector street, the county land development officer shall encourage and may require the development of frontage roads and interconnecting interior circulation drives. 
(1)	Frontage roads are those which parallel the existing street and extend across the entire frontage of a particular large property or group of properties. Frontage roads may be required to provide safe and efficient public access to individual properties. Frontage roads may be required to provide safe and efficient public access to individual properties eliminating the traffic congestion that would be caused if each parcel had its own access onto the arterial or collector street. Access points between the frontage road and the main thoroughfare shall be no closer together than 500 feet and no closer together than 300 feet (measured along the street right-of-way) along collector streets. All frontage roads shall be built to the standards specified in article II of this chapter and shall be dedicated as public streets. Access requirements for property served by a frontage road shall be the same as for property fronting a minor street (i.e., at least 100 feet apart) except that the county land development officer may also allow a regrouping of access points onto the frontage road in accordance with an approved site plan which does not destroy the intent of these access control provisions. 
(2)	Interior drives are needed in large developments that require large parking areas. These drives interconnect all parking lot access points with all buildings and areas of vehicular traffic, parking, loading and servicing. They are constructed to provide safe and efficient vehicular movement between specified access points of a development and a series of developments. The county land development officer shall encourage and may require that the interior circulation drives of adjacent developments be connected to eliminate the need to use the public streets to drive from one to the other. All circulation drives shall be clearly defined and marked appropriately with arrows, etc., to assist public circulation into and out of the property and its parking areas. An area of land not less than ten feet deep shall be provided between the public street right-of-way line and the edge of all proposed frontage roads or interior circulation drives. This area will separate the roadways with a minimum turning radius. Such area shall be landscaped and grassed. The county land development officer shall approve the width, placement and design of frontage roads and interior circulation drives. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 4.103) 
Sec. 42-326. - Specific access points for state highways. 
(a)	All lots having between 100 and 300 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to a state highway. For lots with over 300 feet of frontage, additional access points shall be allowed provided they are spaced at least 300 feet apart from each other and from the first access point. For developments generating high overall or high peak traffic volumes, the county land development officer may lessen the distance between access points to allow improved access provided a carefully planned pattern of internal and external channelization is prepared and approved. 
(b)	When a lot of record fronting a state highway has less than 100 feet of frontage, the county land development officer shall first attempt to obtain joint access with either adjacent property or access onto a frontage road. If this is not feasible, one single access point may be allowed and should be located with consideration to the distance to the access points on the adjacent lots. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 4.104) 
Secs. 42-327—42-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 42-356. - Created; appointment. 
This chapter shall be administered by the Fannin County land development officer. The land development officer shall be appointed by and report to the Fannin County commission chairman. The land development officer shall coordinate his/her activities with the county health department sanitarian, tax assessor, county commission chairman and all other interested parties. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 5.100) 
Sec. 42-357. - Duties. 
The duties of the Fannin County land development officer shall be as follows: 
(1)	Review and approve/disapprove all subdivisions of land defined in article I of this chapter. 
(2)	Coordinate the review of all soil erosion and sediment control plans, issue land disturbing permits and inspect the on-site erosion control measures. 
(3)	Review and approve/disapprove access permits as required in article V of this chapter. 
(4)	Review and issue building permits. 
(5)	Review and approve/disapprove mobile home parks. 
(6)	Issue noncompliance and stop work orders. 
(7)	Regulate floodplain usage and building in the floodplain. 
(8)	Inspect mobile homes for compliance with their governing rules and regulations. 
(9)	Solid waste and litter control rules and regulation enforcement. 
(10)	Driveway ordinance enforcement and permit issuance. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 5.101) 
Sec. 42-358. - Development permits. 
(a)	Required. This chapter will be administered through the use of development permits. 
(b)	Permits issued by land development officer. The Fannin County land development officer will issue all of the permits except the septic tank permit. 
(c)	Fee. A permit fee, in an amount established by the county board of commissioners, shall be charged to partially defray the cost the county incurs in administering this article. 
(d)	Display. All permits must be properly displayed on the building site. 
(e)	Required permits. The permits required are: 
(1)	Soil erosion plat: Land disturbing permit. 
(2)	Preliminary plat. 
(3)	Final plat. 
(4)	Access permit. 
(5)	Building permit. 
(6)	Mobile home park certificate. 
(7)	Septic tank permit. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 5.102) 
Sec. 42-359. - Powers. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Fannin County land development office. The Fannin County land development officer shall have the authority to enter, at reasonable times, upon any property, public or private. For the purpose of inspecting said site for conducting such investigations as may be deemed reasonably necessary to carry out his/her duties, the land development officer shall provide his/her name and position to any owner present and state his/her purpose or in the event that no owner is present, to the supervisor of the project, if present. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 5.103) 
Sec. 42-360. - Determination of noncompliance. 
(a)	Notification. In the event that the Fannin County land development officer determines that there has been a violation of this chapter, he/she shall so notify the property owner of the violation. Said notification shall be provided verbally if the owner is present at the time that the violation is identified. Said notification shall be supplied by means of a telephone call in the event that the owner is not present. Said notification shall be supplemented by a written notification to the owner forwarded to the name on the building permit, preliminary plat or as appearing on the tax records of the tax assessors of Fannin County, Georgia. Said notice shall be forwarded via certified mail, return receipt requested. A log of verbal or telephone notices shall be maintained by said office. A copy of any notification, together with the receipt for mailing and receipt of claiming of certified mail shall be maintained by the office. In the event that any mailing is returned unclaimed the same shall be maintained by the office unopened, as the same was returned from the United States post office. Said notice shall further provide: 
(1)	The period of time for the correction of the violations; 
(2)	The measures required to correct the violations; 
(3)	The citation resulting from said violations; 
(4)	The fine that will result from failure to correct the indicated violations; 
(5)	Any stop work order; 
(6)	A statement that each day that the violation continues can be deemed to be a separate and ongoing offense. 
(b)	Stop work order. The Fannin County land development officer shall be authorized to issue a stop work order. Said order shall be given in the manner outlined in subsection (a) of this section. A stop work order can be delivered verbally and be immediately effective. Said verbal stop work order must be followed with written notification. 
(c)	Citations. The Fannin County land development office is authorized to impose citations for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter. A fine of up to $250.00 per day for each violation incurred in connection with the construction of a single-family dwelling, which is being done either by the individual owner or by a contractor under contract with the owner, may be imposed. A fine of up to $1,000.00 per day per violation involving land disturbing/land development activities other than those set forth for single-family individual owner construction and agriculture uses. Failure to obtain a building permit prior to beginning construction will result in a fine equal to ten times the building permit fee. The chairman of the Fannin County board of commissioners shall be notified before any fine is levied or imposed. The Fannin County land development officer shall provide written notification (according to the same procedure outlined above) to the property owner of the imposition of any citation. Said notice shall also contain written notification of the right of appeal and the procedure for appeal. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 5.104) 
Sec. 42-361. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any individual or entity who is notified of the assessment of a citation or the imposition of a stop work order shall have 30 days from the date of said notice to appeal the same to the Fannin County board of commissioners. The date of notification shall be from the date of receipt of the required certified mailing or from the date of last notification in the event that the same is not claimed. Said request for appeal shall be delivered in writing to the office of land development and to the office of the board of commissioners. The land development officer shall be responsible for scheduling a hearing on the appeal, which hearing shall be held within 45 days of the date of the notification of the appeal. The land development officer shall coordinate said hearing with the clerk of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia. Said hearing may be held prior to, subsequent to, in conjunction with a regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia, or at any meeting specially called for said purpose. The land development office shall supply written notification to the property owner, in accordance with the notification procedures set forth above. Said notification shall be provided to the individual or entity not less than 20 days prior to said hearing. 
(b)	At said hearing the land development officer will present the case for the imposition of a fine and any stop work order. The individual or entity will present any case for vacating of the imposition of any fine or stop work order. Both sides may be represented by counsel and witnesses may be heard. The board of commissioners shall make a ruling, which shall be supplied to the individual or entity in writing. 
(c)	Any individual or entity shall have the right to appeal the decision of the board of commissioners de novo to the superior court for Fannin County, Georgia. Said appeal shall be filed within 45 days from the date of notification of the decision of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 5.105) 
Sec. 42-362. - Levy of fines; nonpayment. 
(a)	Any individual or entity not exercising the right of appeal set forth in section 42-361 shall have 60 days from the date of assessment to remit said fine to the land development officer of Fannin County, Georgia. Said fine shall be payable to Fannin County, Georgia. 
(b)	Any individual or entity not exercising the right of appeal from the decision of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia, as set forth above, shall have 45 days from the date of notification of the decision of the board of commissioners to remit said fine to the land development office of Fannin County, Georgia. Said fine shall be paid in cash, check or certified check or money order and in the case of check shall be made payable to Fannin County, Georgia. 
(c)	In the event that the fine is not paid within the indicated period, the Fannin County land development officer shall place a "Notice of Levy" on the deed records of Fannin County, Georgia, which notice shall set forth the name of the property owner, the source of title (deed book and page), the date of the fine, the date that the right of appeal expired, and the amount of the fine. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 5.106) 
Secs. 42-363—42-382. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES 

Sec. 42-383. - Compliance with federal, state and local laws. 
Persons developing real estate for commercial purposes in the unincorporated areas of Fannin County must comply with all state and federal laws on setbacks from streams, the local ordinances on setbacks from property lines and road rights-of-way, and any other requirements in this chapter which may apply. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 7.100) 
Secs. 42-384—42-409. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROTECTION OF MOUNTAINS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-410. - Purpose of article. 
(a)	Findings. The mountains of Georgia are characterized by steep slopes, thin soils, and, because of the natural stresses placed on such environments, they require special protection. Land disturbing activity on the high elevation, steep slope mountains of Georgia potentially threatens the public health, safety, welfare and economic progress of the state. Such land disturbing activity: 
(1)	May endanger the quality of surface water by increasing erosion and stream sedimentation; 
(2)	Has the potential to induce land slides; 
(3)	Has the potential to adversely affect groundwater due to the difficulty in providing proper sewage disposal in areas of steep slope and high elevation; 
(4)	May damage the habitat for some species of wildlife (both plants and animals); and 
(5)	May detract from the mountain's scenic and natural beauty, which is vital to the recreation and tourism industry of north Georgia. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas within protected mountains as defined herein. 
(c)	Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 1 and Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Georgia Constitution, and O.C.G.A. 12-2-8(b), 50.8.7.1(b), and 50-8-2(a)(18)(B). 
(d)	Jurisdiction. This article shall apply to the unincorporated areas of Fannin County and to any incorporated area electing to adopt this article. 
(e)	Cite. This article shall be known as "Mountain Protection Ordinance as Incorporated in this chapter." 
(f)	Interpretation. This article shall be interpreted in conjunction with federal and state rules, regulations and laws, and other Fannin County Ordinances contained or referenced herein. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. I) 
Sec. 42-411. - Mountain protection district established. 
The Mountain Protection District is hereby designated and shall comprise all land area within the jurisdiction of Fannin County, Georgia, that is 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally. The district shall also include the crests, summits, and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher than any such area. This district shall be further defined and delineated on the Mountain Protection District Map. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. II) 
Sec. 42-412. - Protection criteria. 
(a)	Proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended," and all applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(b)	When one or more septic tanks are to be used for individual sewage disposal, the proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements imposed by the local governing authority and the state regulations. 
(c)	Where one or more wells are to be used for individual water supply, the proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Water Well Standards Act of 1985"; the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Department of Human Resources regarding individual or nonpublic wells; and, any more stringent requirements imposed by the local governing authority. 
(d)	If sewage treatment is to be provided by any means other than one or more individual septic tanks, the sewage treatment shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." 
(e)	If a public water supply system is to be provided, the water supply system shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977." 
(f)	Single-family dwellings shall not be constructed at a density of more than one per acre and no such acre shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building site. This density restriction shall not apply to: 
(1)	Any lot of less than one acre, if such a lot was, as of the date of the initial adoption of this article, owned and described as a discrete parcel of real property according to the instrument of title of the person or persons owning the lot on said date. 
(2)	Any lot of less than one acre, if such lot was, as of the date of the initial adoption of this article, shown as a discrete parcel of real property on a plat of survey properly recorded in the real property records of the clerk of the superior court by the person or persons owning the lot on said date. 
(3)	Any land, or part of any land, which was contained in or subject to any master plan, planned unit development plan, special approved development plan, or any other development plan if such plan was filed with and approved by the local governing authority prior to the date of the initial adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, pursuant to a duly enacted planning and zoning ordinance; provided further, that any such planning and zoning ordinance must have provided for rules and procedures and governed lot sizes, density, types of buildings, and other limitations usually associated with the implementation of local zoning ordinances. 
(g)	Multifamily dwellings, in the absence of a public water supply and sewerage system, shall not be constructed at a density of more than four dwelling units per acre. If there is a public water supply and sewage system available to this property, then the density may be increased to no more than six dwelling units per acre. Regardless of what type of system, no such acre shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building site. 
(h)	Structures shall not extend more than 40 feet, as measured from the highest point at which the foundation of such structure intersects the ground, above the uppermost point of the crest, summit, or ridge top of the protected mountain on which the structure is constructed. This height restriction shall not apply to water, radio, or television towers; to any equipment for the transmission of electricity, to minor vertical projections of a parent building, including chimneys, flagpoles, flues, spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas, antennas, poles, wires; or to windmills. 
(i)	Any application for a building permit to construct a commercial structure shall contain a detailed landscaping plan. Such landscaping plan: 
(1)	Shall identify all trees which are to be removed that exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on the tree 4½ feet above the surface of the ground. 
(2)	Shall contain a plan for replacement of any such trees that are removed. 
(3)	Shall include a topographical survey of the project site and an assessment of the effect that the project will have on the environment of the protected mountain after the project has been completed and is in operation. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require commercial structures to comply with the density provisions of subsections (f) and (g) of this section. 
(j)	No person engaging in land disturbing activity shall remove more than 50 percent of the existing trees that exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on such tree 4½ feet above the surface of the ground, unless such person has filed with the application a plan of reforestation developed by a registered forester. 
(k)	Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited from protected mountains. 
(l)	Hazardous waste or solid waste facilities are prohibited from protected mountains. Disposal facilities permitted by the environmental protection division prior to the promulgation of a Mountain Protection Plan shall be exempt from this criterion. 
(m)	All roads on protected mountains shall be designed and constructed to minimize the potential for landslides, erosion, and runoff. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. III) 
Sec. 42-413. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Agriculture and forestry on protected mountains provided that: 
(1)	Agriculture and forestry activities are consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
(2)	Agriculture and forestry activities are consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(b)	Mining activity on protected mountains if such activity is permitted by the department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. IV) 
Secs. 42-414—42-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 42-440. - Site plans. 
Required information. Application for a local development permit within the mountain protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, with the following information: 
(1)	A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale, and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawing. 
(2)	A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)	Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)	All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(8)	The site plan shall contain a surveyor's or engineer's certification that the project site is or is not located within a water supply watershed district, a wetlands protection district, the river corridor protection district or the mountain protection district, as applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(A)) 
Sec. 42-441. - Compliance with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the land development officer or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(B)) 
Sec. 42-442. - Exemptions to site plan requirements. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(C)) 
Sec. 42-443. - Powers of land development officer. 
(a)	The land development officer shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article. He/she shall have the authority to issue stop work orders and cite/fine violators of the article. 
(b)	The land development officer shall have the power to conduct investigations as reasonably deemed necessary to carry out his/her duties of enforcing this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the site. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(D)) 
Sec. 42-444. - Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the land development officer or designated appointee and will be reviewed within 45 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by Fannin County. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determination, as deemed necessary by the land development officer or designated appointee. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approved with conditions, or disapproval) by the land development officer or designated appointee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the land development officer or designated appointee. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the land development officer or designated appointee may be appealed to the Fannin County board of commissioners as outlined in section 42-361. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(E)) 
Sec. 42-445. - Duration of permit validity. 
The development permit approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. If substantial work has not been done on the development within this time period, the development permit approval shall be null and void. If however, substantial work has been done within this time period on the development, the permit can be renewed. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(F)) 
Sec. 42-446. - Penalties. 
(a)	When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the land development officer. 
(b)	When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the land development officer. 
(c)	If the land development officer discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provisions of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the board of commissioners shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(d)	Fines for noncompliance. Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article shall be cited as outlined in sections 42-360(3), 42-361 and 42-362. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. Other ordinances incorporated herein may specify other penalties, which shall govern this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(G)) 
Sec. 42-447. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
The land development officer or designated appointee may suspend or revoke a permit if he/she finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The land development officer or designated appointee shall issue written notification of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(H)) 
Sec. 42-448. - Administrative appeals. 
For administrative appeals, see sections 42-361 and 42-362. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(I)) 
Sec. 42-449. - Judicial review. (See section 42-7.) 
(a)	Jurisdiction. See section 42-361. 
(b)	Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the Fannin County superior court, the Fannin County board of commissioners or its designee may, within the time specified by the superior court, elect to: 
(1)	Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceeding to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)	Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)	Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(J)) 
Sec. 42-450. - Amendments. 
These regulations and the mountain protection districts map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(K)) 
Sec. 42-451. - Relief assessment. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(L)) 
Sec. 42-452. - Separability and abrogation. 
All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subdivision, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. VIII, art. V(M)) 
Secs. 42-453—42-472. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 42-473. - Purpose, authority, etc. 
(a)	Findings. In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Fannin County and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of Fannin County; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This article shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within Fannin County. 
(c)	Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 1 and Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Georgia Constitution, and O.C.G.A. code sections 12-2-8(b), 50.8.7.1(b), and 50-8-2(a)(18)(B). 
(d)	Jurisdiction. This article shall apply to the unincorporated areas of Fannin County and to any incorporated area electing to adopt this article. 
(e)	Cite. This article shall be known and cited as the "Water Supply Watershed Protection Ordinance." 
(f)	Interpretation. This article shall be interpreted in conjunction with federal and state rules, regulations and laws, and other Fannin County ordinances contained or referenced herein. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. IX, art. I) 
Sec. 42-474. - Water supply watershed district established. 
(a)	The Toccoa River and the Ellijay River Water Supply Watershed Districts are hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains the City of McCaysville public water supply intake, the City of Blue Ridge public water supply intake, and the City of Ellijay (Gilmer County, Georgia) public water supply intake. The boundaries of this district are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius of seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes or reservoirs. This district shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Protection District Map of Fannin County. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)	The following water supply watershed districts and reservoirs are hereby defined and the boundaries shall be identified on the Water Supply Watershed Protection District Map: 
(1)	The Toccoa River is a large water supply watershed. Intakes for both the City of McCaysville and the City of Blue Ridge are located on this river. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir as defined by this article. 
(2)	The Ellijay River is a small water supply watershed. An intake for the City of Ellijay is located on this river. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir as defined by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. IX, art. II) 
Sec. 42-475. - Protection criteria. 
(a)	The following regulations shall apply to the Toccoa River water supply watershed identified on the adopted map as a large water supply watershed without a reservoir. New facilities, located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous material of the types listed in section 312 of the Resources Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds on any one day or more, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)	The following regulations shall apply to the Ellijay River water supply watershed identified on the adopted map as a small water supply watershed without a reservoir: 
(1)	The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria: 
a.	A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.	No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream bank. 
c.	Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback area as described in subsection (b)(1)b of this section. 
(2)	The corridors of all perennial streams outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria: 
a.	A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.	No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream bank. 
c.	Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 75-foot setback area as described in subsection (b)(2)b of this section. 
(3)	No more than 25 percent of the land area of any parcel or lot on which new development is placed may be covered by impervious surfaces within the water supply watershed protection district. 
(4)	Exceptions. 
a.	Land uses existing prior to the initial promulgation of the Fannin County water supply watershed protection districts. For the purposes of this article a pre-existing use is defined as any land use or land disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which prior to the initial promulgation of this article falls within one of the following categories: 
1.	Is completed; 
2.	Is under construction; 
3.	Is fully approved by the governing authority; 
4.	All materials have been submitted for approval by the governing authority; or 
5.	Is zoned for such use and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
b.	Mining activities permitted by the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
c.	Utilities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
1.	The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
2.	The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
3.	The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
d.	Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
1.	The activity shall be consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
2.	The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. IX, art. III) 
Sec. 42-476. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)	Site plans. Application for a local development permit with the Toccoa River and Ellijay River water supply watershed districts shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, with the following information: 
(1)	A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale, and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)	A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)	Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)	All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(8)	The site plan shall contain a surveyor's or engineer's certification that the project site is or is not located within a water supply watershed protection district, a wetlands protection district, the river corridor protection district or the mountain protection district, as applicable. 
(b)	Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of the development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the land development officer or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions, are exempted form this requirement. 
(c)	Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: Repairs to a facility that are part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(d)	Powers of land development officer. See section 42-443. 
(e)	Review procedures. See section 42-444. 
(f)	Duration of permit validity. See section 42-445. 
(g)	Penalties. See sections 42-7 and 42-446. 
(h)	Suspension, revocation. See section 42-447. 
(i)	Administrative appeals. See section 42-448. 
(j)	Judicial review. See section 42-449. 
(k)	Amendments. See section 42-450. 
(l)	Relief assessment. section 42-451. 
(m)	Separability and abrogation. See section 42-452. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. IX, art. IV) 
Secs. 42-477—42-505. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 42-506. - Purpose, authority, etc. 
(a)	Findings. 
(1)	The wetlands in Fannin County are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
(2)	Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on the upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(c)	Authority. See section 42-410(c). 
(d)	Jurisdiction. See section 42-410(d). 
(e)	Cite. This article shall be known and cited as the "Wetlands Protection Ordinance." 
(f)	Interpretation. See section 42-410(f). 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. X, art. I) 
Sec. 42-507. - Wetlands protection district established. 
(a)	The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of Fannin County, Georgia, that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service national wetlands inventory maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)	The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Fannin County and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. X, art. II) 
Sec. 42-508. - Protection criteria. 
(a)	Local permit or permission required. No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the Fannin County land development office. 
(b)	Army Corps of Engineers' determination. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the Fannin County land development officer using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. X, art. III) 
Sec. 42-509. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances. 
(1)	Conservation or preservation. Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)	Outdoor passive recreational activities. Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)	Forestry practices. Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)	The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)	Pasturing of livestock. The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)	Educational. Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. X, art. IV) 
Sec. 42-510. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetland protection district: 
(1)	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)	Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. X, art. V) 
Sec. 42-511. - Administration and enforcement. 
For administration and enforcement provisions, see the following: 
(1)	Site plans. See section 42-440. 
(2)	Activities to comply with site plan. See section 42-441. 
(3)	Exemptions to a site plan. See section 42-442. 
(4)	Powers of land development officer. See section 42-443. 
(5)	Review procedure. See section 42-444. 
(6)	Duration of permit validity. See section 42-445. 
(7)	Penalties. See sections 42-7 and 42-446. 
(8)	Suspension, revocation. See section 42-447. 
(9)	Administrative appeals. See section 42-448. 
(10)	Judicial review. See section 42-449. 
(11)	Amendments. See section 42-450. 
(12)	Relief assessment. See section 42-451. 
(13)	Separability and abrogation. See section 42-452. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. X, art. VI) 
Secs. 42-512—42-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TOCCOA RIVER PROTECTION 

Sec. 42-531. - Purpose of article. 
(a)	Findings. River corridors are the strips of land that flank major rivers in Georgia. These corridors are of vital importance to Georgia in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. River corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
(b)	Designation as protected river. The Toccoa River has been designated as a protected river by the State of Georgia. The purpose of this article is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas adjacent to the Toccoa River as defined herein. 
(c)	Authority. See section 42-410(c). 
(d)	Jurisdiction. See section 42-410(d). 
(e)	Cite. This article shall be known and cited as "Toccoa River Protection Ordinance." 
(f)	Interpretation. See section 42-410(f). 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XI, art. I) 
Sec. 42-532. - Toccoa River corridor protection district established. 
Toccoa River corridor protection district is hereby designated and shall comprise all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of the Toccoa River within Fannin County and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. Also included is the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river, even though this strip of land is not included as part of the 100-foot buffer requirement contained in the minimum standards. This district shall be further defined and delineated on the Toccoa River corridor protection district map. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XI, art. II) 
Sec. 42-533. - Protection criteria. 
Protection criteria are as follows: 
(1)	Construction within the buffer area is prohibited except as provided herein. 
(2)	A natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained at all times in the river corridor, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(3)	The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land disturbing activity. 
(4)	Septic tank and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the river corridor, except as expressly provided in subsection (5) of this section. 
(5)	Single-family dwellings including the usual appurtenances are permitted in the buffer area subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The dwelling shall be in compliance with all local zoning regulations. 
b.	The dwelling shall be located on a tract of land containing at least two acres. For the purposes of these standards, the size of the tract of land shall not include any area that lies within the protected river (that is, for tracts of land that include portions of a protected river, the area between the river banks cannot be counted towards the two-acre minimum size). 
c.	There shall be only one such dwelling on each two-acre or larger tract of land. 
d.	A septic tank or tanks serving such a dwelling may be located within the buffer area. 
e.	Septic tank drain fields shall not be located within the buffer area. 
(6)	Industrial and commercial land uses existing in the river corridor prior to the initial promulgation of this article are exempt from the criteria contained herein, provided that: 
a.	These uses do not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
b.	These uses meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(7)	The construction of road crossings and utility crossings is permitted in the river corridor, provided such construction meets all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, and all applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(8)	The following uses are permitted in the river corridor, provided that such uses do not impair longterm functions of the protected river or the river corridor: 
a.	Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission; and 
2.	Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
b.	Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purpose of O.C.G.A. 12-2-8. 
c.	Wastewater treatment. 
d.	Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criterion but a hard surface tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criterion. Paths and walkways within the river corridor are consistent with this criterion. 
e.	Natural water quality treatment and purification. 
f.	Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
2.	Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
3.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
g.	Other uses permitted by the department of natural resources under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(9)	Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(10)	Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(11)	The standards and requirements in this article do not supersede those contained in the Metropolitan River Protection Act, The Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, and the Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XI, art. III) 
Sec. 42-534. - Exemptions from protection plan. 
The following uses are exempt from the river corridor protection plan. 
(1)	Land use existing prior to the initial promulgation of the Fannin County river corridor protection district. For the purposes of this article a preexisting use is defined as any land use or land disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which, prior to the initial promulgation of the ordinance from which this article is derived falls within one of the following categories (see section 42-533(6) for additional regulations governing preexisting industrial and commercial uses): 
a.	Is completed. 
b.	Is under construction. 
c.	Is fully approved by the governing authority. 
d.	All materials have been submitted for approval by the governing authority. 
e.	Is zoned for such use and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
(2)	Mining activities, if permitted by the department of natural resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
(3)	Utilities, (except as discussed section 42-533(7) if such utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area (feasibility shall be decided conservatively by the local government), provided that: 
a.	The utilities shall be located as far from the river bank as reasonably possible; 
b.	Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer area as well as is reasonably possible; and 
c.	Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(4)	Specific forestry and agricultural activities except as discussed above in section 42-533(8)a and f. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XI, art. IV) 
Sec. 42-535. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)	Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the Toccoa river corridor protection district shall include a site plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, with the following information. See section 42-440. 
(b)	Activities to comply with site plan. See section 42-441. 
(c)	Exemptions to site plan requirements. See section 42-442. 
(d)	Powers of land development officer. See section 42-443. 
(e)	Review procedures. See section 42-444. 
(f)	Duration of permit validity. See section 42-445. 
(g)	Penalties. See section 42-446. 
(h)	Suspension, revocation. See section 42-447. 
(i)	Administrative appeals. See section 42-448. 
(j)	Judical review. See section 42-449. 
(k)	Amendments. See section 42-450. 
(l)	Relief assessment. See section 42-451. 
(m)	Separability and abrogation. See section 42-452. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XI, art. V) 
Secs. 42-536—42-563. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 7-1-2009, adopted July 1, 2009, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 42-564—42-567, 42-598—42-602, 42-623—42-626, 42-656—42-659, 42-677—42-680, 42-704, 42-705, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XII, arts. I, VIII(B), VIII(C), art. II, III(A)—III(E), IV(A)—IV(D), V, V(A), V(C), V(D), VI(A)—VI(D), VII(A), VII(B). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-564. - Title. 
The ordinance from which this article derives will be known as "Fannin County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § I) 
Sec. 42-565. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board. The board of natural resources. 
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: 
Engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or 
A person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District. The Blue Ridge Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division. The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 42-600 of this article. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 42-566(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440, et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Blue Ridge Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f). 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § II) 
Sec. 42-566. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of Section 42-600. of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § III) 
Secs. 42-567—42-597. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 42-598. - General provisions. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 42-599 and 42-600. of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § IV(A)) 
Sec. 42-599. - Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(a)	Best management practices as set forth in sections 42-599 and 42-600 of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (b) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b). 
(b)	A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(c)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(e)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 42-600(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(c). 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § IV(B)) 
Sec. 42-600. - Regulations governing land-disturbing activities. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1, et seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 42-599(b) of this article; 
(15)	Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)	There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § IV(C)) 
Sec. 42-601. - Adoption of regulations which exceed minimum requirements. 
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 42-599 and 42-600 of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § IV(D)) 
Sec. 42-602. - Land-disturbing activity injuring property of another. 
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § IV(E)) 
Secs. 42-603—42-622. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICATION/PERMIT PROCESS 

Sec. 42-623. - General. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § V(A)) 
Sec. 42-624. - Application requirements. 
(a)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Fannin County without first obtaining a permit from the Fannin County land development to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(b)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Fannin County land development office and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in 42-625 of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 42-599 and 42-600 of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(c)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(d)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by Section 42-600(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per Section 42-624(f), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(e)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(f)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § V(B)) 
Sec. 42-625. - Plan requirements. 
(a)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 42-599 and 42-600, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § V(C)) 
Sec. 42-626. - Permits. 
(a)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(b)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 42-600(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 42-624(f) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(d)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(e)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(f)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § V(D)) 
Secs. 42-627—42-655. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-656. - Periodic inspections; failure to comply; notice. 
The Fannin County land development office will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VI(A)) 
Sec. 42-657. - Local issuing authority—Amendment required. 
The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VI(B)) 
Sec. 42-658. - Investigations. 
The Fannin County land development office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VI(C)) 
Sec. 42-659. - Refusing entry to authorized personnel. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VI(D)) 
Sec. 42-660. - Review of certified issuing authorities. 
(a)	The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(b)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VI(E, F)) 
Secs. 42-661—42-676. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES AND INCENTIVES 

Sec. 42-677. - Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VII(A)) 
Sec. 42-678. - Stop-work orders. 
(a)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(b)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(c)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(d)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VII(B)) 
Sec. 42-679. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of 42-624(f). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VII(C)) 
Sec. 42-680. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VII(D)) 
Secs. 42-681—42-690. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - EDUCATION AND CERTIFICATION 

Sec. 42-691. - Education and training certification required. 
Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VIII(A)) 
Sec. 42-692. - Certification required for person in charge. 
For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VIII(B)) 
Sec. 42-693. - Contracting with certified persons to meet the requirements. 
Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VIII(C)) 
Sec. 42-694. - Requirements for subcontractor. 
If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § VIII(D)) 
Secs. 42-695—42-703. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL/JUDICIAL REVIEW 

Sec. 42-704. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Fannin County board of commissioners within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § IX(A)) 
Sec. 42-705. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § IX(B)) 
Secs. 42-706—42-710. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - VALIDITY AND LIABILITY 

Sec. 42-711. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § X(B)) 
Sec. 42-712. - Liability. 
(a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)	No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2009, § X(C)) 
Secs. 42-713—42-723. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-724. - Statutory authorization. 
The Constitution of the State of Georgia provides in Article IX, Section II, delegated responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Fannin County, Georgia, board of commissioners does hereby ordain this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. I(A)) 
Sec. 42-725. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of Fannin County, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. I(B)) 
Sec. 42-726. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to the health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging or other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. I(C)) 
Sec. 42-727. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the floodplain; 
(3)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	Insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. I(D)) 
Sec. 42-728. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § A) 
Sec. 42-729. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Fannin County are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)	Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a flood insurance study. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § B) 
Sec. 42-730. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § C) 
Sec. 42-731. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § D) 
Sec. 42-732. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § E) 
Sec. 42-733. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed to favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § F) 
Sec. 42-734. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Fannin County, Georgia, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § G) 
Sec. 42-735. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300.00 under the procedures outlined in section 42-360. Said person shall be liable for all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia, from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. II, § H) 
Sec. 42-736. - Variances. 
(a)	The Fannin County board of commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the land development officer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners of Fannin County may appeal such decision the superior court of Fannin County. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to reserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the Fannin County board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)	Conditions for variances. 
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The land development officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the Fannin County board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. V) 
Secs. 42-737—42-755. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-756. - Designation of administrator. 
The land development officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. III, § A) 
Sec. 42-757. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Application. Application for a development permit shall be made to the Fannin County land development officer on forms provided by the county prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage or materials and equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)	Required information. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) or the regulatory lowest floor level, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of sections 42-786(2) and 42-788(2); 
d.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of sections 42-786(1) and 42-788(1); 
e.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. 
a.	For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The land development officer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. III, § B) 
Sec. 42-758. - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
Duties of the land development officer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies form which approval is required by federal and state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-729, then the land development officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(4)	Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 42-757(b). 
(5)	Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 42-786(2) and section 42-788(2). 
(6)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the land development officer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 42-757(b)(1)c and section 42-786(2) or section 42-788(2). 
(7)	Obtain design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of this article. 
(8)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(9)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to insure accuracy of community flood maps. Assure that the flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(10)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where the appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the land development officer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(11)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the land development officer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. III, § C) 
Secs. 42-759—42-784. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-785. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into a separate room; 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. IV, § A) 
Sec. 42-786. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter wall be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-785(4), elevated buildings. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 42-758(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: 
1.	Individual lots or parcels; 
2.	In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.	In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.	On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 42-785(6).) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site by only quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
2.	Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a, c of this section. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-729 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights; therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. IV, § B) 
Sec. 42-787. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-729, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-729, then the land development officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division, only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 42-785(4), elevated buildings. The land development officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permanent file. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. IV, § C) 
Sec. 42-788. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-729, may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-785(4), elevated buildings. The land development officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the above provisions, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 42-757(b)(1)c and (b)(2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. IV, § D) 
Sec. 42-789. - Standards for subdivisions. 
Subdivision standards are as follows: 
(1)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2002, ch. XIII, art. IV, § F) 
Chapter 46 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOMES AND PARKS 

Sec. 46-19. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
(a)	These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all mobile homes/manufactured homes on single lots and within parks used for residential occupancy in the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the Fannin County board of commissioners, the Fannin County health department, and the building inspection department to review and assist the development of mobile home/manufactured home sites and mobile home/manufactured home parks within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County for the purposes stated in this article. 
(b)	This article does not govern or regulate industrialized buildings. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 46-20. - Purpose. 
These regulations are being promulgated to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Fannin County. Fannin County recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing, if developed in accordance with compatibility standards. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 46-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved mobile home/manufactured home space means any lot or parcel of land designed and designated for the location of one manufactured home, its accessory buildings or structures, and accessory equipment for exclusive use of the home meeting the requirements of this article, as administered by the Fannin County building inspector. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Buildings Act, Georgia Law 1982 pp 1637 (O.C.G.A., title 8, chapter 2, art. 2; part 1). 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit of transfer or ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a residential dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established in the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC Section 5401 et seq. A travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobile home/manufactured home. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and was built prior to June 15, 1976. 
Mobile home/manufactured home park means premises where more than two mobile homes/manufactured homes are parked for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces or lots are set aside and offered for rent for use by mobile homes/manufactured homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure or facility used by occupants of mobile homes/manufactured homes on such premises. This definition shall not include mobile homes/manufactured homes sales lots. 
Owner means any person or entity which holds legal or equitable title to the mobile home/manufactured home. The term "owner" does not include any person or entity which holds a security interest, lien, or security deed to the mobile home or manufactured home park. 
Porch means an open air structure consisting of a deck, with or without a roof, which may be enclosed only by the installation of screen wire. Porches shall not be attached to a recreational vehicle in any manner. A porch shall not contain plumbing fixtures. 
Recreational vehicle means an operable motorized vehicle, an immediately towable travel trailer, or a pop-up tent camper used for recreational purposes. Any units over 8½ feet in width or which require a special permit from the department of transportation for moving are not considered to be recreational vehicles. A pitched roof trailer is not considered to be a recreational vehicle under this definition. A recreational vehicle shall not have a removable tongue. A recreational vehicle shall have marine type plumbing fixtures throughout and a holding tank, except that a pop-up tent camper need not have a holding tank. The recreational vehicle may be parked next to unattached porches or decks. A recreational vehicle is no longer a recreational vehicle if any of the following occurs: 
(1)	Other buildings or rooms are attached; 
(2)	If the unit is tied (strapped) down; 
(3)	If wheels or tires have been removed; 
(4)	Attachment of any permanent structure. 
Recreational vehicle park means a property designed to hold recreational vehicles in designated spaces. Recreational vehicle spaces are designed for temporary use with a maximum continuous occupancy of no more than 180 days not counting vehicle storage days. The spaces in a recreational vehicle park are designed to remain on a common piece of property. If the spaces are sold individually, then this no longer constitutes a recreational vehicle park. If any space in a recreational vehicle park is occupied by a mobile home or by a dwelling not meeting the definition of recreational vehicle, then the property no longer constitutes a recreational vehicle park. An established recreational vehicle park must remain a recreational vehicle park and may not be converted to a mobile home park. Any entity purporting to be a recreational vehicle park or wishing to be considered to be a recreational vehicle park under any law, ordinance, rule, regulation or standard must meet the definition of a recreational vehicle park as defined above, otherwise is will be considered a mobile home park for the purposes of this article. 
Street (private) means a right-of-way which meets all required design standards of a public road as described in the Fannin County land planning ordinance, but for purposes of controlled access or privacy is not dedicated to public use of public by prescription. Any such right-of-way shown on a plat or deed shall be recorded with a statement on the park plan that the road is not intended to be maintained by a government entity or agency thereof. 
Street (public) means a right-of-way arising by purchase dedication, or public use which is maintained by a government entity or agency thereof; accessible to, supported and shared by all members of the public. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 3; Amd. of 1-13-2004) 
Sec. 46-22. - Nonconforming mobile home/manufactured home parks. 
Nonconforming mobile home parks lawfully existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six months, the mobile home/manufactured home park shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations prior to the park being occupied again. Any alteration or expansion of an existing manufactured home park or alteration, modification of any previously approved mobile home/manufactured home park plan, or any alteration, modification of any park in existence prior to the requirement of plat approval shall be in compliance with these regulations, as amended. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 46-23. - Location disclosure and decal required. 
Every person holding title to or possessing a mobile home/manufactured home which is placed or located within the limits of Fannin County, shall report the location to, and obtain a location decal for, said mobile home/manufactured home from the tax commissioner of Fannin County, annually, no later than April 1 of each year. Such location decal shall be designed in such manner and affixed to the mobile/manufactured home in such manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 46-24. - Issuance of building permit. 
Any owner of a mobile home/manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said mobile home/manufactured home, shall obtain a permit from the building inspector of Fannin County, as provided in section 42-25, indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed mobile/manufactured home. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 6) 
Sec. 46-25. - Permit application procedures. 
(a)	A building permit to move a mobile/manufactured home into or within the county shall not be issued by the Fannin County building inspector until the following conditions have been met in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
(1)	A valid location decal must be issued from the tax commissioner's office and attached as provided in section 46-23. 
(2)	All mobile/manufactured homes must be located at an approved mobile home/manufactured home space, as defined within section 46-21 or in an approved mobile home/manufactured home park. 
(3)	For individual lots not approved under the mobile/manufactured home park regulations, a sanitary permit must be obtained from the Fannin County health department for on-site sewage disposal, or in the event that a municipality will provide sewer hookup, a letter must be provided by that municipality verifying that they will allow public sewer hook-up. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, the tax commissioner shall issue the aforementioned location decal, the building inspector shall issue the aforementioned building permit, and the health department shall issue the aforementioned sanitary permit. Upon the issuance of the above permits, a mobile/manufactured home may be moved into the county or within the county and installed for occupancy. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 7) 
Sec. 46-26. - Exception to the issuance of a building permit. 
A building permit shall be required to locate a mobile/manufactured home in Fannin County except under the following exceptions: 
(1)	In cases where an owner does not desire to set the mobile/manufactured home up for occupancy, a building permit shall not immediately be required, subject to completion of a certified, notarized statement that no occupancy of said mobile/manufactured home will be permitted until such time as a building permit is applied for and granted. In such cases, authorization to maintain the mobile/manufactured home on a site without a building permit shall expire six months from the date the relocation permit was issued. 
(2)	Mobile/manufactured homes may be brought into the county and located on a sales lot of a state approved dealer as listed in the office of the state safety fire commissioner for sale without a building or sanitary permit. However, under no exceptions shall any mobile/manufactured home, which is located on a sales lot, be occupied unless all permit requirements in these regulations are met. Installation must comply with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, Chapter 120-3-7, Appendix A, made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to authority set forth in O.C.G.A., sections 8-2-133, 8-2-135, 8-2-137(b), 8-2-161, 8-2-162, 8-2-165, 8-2-168 and 25-2. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 8) 
Sec. 46-27. - Mobile home/manufactured homes minimum construction standards. 
(a)	Each newly installed mobile home/manufactured home in Fannin County shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the U. S. Housing and Urban Development, as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., before that mobile home/manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said mobile home/manufactured home. It is the intent of this section to prohibit mobile home/manufactured home into Fannin County that do not conform to the applicable Housing and Urban Development Construction Standards, as expressed in 42 USC 5401 et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that act. To that end, no mobile home/manufactured home shall be allowed to locate for residential occupancy in this county unless that mobile home/manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the U. S. Housing and Urban Development, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanently affixed label or tag certifying 42 USC 5415, compliance. 
(b)	Mobile homes/manufactured homes which do not display the certification required by 42 USC 5415 shall not be eligible for a Fannin County building and/or occupancy permit. However, any mobile home which legally exists in Fannin County at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not require said certification. Said existing mobile home shall be freely transferable and regulatable in Fannin County, provided that all of the installation requirements in sections 46-28 and 46-29 are met to the satisfaction of the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 10) 
Sec. 46-28. - Mobile home/manufactured home installation requirements. 
(a)	All newly installed mobile/manufactured homes must be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service in compliance with applicable health codes and chapter 120-3-7 Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner included in appendix A. All mobile/manufactured homes must be installed on an approved pier system and secured with approved tie-down devices, an approved plumbing system, an approved electrical system, and an approved landing at each exit as required by the aforementioned rules and regulations. 
(b)	Each mobile/manufactured home shall be installed such that the finished floor level of the mobile/manufactured home shall not exceed an average height higher than 80 inches in elevation from finished grades, in accordance with chapter 120-3-7, appendix A. All mobile/manufactured homes shall be installed to meet the manufacturers regulations. 
(c)	At the time of inspection, the space beneath each mobile/manufactured home shall be enclosed, with the exception of ventilation and access openings. A minimum of four ventilation openings shall be provided from the under floor space to the exterior. These standards are more specifically explained in the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes. The enclosing material shall extend from the lower edge of the exterior walls of the mobile/manufactured home to the ground surface level of the pad on which it is located. All such enclosures shall be permanently installed and consist of opaque, rust and rot resistant materials. All ventilation and access openings shall be covered with wire mesh screen or its equivalent. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 11) 
Sec. 46-29. - Process of inspection for mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
The following requirements shall pertain to the installation of mobile/manufactured homes on individual lots or in parks: 
(1)	Foundation. The building inspector shall require the foundation to be inspected to insure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as may be subsequently revised. The Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes are incorporated as a part of this article by reference. Until the foundation is inspected and approved by the building inspector, no additional work will be approved. 
(2)	Plumbing. The building inspector shall require the external plumbing system to be inspected, including water and sewage hookups, to insure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the 1991 Georgia State Plumbing Code, as may be subsequently revised. Until the plumbing system is inspected and approved by the building inspector, no additional work will be approved. 
(3)	On-site sewage. 
a.	Where individual on-site sewage systems are installed in conjunction with public or community water systems, the minimal lot size shall conform to those required by the Fannin County health department and chapter 42 of this Code, the Fannin County land use ordinance, for the location of an individual on-site sewage system. 
b.	All on-site sewage systems shall be subject to the approval of the Fannin County health department. Where individual on-site sewage systems are installed in conjunction with private water systems, the minimal lot size shall conform to standards established in by the Fannin County health department and chapter 42, the Fannin County land use ordinance. 
c.	Any building site so determined by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division to fall within a designated groundwater recharge area shall be subject to additional restrictions pursuant to chapter 391-3-17, 02, section 3(m), Criteria for Protection of Groundwater Recharge Areas, Rules for Environmental, Planning Criteria, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as amended. 
(4)	Stairs and landings. The building inspector shall require stairs and landings to comply with section 1112-Stairway Construction of the Georgia State Building Code, as may be subsequently revised, and must adhere to the following as stated in the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as may be subsequently revised: The height of the riser shall not exceed 7¾ inches, and treads, exclusive of nosing, shall be not less than nine inches wide. Every tread less than ten inches wide shall have a nosing, of effective projection, of approximately one inch over the level immediately below that tread. The width of the landings shall be not less than the width of stairways they serve. Every landing shall have a minimum dimension measured in the direction of travel equal to the width of the stairway. Such dimension need not exceed four feet when the stair has a straight run. All stairways having treads located not less than 30 nor more than 34 inches above the leading edge of a tread. The minimum width of any stair serving as a means of egress shall be a minimum of 36 inches. 
(5)	Electrical. The building inspector shall require inspection of the external installation and connection of the electrical system to insure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the 1990 National Electrical Code, as may be subsequently revised. 
(6)	Gas. 
a.	The Fannin County building inspector shall require inspection of the connection of any gas system to insure compliance with the 1991 Standard Gas Code, as may be subsequently revised. 
b.	Until these inspections have been made and the mobile/manufactured home is found to be in compliance with all applicable codes, no permanent power may be installed, and no occupancy shall be permitted. Evidence of compliance will be shown by a certificate of completion, which includes written documentation provided the applicant and a sticker attached to the electrical meter base. Occupancy is permitted upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 12) 
Sec. 46-30. - Permanent occupancy of recreational vehicles in parks prohibited. 
No recreational vehicles shall be permanently occupied within any mobile/manufactured home park development nor connected to water or electrical power, and no building permits shall be issued for occupancy of any recreational vehicle. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 13) 
Sec. 46-31. - Procedures for development of mobile home/manufactured home parks. 
All mobile home/manufactured home parks developed after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall meet the following site plan requirements: 
(1)	Site plan approval required. All mobile home/manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the board of commissioners after review by the Fannin County building inspector in accordance with the procedures and requirements established herein. Site plans required herein for the placement of two or more residential units shall contain the seal of a Georgia registered engineer or surveyor. No building permits shall be issued for sites within any development until final approval is granted subject to all park plan requirements. 
(2)	Park plan submittal requirements. All park plans shall be submitted to the Fannin County building inspector accompanied by an application fee of $100.00 and shall contain the following information: 
a.	The name of proposed park, and the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and owner. 
b.	Location map and legal description of the mobile home/manufactured home park; north point (designated magnetic or true). 
c.	Complete plans to scale of one inch equals not more than 100 feet and specifications of the proposed park showing: 
1.	The area and dimensions of the tract of land, including topographic data at a contour interval of not more than five or an interval appropriate for decision-making on the tract; and including the location and type of soils on the tract. A statement of accuracy signed by surveyor or engineer as applicable. 
2.	The number, location, and dimensions of all mobile home/manufactured home lots. 
3.	The location, width, and name of all streets shall be indicated; and no street names designated on the park plan submitted shall be redundant with the name of a legally existing street within Fannin County. 
4.	The location and size of drainage mechanisms proposed, including the size of each application drainage area. 
5.	The location of service buildings and other proposed structures. 
6.	The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
7.	Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage disposal facilities. 
8.	Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home/manufactured home park. 
9.	The location of all street lights. 
10.	The location of bulk refuse containers, perimeter walls, and park identification signs. 
11.	A soil erosion and sedimentation plan meeting the requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
12.	Certification from the appropriate authority on water and sewer acceptability. 
(3)	Development compliance. All required improvements, according to the site plan approved by the board of commissioners, shall be installed in each park phase before the issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 14) 
Sec. 46-32. - Mobile home/manufactured home parks regulations. 
(a)	Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, or covered with stone, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
(b)	Location and frontage. A mobile home/manufactured home park development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 100 feet on a public street. 
(c)	Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home/manufactured home site shall be equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. All lots shall comply with the flood damage prevention ordinance of Fannin County. 
(d)	Streets. All mobile home/manufactured home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within a park, and shall have unobstructed access to public street or highway. The following requirements shall apply to the development of the park system: 
(1)	All internal streets shall be provided with a paved surface, having a minimum width of 20 feet, which shall be durable and well-drained under normal weather conditions, and designated by street signs, meeting the approval of the public works director. 
(2)	All cul-de-sacs shall be constructed with a minimum 50-foot radius. 
(3)	All park streets shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times by the owner(s) of the park. 
(4)	Street design, base preparation, and surface construction materials shall meet the requirements of the county street and road standards. Written approval of the street system by the land planning development officer shall be required before the first building permit is issued. 
(e)	Off-street parking requirements. A minimum of two off-street spaces per lot shall be provided in all mobile home/manufactured home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. 
(f)	Lot area and width. A mobile home/manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of 3.5 contiguous acres. Individual unit spaces shall be in conformance with section 46-29(3), with not less than a 100-foot minimum width at the building setback line and not less than 100 feet of frontage on any adjacent streets; with the exception of cul-de-sac lots, which shall have a minimum street frontage of 30 feet. 
(g)	Recreation and other community facilities. Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities for those mobile home/manufactured home parks containing 20 or more acres or 25 or more units. 
(h)	Setbacks required. 
(1)	No mobile home/manufactured home or accessory building or structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any mobile home/manufactured home park perimeter property boundary. 
(2)	Each mobile home/manufactured home shall be set back from any other mobile home/manufactured home by at least 40 feet. 
(3)	There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any individual mobile/manufactured home and an adjoining street, common parking areas or other common areas. 
(4)	On-site septic systems shall be allowed to extend into all setback areas, provided a minimum 25-foot setback is maintained from the park perimeter. 
(i)	Perimeter buffer required. An undisturbed buffer consisting of trees and other vegetation, at least 50 feet in width, shall be maintained around the entire exterior perimeter of a mobile/manufactured home park. Provided, however, any underground utilities may be placed within this buffer, but no closer than 25 feet from the perimeter park boundary. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the buffer, which shall be so maintained as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
(j)	Lighting. All mobile home parks shall have lighting of appropriate height, spacing, and intensity so that each mobile home/manufactured home site's access and parking is appropriately illuminated. Mercury vapor, or high or low pressure sodium lights of not more than 200 feet intervals with a minimum height of 18 feet. 
(k)	Water supply. All mobile/manufactured home parks shall be required to provide an adequate, safe, and potable supply of water that is easily accessible for maintenance, meeting the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	Public water supply. All mobile home/manufactured home parks shall connect to an existing public water system if such system is located within 1,000 feet of the proposed park. The availability and adequacy of a public water supply shall be confirmed by the applicable agency having jurisdiction. If the public water supply is determined to be unavailable or inadequate for service, the board of commissioners shall waive the requirement and allow an alternative water supply source. 
(2)	Community water system. If a single well is proposed to serve 15 or more service connections, or 25 or more persons, then such well and water distribution system must meet the standards for a Community Water System in accordance with the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-5, "Rules for Safe Drinking Water," as amended. 
(3)	Individual wells. If individual wells are used, each well may be permitted to serve up to four service connections, provided that the construction method of each well shall meet the standards in accordance with the Georgia Annotated Code 12-5-120 through 12-5-138, The Water Well Standard Act of 1991, as amended. 
(l)	Sewage disposal and treatment. All mobile home/manufactured home parks shall be required to provide either: 
(1)	A public or community sewage treatment system approved by the appropriate governing agency; or 
(2)	An on-site sewage management system approved by the Fannin County health department. 
(m)	Electricity. All electric installations shall meet the requirements of the current National Electrical Code, as amended. 
(n)	Refuse collection facilities. Each mobile home/manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) or individually covered refuse containers distributed throughout the park, equipped with tightfitting covers, having a capacity of 30 gallons or more for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall be required at all parks in excess of ten units, with a minimum of four cubic yards per ten units. Bulk containers shall either be screened or located so as to remain hidden from the public right-of-way, enclosed within a minimum four-foot high chainlink fence, and placed upon concrete pads, extending at least 18 inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor, or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
(o)	Service buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. Such structures shall conform to the Georgia State Building Codes, as amended, and may include, but are not limited to the following uses: 
(1)	Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
(2)	Community sanitary facilities. 
(3)	Community postal facilities. 
(4)	Indoor community recreation areas. 
(5)	Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for park residents only. 
(p)	Signs. The following nonflashing and nonanimated signs are permitted under the conditions specified: 
(1)	Park identification sign. One park identification sign per entrance shall be permitted not to exceed 24 square feet in area for the purpose of denoting the name of the mobile home park. 
(2)	Mobile home identification sign. One identification sign not exceeding one square foot in area shall be permitted for each unit. The sign shall indicate the name and address of the occupant of the unit. 
No sign shall be located so as to impede vehicular visibility at any intersection of street lines with one another or the edge of driveways with street lines. 
(q)	Restrictions on occupancy. A mobile home/manufactured home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it has met the installation requirements in section 46-29 upon inspection by the building official. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 15) 
Sec. 46-33. - Enforcement. 
The Fannin County board of commissioners is hereby authorized to adopt, after a public hearing, such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article. These additional regulations shall have the same effect as all provisions of this article and the penalty for violation of the provisions thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this article, as hereinafter provided. 
(1)	Violations. In cases where a violation of this article has been determined by the building inspector, he/she shall notify the owner of the property on which such violation is found by certified mail sent to the address of the property owner as it appears in tax information. If the owner of the mobile/manufactured home is different from the property owner, the violation notice shall also be sent by certified mail to the owner of the mobile/manufactured home. If no valid mailing address can be obtained, or if the certified mail is returned to the building inspector, the notice of violation may be hand delivered to the person deemed responsible for said violation. The notice of violation shall clearly state the nature of the violation, including specific provision(s) of this article which have not been complied with, and the date by which said violation(s) will be remedied. Said date will be determined by the building inspector based on the nature and extent of the violation, but in no case shall exceed 30 days from the date the certified mail was received. In cases where the notice of violation is hand delivered, the date upon which said violation(s) will be remedied shall not exceed 30 days from the date of delivery. 
(2)	Issuance of stop work orders. The building inspector is authorized to issue stop work orders in any instance where a violation of this article is found. The procedure for the issuance of stop work orders shall be the same as the notification procedure for violations as specified in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)	Procedure for noncompliance. In cases where a violation has occurred, and the violator has not remedied the violation within the specified time period, or in cases where stop work orders have not been fully complied with, the Fannin County sheriff's department, upon written notification from the building inspector of such violation or noncompliance, shall issue a citation requiring appearance in Fannin County magistrate court and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or confinement in the Fannin County jail not to exceed 60 days or by either fine, confinement, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. This section is adopted pursuant to the provision of Georgia Laws 1984, (H.B. 910), O.C.G.A. 36-1-20(a), (b), (c) and (d). Said citation shall include any and all violations found by the building inspector. 
(4)	Exceptions. The only exceptions to the aforementioned enforcement procedures are cases that involve a violation regarding location decals or failure to provide a complete list of all mobile homes/manufactured homes parked, rented or otherwise located upon the property of the entity or in a mobile home/manufactured home park operated by the entity. In those cases where a violation occurs, it shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 16) 
Sec. 46-34. - Conflict with other ordinances and effect or partial invalidity. 
(a)	In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of Fannin County existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the provision which in the judgment of the Fannin County board of commissioners establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances which establish a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this article. 
(b)	If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article which shall remain in full force and effect. To this end, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1994, § 17) 
Secs. 46-35—46-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOMES BROUGHT INTO COUNTY 

Sec. 46-57. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all mobile homes on individual lots and within parks used for residential occupancy in the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the board of commissioners and the Fannin County land planning and development officer to regulate the location of mobile homes within Fannin County, Georgia. This article does not govern or regulate industrialized buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 46-58. - Purpose. 
These regulations are being promulgated to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia. The board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia, recognizes that mobile homes and nonsite built homes can meet the housing needs of many citizens of the county and will not adversely effect the overall development of Fannin County, Georgia, if utilized in accordance with compatibility standards. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 46-59. - Mobile home defined. 
The term "mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing and electrical systems. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 46-60. - Maximum age standards. 
Manufactured homes transported from outside of Fannin County, Georgia, which were manufactured in a year more than ten years prior to the year in which the manufactured home is to be relocated to Fannin County, Georgia, shall be presumed to be in a condition or state of disrepair making such home unsuitable for utilization within Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 4) 
Sec. 46-61. - Mobile homes currently on Fannin County tax digest. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this article, any mobile home that was on the Fannin County tax digest for the previous year can be relocated to any point within Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 46-62. - Adequate means of entry. 
All manufactured homes shall provide adequate means of entry or steps at every door opening. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 6) 
Sec. 46-63. - Minimum setback. 
The location of a manufactured home shall comply with the applicable county setback ordinances. Any adjacent property owner can execute an agreement of variance as to the setback from an adjacent property line. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 7) 
Sec. 46-64. - Adherence to Fannin County ordinance regulating mobile homes/manufactured homes and parks. 
This article shall be read with and construed in conjunction with the "Fannin County Ordinance to Regulate Mobile/Manufactured Homes and Parks," article II of this chapter. To the extent that there is a conflict between said articles, this article shall govern. To the extent that this article is silent on an issue, article II of this chapter shall govern. All standards not specifically addressed in this article shall be the same as those in article II of this chapter. The provisions of inspection and enforcement shall be the same as those of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 8) 
Sec. 46-65. - Headings, severance, governing law. 
The section headings are provided for reference only and shall not be controlling. In the event that any portion of this article or article II of this chapter is deemed invalid, it shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of said ordinances. This article shall be governed by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-25-1999, § 8) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRODUCTS USED IN THE PREPARATION OF METHAMPHETAMINE 

Sec. 50-19. - Defined. 
The term "products used in the preparation of Methamphetamine" means any compound, mixture, preparation or drug product containing any dosage of 18 mg or more of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanoline, or any of their salts, isomers or salts of isomers, alone or in a mixture. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 50-20. - Display of products prohibited. 
Products used in the preparation of Methamphetamine may not be openly displayed for sale in the unincorporated area of the county, but must be maintained behind the counter, maintained in a locked cabinet or maintained in a location from which it may be distributed for sale only by the pharmacist, pharmacy technician, sales clerk or other retail distributor employee. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 50-21. - Requirements for purchase of products. 
(a)	Products used in the preparation of Methamphetamine may not be dispensed, sold or distributed in the unincorporated area of the county without requiring the individual purchasing, receiving or otherwise acquiring such compound, mixture, preparation or drug product to produce a photo identification showing their date of birth and sign a written log or receipt showing their signature and printed name, the date of the transaction, the type and amount of product purchased. 
(b)	The log or receipt must be maintained by the retailer or other persons dispensing, selling or distributing the drug used in preparation of Methamphetamine for a period of one year. Then records, logs or receipts must be made available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 50-22. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)	Violations of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor punished in accordance with O.C.G.A. 15-10-60 et seq., and 36-1-20 and will be heard in Fannin County magistrate court. 
(b)	The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Fannin County sheriff's office. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 50-23. - Validity and severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. Should a Georgia or federal law be instituted which supercedes this article, then this article shall be declared void. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2005) 
Chapter 54 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)	The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, is enacting this chapter to insure that noncommercial messages are authorized with restriction only as to the size of such signage and to establish reasonable regulations for signage containing commercial messages. 
(b)	The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard, a detriment to property values, and adversely effect the natural beauty of the Fannin County, Georgia, area and thereby negatively impact on the travel and tourism industry of Fannin County, Georgia, which is the largest industry in Fannin County, Georgia, and can adversely impact the overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. 
(c)	By enacting this chapter, the members of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia, intend to: 
(1)	Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)	Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(3)	Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(4)	Maintain the aesthetic beauty of the county; 
(5)	Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(6)	Avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(7)	Promote economic development; and 
(8)	Insure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of the chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, the word "person" includes a firm, organization, partnership, trust and corporation, and the word "county" shall mean Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 
Advertising devise means any structure or device erected or intended for the purpose of displaying advertising situated upon or attached to real property. 
Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition does not include signs which indicate time, temperature, or date. 
Arcade, directory, mall sign means a serial sign which identifies the names of businesses, offices, professionals, industries or other entities located within a planned center. 
Area of sign means the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. The sign area of painted or affixed wall signs when composed of letters only is the sum of the areas of the smallest contiguous rectangles each capable of containing one such letter. For double-faced signs, except for commercial off-premises signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area. 
Banner means a sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. 
Business sign means any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, which directs attention to goods, commodities, products, services or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
Clock sign means any timepiece erected outside of any building for the purpose of advertising the business on the premises on which it is located. 
Commercial sign means a sign which identifies, advertises, or directs attention to a business, or is intended to induce the purchase of goods, property, or service, including without limitation, any sign naming a brand of goods or service and real estate signs. 
Construction sign means a sign erected and maintained on premises announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building(s) or project. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. Illuminated signs that indicate only the time, temperature, or date shall not be considered as flashing signs. 
Frontage, building, means the width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular establishment. 
Frontage, road, means the width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Ground sign means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Height of sign means the distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign face. 
Illuminated sign, direct, means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
Illuminated sign, indirect, means a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Licensee means the person and/or entity erecting the sign on property of owner and/or permittee. 
Marquee means a roofed structure and attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
Marquee sign means a business sign painted on, attached to or hung from a marquee. 
Monument sign means any sign which has a brick or stone base and frame within which advertising panels are contained. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Nonconforming use means a structure or land lawfully occupied by an existing use which does not conform with the permitted uses. 
Off-premises signs. 
(1)	Off-premises advertising sign means a sign which is not located upon the premises of the business or entity indicated or advertised by said sign. This includes products advertised in conjunction with a business entity. 
(2)	Off-premises directional sign means a sign not located upon the premises of the business or entity indicated on the sign and only for the purpose of directing traffic to business establishments, real estate developments, public and private clubs, schools and other such facilities. The advertising of products and/or services shall not be allowed on the sign structure. 
Permittee means the person and/or entity owning the land (landowner) on which the sign is erected. 
Planned center, office, commercial, or industrial means a group of retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries, or any other businesses planned to serve the public, which is in common ownership or condominium ownership. 
Political sign means a sign identifying or urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party, or candidate for public office. 
Portable sign means a sign which is not permanently affixed, including but not limited to signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of an advertising device. 
Pylon sign means a freestanding sign which rests upon a pylon or pole. 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his/her agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease, or sale. 
Roof sign means a sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or over the ridge of a gable, hip or gamble roof, and supported by or attached to said roof. 
Sidewalk or sandwich sign means a movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
Sign means a device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
Sign face means that part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Swimming or projecting sign means a sign projecting more than six inches from the outside wall or walls of any building upon which it is located. 
Temporary sign means a sign of a nonpermanent nature. All such signs shall be removed with ten days after the purpose of which the sign is intended to advertise has been accomplished. 
Trailer sign means any sign mounted on wheels and that may be moved from one location to another. 
Wall sign means a sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than six inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign. 
Window sign means a sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 54-3. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Repairs and maintenance of existing nonconforming signs, including off-premises signs, shall be permitted. 
(b)	Structural repairs, changes in shape, or design shall be permitted. 
(c)	No existing nonconforming sign shall be increased as to height or size. 
(d)	No new nonconforming off-premises signs shall be permitted, suffered or allowed subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-8) 
Sec. 54-4. - Noncommercial speech. 
(a)	Noncommercial speech shall be regulated by this chapter only as to the size and style of signage containing such speech. Any sign or structure used solely for the purpose of displaying a noncommercial message or noncommercial speech is exempt from all other aspects of this chapter. 
(b)	Any sign or structure erected for the purpose of displaying noncommercial speech or a noncommercial message shall not be used for the display of a commercial message unless such sign or structure is erected in conformance with all requirements of this chapter and has received a sign permit as required hereunder. 
(c)	For the purpose of this chapter, noncommercial speech or noncommercial messages on signs shall mean any speech or message which does not meet the definition of a commercial sign (section 54-2). 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-9) 
Sec. 54-5. - Public liability insurance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the county, unless and until such entity shall have obtained a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim and public liability insurance in an amount not less than $250,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death to one person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier will notify the county 30 days in advance of any termination and/or restriction of the coverage. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-10) 
Sec. 54-6. - Prohibited signs; ground signs on double frontage lots. 
(a)	The following types of signs or advertising devices are prohibited in all unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)	Roof signs. 
(2)	Sidewalk, sandwich or curb-type signs. 
(3)	Portable signs. 
(4)	Pylon signs unless installed prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(5)	Swinging or projecting signs. 
(6)	Vehicles used for the basic purpose of providing advertisement or products or directing people to a business activity located on the same or nearby property or to any other premises. 
(7)	Rotating or animated signs involving motion or sound. 
(8)	Off-premises signs. 
a.	Off-premises signs, except as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
b.	Off-premises directional signs, except as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(9)	Flashing, blinking, or varying light intensity signs except time, temperature and date. 
(10)	Signs on public rights-of-way except signs exempt under section 54-8(3). 
(11)	Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "warning," or similar words, except construction signs and barricades and when the words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business. 
(12)	Courtesy benches, trash cans, and similar devices on which advertising is displayed. 
(13)	Trailer signs. 
(14)	Window signs exceeding 30 percent of window area. 
(b)	The following ground signs shall be permitted: 
(1)	Only one ground sign per road frontage shall be allowed. 
(2)	Any ground sign permitted shall be used and located in such manner where the principal advertising is oriented toward the road frontage authorizing such ground signs. 
(3)	No permit for a ground sign shall be authorized where such ground signs shall be oriented in a greater degree to a different road frontage than the road frontage authorizing such ground sign. 
(4)	The land development officer or his/her designee shall determine, in all instances where double frontage lots allow ground signs to be permitted, where each sign's predominant advertising is directed. 
(c)	Any appeal of a determination made by the land development officer of this section shall be made directly to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may vary this section where they find the requested variance is warranted. 
(d)	Neon signs are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-11) 
Sec. 54-7. - Temporary signs. 
(a)	The following types of signs or advertising devices shall be permitted only by issue of a special permit allowing usage of this type advertising for a period not exceeding ten consecutive days. No such special permit shall be issued for the same premises at less than four-month intervals. All signs or advertising devices must be set back at least ten feet or out of the right-of-way, whichever is greater. A fee of $15.00 shall be charged for each special permit. 
(1)	Air- or gas-filled balloons or other devices which have a capacity for air or gas which does not exceed three cubic feet. 
(2)	Streamers or pennants. 
(3)	Flags or banners, maximum size of 32 square feet, except official flags of the United States, State of Georgia, Confederate States of America, not to exceed three. 
(4)	Searchlights and similar devices. 
(b)	On-premises temporary signs relating to the initial opening or final closing of a business or service, provided such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet each and shall not be closer than ten feet to the pavement of any street or on any public right-of-way. The land development officer or his/her designee shall approve such signs for a maximum period of two weeks for initial opening signs and four weeks for final closing signs, after which they shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-12) 
Sec. 54-8. - Exemptions. 
The following types of signs are exempt from sections 54-12, 54-13, 54-51, and 54-52: 
(1)	Temporary nonilluminated real estate or construction signs. 
(2)	Temporary signs not exceeding four square feet in area pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational, religious organizations, provided such signs are posted not more than five days before said event and removed the day after the event. 
(3)	Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his/her duty, such as public notices, safety sign, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, and the like. 
(4)	Signs on private property directing traffic movement, each not exceeding three square feet in area, and not advertising any business, service or product. Such signs shall not be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(5)	On-premises credit card identification signs up to three square feet in area per sign. Such signs shall be at least ten feet from the pavement of any street or out of the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(6)	Any sign not visible from a public road or street. 
(7)	A sign installed inside a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the window area. 
(8)	Off-premises nonilluminated school, hospital, or other quasi-public signs not exceeding four square feet in area. However, no such sign shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(9)	On-premises model home, model apartment, sales office signs, etc., within a residential development, provided such signs do not exceed six square feet in area and are set back at least ten feet from the pavement of any street. Such signs shall be limited to one per sales office, model, etc. 
(10)	On-premises no trespassing, no hunting, and similar public notice type signs less than six square feet in area, provided no such signs shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(11)	On-premises signs attached to the outside wall of any business establishment, which are designed to identify services rendered, products sold, or activities conducted on the premises, provided not more than two such signs shall be affixed to any wall on the business establishment and further provided the total area of such signs shall not exceed one percent of the total area of the wall on which they are affixed. 
(12)	Signs or advertisement placed by a business, church, civic organization or individual in sponsorship of a recreation activity, school activity, sport activity or similar such event are hereby exempt as to this article. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-13) 
Sec. 54-9. - Misleading advertising; discontinued businesses. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a person to display false or misleading statements upon signs or other public places calculated to mislead the public as to anything sold, services to be performed, or information disseminated. The fact that any such sign or display shall contain words or language sufficient to mislead a reasonable or prudent person shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by the persons displaying such sign, or permitting same to be displayed at their residence, establishment, or place of business. 
(b)	When a business or service using an identification or business sign is discontinued, all signs and sign structures relating to this business or service shall be removed within ten days from the date of discontinuance. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-14) 
Sec. 54-10. - Maintenance. 
(a)	All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The land development officer may cause to be removed after due notice any sign which shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or if the ground area around it is not well maintained. 
(b)	The land development officer or his/her designee will give the owner ten days written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign or signs. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the land development officer or his/her designee will have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. 
(c)	Ground signs located within 100 feet of a public right-of-way shall display the street address of the property. Within a commercial center where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest street address numbers shall be identified. This section shall not apply to any ground sign where the sign is located on property which has more than one street frontage and the property address is assigned from a street other than the street frontage whereupon the ground sign is erected. 
(1)	Street address numbers shall be of contrasting colors against the background. Numbers shall be a minimum of eight inches in height. Numbers shall be visible from both directions of travel along the street. 
(2)	Ground signs existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be brought into compliance with this section by January 1, 2004. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-15) 
Sec. 54-11. - Illumination. 
(a)	The light from any illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness which will interfere with the peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(b)	No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluctuating lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color except those depicting only time, temperature or date. 
(c)	No colored lights shall be used at any location or any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(d)	Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(e)	All lighting shall be installed in a manner to comply with subsections (a) through (d) of this section or from the interior of the sign. 
(f)	All existing signs with lighting prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be brought into compliance with this section by January 1, 2005. 
(g)	All lighting on newly erected signs must conform with subsections (a) through (f) of this section and must point downward. 
(h)	All illuminated externally lighted signs must be darkened by 1:00 a.m. eastern standard time and remain so until 5:00 a.m. eastern standard time. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-16) 
Sec. 54-12. - Signs permitted in the unincorporated areas. 
(a)	If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically permitted as provided under this section shall be prohibited, except as otherwise provided for under this chapter. 
(b)	The following types of signs shall be permitted and regulated within the county: 
(1)	Permanent signs identifying only the name of a residential development. 
(2)	Church bulletins, signs identifying schools, recreation facilities, churches, public buildings and facilities. 
(3)	Signs identifying farm products which are produced and sold on the premises. 
(4)	Off-premises directional signs, subject to requirements set forth in section 54-13(b)(4)a. 
(5)	Signs containing noncommercial speech not exceeding 128 square feet. 
(6)	Nursery school and kindergarten signs. 
(7)	Club or lodge signs. 
(8)	Business signs for retail stores and service establishments in approved community unit development. 
(9)	Arcade, mall, or directory signs for planned office and/or commercial centers. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-17) 
Sec. 54-13. - Maximum heights, maximum sizes, setback requirements, and number allowances. 
(a)	Generally. Subsections (b)(3) and (4) of this section provide information regarding restrictions on signs as permitted in the county. Ground signs, wall signs and marquee signs are examples of the type signs that shall be permitted and regulated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	Height; restrictions. All signs within the County of Fannin shall be a maximum of ten feet in height subject to the following limited exceptions: 
(1)	Multitenant sites. Multitenant sites (shopping centers and/or office parks) can utilize 15-foot height with a 50 percent reduction of the total area of the sign subject to approval by the Fannin County land development office. 
(2)	Sites below road grade. Sites situated below road grade may, where necessary to achieve adequate visibility, and with approval of the Fannin County land development office approval, increase sign height. In no event shall such sign exceed ten feet above the grade of the road. 
(3)	Nonprimary roads; all signs. 
TABLE 54-13 
NONPRIMARY ROADS—ALL SIGNS 
(All Roads within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County with the exception of Ga. State Highway No. 5 and the Appalachian Development Highway No. 515) 

 
1 Measured from the top of the sign to the ground. 
Note—In case a person desires to place a double-faced sign within a median at the entrance of a residential development, there will be no setback requirement if the land development officer determines such sign will not constitute a traffic hazard. However, if this option is taken, only one sign per entrance will be allowed. 
(4)	Primary roads. Primary roads, being Georgia State Highway No. 5 and the Appalachian Development Highway No. 515 within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia. 
a.	Off-premises directional signs. Off-premises directional signs, as defined in section 54-2. The following conditions shall apply to all such signs: 
1.	The premises or thing sought to be advertised must be located within the county limits. 
2.	Maximum height: 20 feet (from the top of the sign to the ground). 
3.	Setback from pavement: 20 feet or to edge of right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
4.	Ten square feet. 
5.	Construction: Signs shall be mounted between two posts at least four inches by four inches in dimension, which are made of metal, steel or concrete, or on a size appropriate single pole which is made of metal, steel or concrete. 
6.	Printed material: Each sponsor's sign shall contain only the logo or name of the sponsor and an arrow indicating direction. 
7.	As to any variance sought, a variance may be granted only in an individual case of unusual hardship and where there exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions to the property in question. Provided further, that literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties, and further provided that granting of the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to other similar properties. 
b.	Off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises advertising signs, as defined in section 54-2. The following conditions shall apply to all (such) signs: 
1.	Location and spacing: 
i.	No off-premises sign shall be placed within 500 feet of a residence, church, school, park or cemetery. 
ii.	No off-premises sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another off-premises sign on either side of the road or street as measured along the right-of-way of the road or streets on which these signs are located. 
2.	Height: The height of an off-premises advertising sign at its highest point shall not exceed 20 feet. (Measured from the top of the sign to the ground.) 
3.	Size: The size of the off-premises advertising sign shall not exceed 100 square feet (in area), inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members. 
4.	Faces: No off-premises advertising sign shall contain more than two faces, not to exceed more than 100 square feet on each side. Double-faced signs which advertise two products, businesses, or carry different noncommercial messages shall be considered as two different signs for fee collection and annual renewal fees shall be doubled the rate for such signs. Renewal fees shall be due on January 1 of each year. Renewal fees not paid within 30 days shall be subject to a penalty of double the permit fee or up to a maximum of $100.00 per sign company or owner. Fees, including any interest and/or penalty due, that are not paid within 60 days, will cause the sign to be removed by the sign owner and/or the owner of the land on which the sign is located. If the fee, including any interest and/or penalty due, is not paid within 60 days and/or the sign is not removed by the sign owner and/or owner of the property on which the sign is located, the sign will be removed by the county at the sign owner's and/or landowner's expense. No other sign permits will be issued to the sign owner and/or landowner until the fee, including interest and/or penalty due, if any, is paid and/or the matter settled. 
5.	Setback: All sign structures will be set back from the right-of-way of the road at least 12 feet. 
6.	The fee is $30.00 per sign per year. 
7.	All other signs located on a primary road shall comply with the requirements set forth in Table 54-13. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-18) 
Sec. 54-14. - Numbering. 
(a)	Ground signs located within 100 feet of a public right-of-way shall display the street address of the property. Within a commercial center where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest street address numbers shall be identified. This section shall not apply to any ground sign where the sign is located on property which has more than one street frontage and the property address is assigned from a street other than the street frontage whereupon the ground sign is erected. 
(b)	Street address numbers shall be of contrasting colors against the background. Numbers shall be a minimum of eight inches in height. Numbers shall be visible from both directions of travel alone the street. 
(c)	Ground signs existing prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be brought into compliance with this section within one year of the date of adoption of this section. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-19) 
Sec. 54-15. - Enforcement of provisions by land development office. 
The Fannin County land development office is hereby empowered and authorized to enforce this chapter. These powers and duties are in addition to the power and duties authorized by the board of commissioners pursuant to other ordinances. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-21) 
Sec. 54-16. - Fannin County board of commissioners; powers and duties enumerated. 
(a)	The Fannin County board of commissioners shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	Administrative review. To hear and decide whether there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the county land development officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)	Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, when due to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unusual hardship, so the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The mere existence of a nonconforming sign or advertising device shall not constitute a valid reason to grant a variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unusual hardship upon a finding by the review board that the following conditions exist: 
a.	There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area. 
b.	A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties. 
c.	Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to other similar properties. 
d.	The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
e.	The special circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant. 
f.	The variance requested is the minimum variance which will make possible the logical use of the land, building or structure. 
g.	The variance is not a request to permit a type of sign which otherwise is not permitted in the zoning district involved. 
(3)	Appeal. If the applicant is not satisfied with the ruling of the Fannin County board of commissioners, he/she may seek judicial review of the decision of the Fannin County board of commissioners to the superior court for Fannin County, by filing for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of Fannin County within 30 days of the decision of board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(4)	Petitions for variance. All petitions for review of variance requests shall be in written form and filed with the office of the land development office for delivery to the office of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia. The board of commissioners shall hear all such petitions within 30 days of receipt by the land development office and shall act upon all such petitions within 15 days of the hearing. 
(5)	Off-premises advertising or off-premises directional signs. The board of commissioners will approve and/or disapprove all requests for off-premises signs. The permittee will submit with each request for an off-premises sign the following information: 
a.	The street address of the property on which the sign will be located and the zoning district in which such property is located. 
b.	A plat of the property on which the sign will be located which shows where thereon the sign will be located and the distance from the property lines and the paved street. 
c.	A design of the sign which shows the height of the sign, the area of the face of the sign, the color scheme of the sign, and the structural supports of the sign. 
d.	A copy of the lease or other document from the owner of the sign which authorized the erection thereof. 
e.	The cost of the sign and/or estimated cost if such is not known at the time the permit is requested which will be changed to actual cost as soon as such is known. 
f.	No action will be taken on the erection of the sign by the owner of the property, the lessee, the sign owner, and/or any of their contractors, agents, or employees until the sign has been approved by the Fannin County board of commissioners or the superior court if such matter is appealed. 
(b)	The Fannin County board of commissioners shall not have the power to grant any variance as to the maximum size of signs. Furthermore, neither the Fannin County land development office nor the Fannin County board of commissioners shall regulate, in any manner, the messages of signs. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-22) 
Sec. 54-17. - Enforcement. 
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the land development officer or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-24) 
Sec. 54-18. - Additional enforcement options. 
In case any sign, advertising device, or other device covered by this chapter is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted, or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the land development officer may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of this Code requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court; institute injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-26) 
Sec. 54-19. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $150.00 for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Any citation and subsequent hearing shall be returnable to and heard in the magistrate court for Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-25) 
Sec. 54-20. - Severability. 
In the event that any part of this chapter is deemed to be invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, all other aspects of this chapter shall be and will remain valid. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, art. 4) 
Secs. 54-21—54-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 54-51. - Required. 
Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign or advertising device in the county without first having obtained a sign permit. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 54-52. - Application. 
(a)	Applications for sign permits required in section 54-51 shall be filed by the sign owner or his/her agent in the office of the land development office upon forms furnished by said office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)	The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this chapter. 
(2)	The value of the sign. 
(3)	The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the property. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the land development office shall be used. 
(4)	The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)	The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the sign is to be located. 
(6)	Consent of the owner, or his/her agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(7)	The land development officer will require a sketch or print drawn to scale showing pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the Southern Standard Building Code. The land development officer may require additional information of such print or sketch to insure compliance with this chapter. 
(8)	Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(b)	All applicants for electrical signs must obtain an electrical permit. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 54-53. - Issuance. 
(a)	The county shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the county's actual receipt of an application and a sign permit fee. The land development officer shall give notice to the applicant of his/her decision by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th day after the county's receipt of the application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. 
(b)	The land development officer shall reject any application containing any false material statements or omissions. Any rejected application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of original submission. 
(c)	Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, the land development officer shall revoke said application and the subject sign shall be removed. A revocation pursuant to this section shall be appeal able pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-20) 
Sec. 54-54. - Expiration date. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for a permit after the permit is issued. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application for the sign must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 54-55. - Fees. 
No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the land development officer and fees have been paid as provided below: 
(1)	One to 32 square feet ..... $ 32.00 
(2)	33 to 64 square feet ..... 64.00 
(3)	65 to 100 square feet ..... 100.00 
(4)	Temporary permits (ten days) ..... 15.00 
(5)	Off-premises signs ..... 30.00 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 54-56. - Identification labels to be issued with permit. 
(a)	With each permit the land development officer or his/her designee shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his/her agent to affix such sticker to the sign in the lower righthand area so it will be easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been, or is being, erected or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Stickers may be color coded. 
(b)	The land development officer or his/her designee shall inspect all existing signs and advertising devices in the county to determine if such signs or devices conform to the provisions of this chapter. Identification stickers shall be provided for all signs in order to identify existing conforming and nonconforming signs. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 54-57. - Suspension, revocation of permit, license. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating the permit granted by the county to the owner and/or the license of the person or entity erecting the sign. No permit and/or license shall be suspended, revoked or canceled except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the permittee and/or licensee is granted a public hearing before the Fannin County board of commissioners. The permittee and/or licensee will be given ten days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the suspension, revocation or canceling of such permit and/or license. The term "due cause" is the willful and/or continued violation of the provisions of this chapter. The termination of the permit and/or license does not in any way preclude the person or persons alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter from being tried under this chapter, or preclude the county from taking any other action authorized by this Code, and/or any action authorized by law. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 1-1-23) 
Secs. 54-58—54-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 54-88. - Purpose. 
Insofar as unsolicited handbills and flyers are constantly left on private premises and vehicles in public places, there is a problem with litter as such handbills are often blown into the streets and onto lawns and not retrieved. In addition to the litter problem created by handbill distribution, an accumulation of handbills is a signal to burglars or vandals that the residence is unoccupied. To that end, this article will set out guidelines for the distribution of unsolicited handbills. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 2-2-1) 
Sec. 54-89. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
(1)	Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, flyer or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
a.	Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, service, business, opportunity or thing; 
b.	Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of, either directly or indirectly, promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
c.	Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken; or 
d.	While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
(2)	Private premises means any dwelling house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
(3)	Public place means any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, ground or building. 
(4)	Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 2-2-2) 
Sec. 54-90. - Penalties. 
(a)	Anyone convicted of violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 upon conviction. 
(b)	Any continuing violation of this article resulting in the unlawful littering of the streets or sidewalks of the County of Fannin shall be deemed a nuisance and on conviction thereof by the magistrate court of Fannin, a fine as set forth herein may be imposed. 
(c)	Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Each location at which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)	All citations issued under the provisions of this section shall be returnable to the magistrate court for Fannin County, Georgia. 
(e)	This article shall be administered and enforced by the land development officer or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 2-2-7) 
Sec. 54-91. - Scattering prohibited; manner of depositing handbills. 
Unless inhabited private premises are posted or unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, the person distributing the handbills may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is placed or deposited in a manner reasonably designed to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 2-2-3) 
Sec. 54-92. - Prohibitions; public places; vacant premises; vehicles; exemptions. 
(a)	No person shall throw, post or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the county, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the county for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill to any person willing to receive it. 
(b)	No person shall throw, post or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are vacant and which could be reasonably ascertained to be vacant. 
(c)	No person shall throw, post or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receivers thereof, a handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(d)	Handbills for political, charitable and other nonprofit purposes are exempt from this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 2-2-4) 
Sec. 54-93. - Lampposts, public utility poles, trees, public structures. 
No person shall post or affix any handbill, notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole, and tree or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 2-2-5) 
Sec. 54-94. - Violation. 
(a)	If any handbill is found on any public or private premises or vehicle in violation of this chapter, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person or persons whose name(s), address(es) or telephone number(s) appear thereon has violated this chapter. 
(b)	The person who throws or deposits such handbills may also be charged with a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, § 2-2-6) 
Secs. 54-95—54-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLITICAL SIGNS 

Sec. 54-126. - Restrictions and allowances. 
Political signs shall be permitted within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, subject to the following restrictions and allowances: 
(1)	Before the placement of any political sign, the candidate, his/her committee or a political party or organization shall tender a deposit of $300.00 to Fannin County, Georgia. This deposit shall be paid to the clerk of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia. A receipt shall be given to each such candidate, committee, party or organization. 
(2)	A political sign or any structure that is intended solely for the support of a political sign shall not be erected more than 30 days prior to the election which the sign is intended to influence and shall be removed within 20 days after the final election including any runoffs which the sign is intended to influence. A winner of any primary election or runoff may leave their signs up until 20 days after the general election or any subsequent runoff. 
(3)	All political signs shall be supported by independent means and shall not be placed on any utility pole, on any street sign, or on any sign directing or controlling traffic, on any pole or post supporting such signs; nor on any tree. 
(4)	The following types of political signs or devices are prohibited: 
a.	Roof signs; 
b.	Sidewalk or sandwich signs; 
c.	Animated or rotating signs involving. 
(5)	Before any political sign is erected, the permission of the owner and/or agent of the property upon which the sign is proposed to be erected shall be obtained. 
(6)	No political signs shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(7)	Each candidate or political party who places a political sign within the unincorporated areas of Fannin County, Georgia, acknowledges that it is familiar with these sign regulations and agrees to abide by them. 
(8)	Fannin County is empowered to remove, or cause to be removed, all political signs not conforming to the provisions of this article without notice to the candidate whose sign is nonconforming. 
(9)	All political signs which are not removed within ten days after the election and/or runoff for which such signs are placed may be removed by Fannin County, and the deposit tendered by the candidate, committee, party or organization shall be retained by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2003, art. 3) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 5-19-2009, adopted May 19, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 58, Arts. I—V, §§ 58-1—58-8, 58-33—58-36, 58-68—58-72, 58-103—58-105, 58-124—58-128, and enacted a new Ch. 58 as set out herein. The former Ch. 58 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 4-24-1990, arts. I, III, IV, §§ 5.0—5.3, 6.0—6.2, 6.3(1)—6.3(5), 6.4—6.7, 7.0—7.2, 8.0(1)—8.0(5) 9.0—9.2, 10.0, 10.1; Res. of 10-13-1992. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Purpose. 
The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, hereby enacts this article in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia, and to protect and enhance the quality of the environment, to institute and maintain countywide rules and regulations controlling the spread of litter and to establish rules and regulations concerning solid waste management to assume that solid waste systems, whether privately or publically operated, do not adversely affect the health, safety, and well-being of the public and do not unduly degrade the quality of the environment. 
Additionally, the board of commissioners of Fannin County desires to make it known that the business and operation of solid waste facilities and Properties is appreciated and acknowledged as a public service and legitimate business and further desires to encourage their enterprise while establishing these requirements for operation and establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Solid Waste Ordinance of Fannin County, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-3. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this situation. 
General. Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes the firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The use of the masculine gender includes the feminine, and the use of the feminine gender includes the masculine. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive and is not mandatory. The term "commissioners" refers to the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia. Reference is made herein to EPD definitions listed in EPD Section 391-3-4-.01 for further clarification and additional definitions. This chapter shall supersede any definition conflicts or changes. 
Abandoned property means wrecked or derelict property having no value other than nominal salvage value, if any, which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements shall include, but not be limited to, wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, refrigerators, lawnmowers, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture and any other similar articles. 
Asbestos means any naturally occurring hydrated mineral silicates separable into commercially used fibers, specifically the asbestiform varieties of serpentine, chrystaile cummingtonite-grunerite, amosite, riebeckite, crocidolite, anthophyllite, tremolite, and actinolite. 
Bailing means a volume reduction technique whereby solid waste is compressed into bales. 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutter, sand, gravel or other substance used in the repair or alteration of existing buildings, or the demolition of existing buildings. 
Buffer means a landscaped, open space and/or screen located between incompatible land uses for the purpose of blocking visible clutter, light, glare, noise, odor or similar separating uses through distance. That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established for the purpose of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from a common property line and extended to the developed portion of the property. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs, fencing, and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossing. 
Collector means the person or persons as defined herein who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste, from industries, office, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, from residential dwellings, provided however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting wastes from his/her own single-family dwelling unit. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid waste. 
Construction/demolition waste means the waste building material and rubble resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to wood, bricks, metal, concrete, asphalt, wall board, paper and cardboard. 
County means the duly authorized governing body of Fannin County, Georgia, or the geographical area of Fannin County, Georgia, outside the corporate limits of any incorporated municipality therein. 
Designated river corridor in Fannin County means the Taccoa River, which is a water supply watershed protection area and is protected by the State of Georgia (see chapter XI of the land development ordinance for Fannin County). 
Designated streams in Fannin County means all streams (see Chapter IX, "Water Supply Watershed Protection" of the Fannin County Land Development Ordinance). 
A disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, purchase, sale, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. Any person, facility or business that engages in any, some or all of these activities as the primary means of use on that property or premises shall be acting and deemed to be a Solid waste handling facility and shall, therefore, be governed by this chapter and shall be required to obtain a permit to function as such. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal which includes administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Dumpster means the bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash and litter. The use of this term is generic, and does not refer to the bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer. 
Fence means an enclosure or barrier, composed of wood, masonry, stone, wire, iron, or other materials or combination of materials used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening, or confinement, including brick or concrete walls but not including hedges, shrubs, trees or other natural growth. 
Fence—Solid means a fence including operable entrance and/or exit gates where access openings appear, through which no visual image can be seen. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuff resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Garbage bag means some plastic (or other similar nonporous material) bag or sack designed to contain garbage or household trash in a secure airtight manner. Such bags shall also include suitable means of closure to ensure that the material contained therein is not exposed to the outside air. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poisons, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attended to housekeeping. 
Incineration means the controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changes into gases and residue produces which are relatively free of combustible materials. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solid, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Inter waste landfill means a disposal site accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause the production of leachate of environmental concerns. Such wastes are limited to dirt and dirt-like products, concrete, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste. 
Infectious waste means all biomedical wastes as defined in section 58-70. 
Junk shall include, but not be limited to, lawnmowers, old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors and any other such vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap, building material, scrap contractor's equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, wiring, bottles, glass, computers, iron, machinery, rags, paper, mattresses, beds, or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled or displayed within County limits. 
Junk vehicle includes an automobile, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or mechanical contrivance of part thereof, which is inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, inoperative, and which does not have a valid license plate; or which has been abandoned or discarded according to the definition of abandoned motor vehicle set forth in O.C.G.A. 40-11-1. For the purpose of this definition, a vehicle is inoperative if it is incapable of movement by its own power, or if it remains in place for a period of more than seven days, and in neither case is within a carport or parking way and driveway. 
Junk/salvage yard means any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage, purchase, sale or disassembly of junked or inoperable vehicles or junked machinery. The abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap metal, metal, used plumbing fixtures, kitchen equipment, used brick, wood, any other building material, structural material, used paper, rags or any other scrap material. Any person, facility or business that engages in any, some or all of these activities as the primary means of use on that property or premises shall be acting and deemed to be a solid waste handling facility and shall, therefore, be governed by this chapter and shall be required to obtain a permit to function as such. 
Landfill means any facility where any treatment, utilization, processing, storage, purchase, sale or deposition of solid wastes occurs. Any person, facility or business that engages in any, some or all of these activities as the primary means of use on that property or premises shall be acting and deemed to be a landfill facility and shall, therefore, be governed by this chapter and shall be required to obtain a permit to function as such. 
Leachate means a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or miscible materials removed from such wastes. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a sanitary landfill for collecting the leachate which may percolate thought the wastes and into the soil surrounding the landfill. 
Liner means a continuous layer of natural or manmade materials, beneath or on the sides of a disposal site or disposal site cell which restricts the downward or lateral escape of solid waste, solid waste constituents, or leachate. 
Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbat, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used, or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. 
Monofill means a method of solid waste handling that involves the burial of one waste type or waste having very similar characteristics in a segregated trench or area which is physically separated from dissimilar or incompatible waste. 
Nuisance means anything that meets the definition of the term as defined by O.C.G.A. 41-1-1 and which occurs during or as the result of the handling or disposing of solid waste. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more source(s) is consolidated and left to decompose burn or otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Operator means the person having direct supervision of the daily field operations of a disposal site to ensure that the site operates in compliance with the permit. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to begin an activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means Fannin County or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individuals, partnership, association or other entity in Fannin County. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowerment in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Fannin County, Georgia, or any other county. 
Processing operation means any method, system or other treatment designed to change the physical form or chemical content of solid waste and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings and other elements). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way to any road, street, or highway; and any body of water or water source or the shores or beaches therefore; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Pyrolysis means the chemical decomposition of a material by heat in the absence of oxygen. 
Reclamation means the controlled method of sorting and storing materials from solid wastes for future use in accordance with a procedure approved by the office of the board of commissioners. 
Recycling means any process by which reclaimed materials or other materials which out otherwise become solid waste would be collected, separated, or processed and reused or return to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Recycling center/recycling processing center means any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting, purchase, sale, storing and/or processing materials to be recycled, including but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper, and all metal materials. Any person, facility or business that engages in any, some or all of these activities as the primary means of use on that property or premises shall be acting and deemed to be a recycling facility and shall, therefore, be governed by this chapter and shall be required to obtain a permit to function as such. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive, and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rubbish includes wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material, and similar material. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of by means of placing an earth cover thereon. 
Sanitary landfilling means an engineered method of disposing of putrescible solid wastes on land by spreading them in thin layers, compacting them to the smallest practical volume, placing an earth cover thereon and such other measures as are necessary to protect human health and the environment. 
Scavenge or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Secondary metals recycler means any person who is engaged, from a fixed location or otherwise, in the business of paying compensation for ferrous or nonferrous metals that have served their original economic purpose, whether or not engaged in the business of performing the manufacturing process by which ferrous metals or nonferrous metals are converted into raw material products consisting of preparing grades and having an existing or potential economic value. Secondary metals recyclers shall be also governed by Senate Bill 82 effective, as passed, on July 1, 2009. 
Shredding means the process by which solid waste is cut or torn into small pieces for final disposal or further processing. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste and materials destined for recycling and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, crockery or dunnage), ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludge, animal manure, industrial waste (waste materials generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined herein. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, purchase, sale, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Solid waste handling facility means any location where any storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, purchase, sale or disposal of solid waste, or any combination thereof occurs. Any person, facility or business that engages in any, some or all of these activities as the primary means of use on that property or premises shall be acting and deemed to be a solid waste handling facility and shall, therefore, be governed by this chapter and shall be required to obtain a permit to function as such. 
Solid waste handling permit means written authorization granted to a person by the office of the board of commissioners to engage in solid waste handling. 
Solid waste management act or the act, wherever referred to herein, means O.C.G.A. 12-8-20. 
Special solid waste means any solid waste not otherwise regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. 12-8-60 et seq., and regulation promulgated thereunder or originating or produced from or by a source or generator not subject to regulation under O.C.G.A. 12-8-27(g). 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal site or processing operation. 
Uppermost aquifer means the geologic formation nearest the natural ground surface this is an aquifer, as well as lower aquifers that are hydraulically interconnected with this aquifer within the solid waste handling facility property boundary. 
Wrecked motor vehicle compound means an area used to store disabled vehicles until such time as their disposition (either by junk, salvage or repair) has been determined by the insurance company, the owner of the vehicle or his/her legal representative. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-4. - Enforcing officers. 
(a)	Any law enforcement personnel employed by the Fannin County sheriff's department shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	The board of commissioners hereby names the employee of Fannin County who holds the title of solid waste management supervisor, land development officials or planning commission members to serve as its designee for the purpose of reporting on and/or enforcing the provisions of said chapter. 
(c)	The duly authorized designee of the board of commissioners, said person being the solid waste management supervisor or land development officials together with any law enforcement officer of the Fannin County sheriff's department, shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of the subject ordinance, or to the owner or any other persons who may be in possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of any provision of this chapter. The form of said citation is attached hereto as "Exhibit A" and/or the Uniform Traffic Citation, by the adoption of the [ordinance] resolution from which this section is derived, approved by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
CITATION ISSUED IN VIOLATION OF "THE SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE"  of FANNIN COUNTY, GEORGIA 

 
HEARING: 
A hearing on this matter has been scheduled for ____________ at ____________ M., in the Magistrate Court for Fannin County, Georgia, at the Fannin County Courthouse, West Main Street, Blue Ridge, Georgia. 
A copy of this citation was served on ____________ ____________ ____________ 
( )	The accused 
( )	Adult at the home of the accused by the undersigned. 
Date of Service: ____________ 
Time of Service: ____________ 
_____ Signature of person achieving service 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-5. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person violating this chapter, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	By fine of not less than $410.00 and not more than $1,000.00, per day and/or by imprisonment in the Fannin County jail for a period not to exceed 60 days or both; 
(2)	In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter disposed thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of sentence; or 
(3)	In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he/she has deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(b)	Records of conviction for violation of this chapter shall be a matter of public record. 
(c)	No person accused of violating this chapter shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate and required to post a bond for his/her future appearance. 
(d)	Upon determination, by the Fannin County board of commissioners, that a violation is occurring or has occurred, a notice will be delivered to the violating business, in writing. If the violation(s) are not corrected within 30 days from the date of the warning, penalties shall begin to accrue. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-6. - Court proceedings. 
(a)	Violations of this chapter shall be tried upon citations or accusations as described in section 58-4[c](d) and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation. The court attorney or another attorney designated by the board of commissioners shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)	Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of Fannin County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A., Chapter 15-10. 
(c)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this chapter. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy by law. 
(d)	Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-7. - Severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared invalid for any reason, the remainder of the said chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-8. - Repeal of conflict ordinance. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-9. - Existing businesses compliance. 
All solid waste areas, junkyards, salvage yards, used auto parts yards, recycling centers, transfer stations and solid waste transfer stations which are in existence in Fannin County prior to the enactment date (May 19, 2009) of the ordinance from which this chapter derives are required to and shall comply with all items within the following subsections 58-10: (4), (5), (7), (8), (9), (11), (12), (15), (16), (17), (18), et al., of this chapter within 12 months of the effective date of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-10. - Property/land requirements and restrictions. 
All new or applying solid waste areas, junkyards, salvage yards, used auto parts yards, secondary metal recyclers, recycling centers, transfer stations and solid waste transfer stations which are seeking location in Fannin County after the enactment date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives are required to and shall comply with all items within section 58-10. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	No property for this intended use shall be located 1) within 500 feet of a residential, commercial, retail, medical or educational use/area, 2) on a hill/mountain crest, 3) within 1,000 feet of a designated river corridor, 4) within 1,000 feet of the designated Highway 515 development corridor or 5) within 2,000 feet of a designated stream or body of water. 
b.	EPD guidelines for similar business adjacencies to designated rivers, streams and bodies of water shall govern. 
(2)	Minimum and maximum lot size. 
a.	Property for this intended use shall be limited to be no smaller than five acres and be no larger than 25 acres in each instance. 
(3)	Minimum building size. 
a.	A minimum required building area of ten gross square feet (GSF) per acre shall be provided and shall meet applicable building codes. 
(4)	Setbacks. 
a.	Front, rear and side yard setbacks for all operation of the business, including but not limited to storage, parking, office, loading/unloading and material handling area(s) shall be 50 feet from all adjacent property lines and roads and shall be in addition to any required easement and/or right-of-way setback requirement(s). 
b.	Compacting, crushing or any similar operation shall be setback no less than 50 feet from all adjacent property lines and roads and in addition to any required easement and/or right-of-way setback requirement(s) and shall be conducted on an impervious surface with spill containment, treatment and reclamation provisions. 
c.	Fencing requirement(s) shall be permitted, as required, along property lines and along any required easement and/or right-of-way setback requirement(s). 
d.	No parts of the facility operations, loading/unloading or storage of materials or scrap shall occur outside of these required setbacks or required fencing. Violation of this article, by the business operator or its customers, shall be grounds for a warning and daily penalties. 
(5)	Height restrictions. 
a.	Maximum scrap/material stacking, equipment or building height shall be 25 feet as measured from the finish grade at each location. 
b.	All OSHA requirements for working above grade shall be followed. 
(6)	Acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
a.	Property shall be designed with appropriate acceleration and deceleration lanes per Georgia Department of Transportation Code from public right-of-way on any state highway or any two-lane, paved or gravel, county roadway. 
(7)	Natural green/evergreen tree buffer. 
a.	Property development shall include a 20 foot wide, solid, ten-foot tall (at time of installation) solid, natural green/evergreen tree Buffer within the designated Setback area outside designated fenced areas or shall be fenced as required by this chapter. 
(8)	Parking area(s) for employees and customers. 
a.	Parking area(s) shall be provided at four spaces per acre for the purpose of material drop-off and an additional one space per 100 GSF of office area for business (including required ADA space(s)). One parking area is intended to be the sole staging or cueing area for the loading and unloading area and employee and customer parking. 
b.	Parking area(s) shall be designed by a registered and qualified civil engineer or geologist and meet applicable Georgia Department of Transportation, Accessibility and Parking Standards, including proper signage and stripping (if paved). 
c.	Parking area(s) shall be screened from the public right-of-way and public view by fencing (see fencing section). 
d.	Parking area(s) shall be graveled or paved per Georgia Department of Transportation paving standards for heavy vehicles. 
e.	All parking area(s) shall be shown on the site plan for permitting. 
(9)	Loading and unloading area(s). 
a.	Loading and unloading area(s) shall be provided in addition to the parking area(s) and be of sufficient area and radius to accommodate intended vehicles. 
b.	Loading and unloading area(s) shall be screened from the public right-of-way by fencing (see fencing section). 
c.	Loading and unloading area(s) shall be graveled or paved per Georgia Department of Transportation paving standards for heavy vehicles. 
d.	Loading and unloading area(s) shall be shown on the site plan for permitting. 
e.	Any mud or debris coming from the business onto public roadways from trucks or cars exiting the property shall be cleaned, at the business owner's expense, from public roadways. 
(10)	Storm water retention/detention area(s). 
a.	A Hydrology report, detailing the seasonal depth to groundwater, shall be submitted with the application to permit. 
b.	Adequate storm water retention/detention area(s) shall be designed by a registered and qualified civil engineer or geologist per Georgia Code. 
c.	Storm water retention/detention area(s) shall be shown on the site plan for permitting. 
d.	All retained or detained storm water shall be treated and maintained to comply with the Georgia Clean Water Discharge Act. 
(11)	Fencing and screening. 
a.	The perimeter of said area(s) used for any and all purposes described in this chapter, running along property lines/setbacks or easements shall be provided with a visually solid, screening-type fence to a height of ten feet or shall be provided with the natural green/evergreen tree buffer as required by this chapter. 
b.	The required fence shall be constructed of materials, means and methods so as to provide a permanent, solid (top to bottom), structurally stable and attractive screen for the operations and materials contained within the property. 
c.	The required fence shall be maintained by the owner to be kept free from visible penetrations or damage as seen from the exterior. 
d.	The required fence shall be of such a height so as to screen stored, handled and loaded/unloaded materials and parking areas from view from the outside adjacent property owners, public right-of-way(s) and property owners that have visual access to the property within a 200 foot radius from all property lines. However, no fence shall be required to be above ten feet tall. 
e.	Fence design and engineering shall be submitted for review and approval prior to permit approval. 
(12)	Hours of operation. 
a.	Exterior, uncontained, noise-generating business operations shall not be limited to the hours of operation but may be restricted if deemed a public nuisance by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
b.	Hours of said operations shall be posted at the access point(s) to the property. 
c.	A building permit, site plan, inspections and a certificate of occupancy shall be required and obtained for these types of businesses prior to beginning operations. 
(13)	Ground water and soil testing. 
a.	Prior to permitting, the owner shall submit a baseline ground water and soil report, prepared by a registered and qualified engineer or geologist, to document existing conditions on the property. 
b.	Owner shall secure and present a ground water and soil testing report, prepared by a registered and qualified engineer or geologist, every six months on the anniversary of the certificate of occupancy to quantify changes, if any, from the existing condition. 
c.	The owner shall provide adequate ground cover vegetation or other ground water and soil protection measures as required by Georgia code to protect adjacent properties from contamination. 
(14)	Soil erosion. 
a.	In addition to required soil erosion precautions required during construction, the owner shall provide adequate ground cover vegetation or soil erosion measures as required by Georgia and County Code to protect adjacent properties from contamination and erosion. 
(15)	Fuels and flammables. 
a.	All materials intended for loading, unloading, storage or handling shall be free of fuels and flammable liquids. 
b.	Hazardous and other chemicals shall be promptly stored, labeled and certified for removal or recycled to comply with applicable environmental and safety regulations as instructed and regulated by the Georgia Environmental Protection Department (EPD) and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(16)	Odors. 
a.	Properties found to be contributing to an uncontrolled festering of odors shall be subject to penalties. 
(17)	Rodents and varmints. 
a.	Stagnant water shall not be allowed to accumulate. 
b.	Properties found to contribute to an uncontrolled festering of rodents and/or varmints shall be subject to penalties. 
(18)	Fire suppression access and resources. 
a.	Property shall be designed to accommodate fire department vehicles ingress/egress, turning radii, drive aisles and property access per NFPA, state and local codes. 
b.	Fire suppression access area(s) shall be designed by a registered and qualified civil engineer per Georgia Code. 
c.	Fire suppression access area(s) shall be shown on the site plan for permitting. 
d.	Fire extinguishing resources (water, etc.) shall be designed and provided on site as determined by local fire management professionals. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-11 - Variance/waiver. 
A variance and/or waiver to any of the requirements and restrictions of section 58-10 may be requested. The process for applying for said variance and/or waiver shall be to submit said request to the Fannin County board of commissioners, in writing, 30 days prior to any action. The Fannin County board of commissioners shall have time to review, discuss, visit and make recommendation. The Fannin County board of commissioners shall grant, deny or amend the recommendation and shall pass final judgment and all requested variance and/or waiver. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-12 - Permitting and fees. 
(a)	All new businesses being defined within this chapter shall apply to the Fannin County land development department for a permit to operate said business within Fannin County. 
(b)	The application for permit shall include a site plan showing all requirements and restrictions listed in section 58-10, erosion and sediment control plan, a location showing the surrounding one radius mile area, an EPD approved plan of operation and identification of compliance with any EPD requirement. 
(c)	A fee of $250.00 per acre shall be assessed to process, review and evaluate the permit application. This fee shall be refunded if permit is denied and is applicable upon application of new businesses, any new locations or expansion of any existing business. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Secs. 58-13—58-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 58-33. - General prohibitions. 
(a)	Dumping on public or private property prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any road or street or any public or private property in Fannin County, unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state of Georgia or Fannin County or by any of their agencies for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property. 
(2)	The litter is placed into the litter receptacle, container, or dumpster installed on such property and designated for the disposal of litter; or 
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)	Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of litter or household trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property, except with the written consent of the owner thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Blockage of storm drains or draining ditches. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over, or near any storm drain or draining ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(d)	Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation or refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by the chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of the owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the commissioner of his/her designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this chapter. 
(e)	Appliances. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other containers which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the lock or door. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerators or containers which have been placed adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(f)	Transportation of loose materials. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any road or street to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle, provided that the transported materials present a danger of falling from the vehicle. This section shall apply to the transportation of any garbage, refuse, litter, household trash or other material of any kind to any disposal site, which includes but is not limited to any dumpster or sanitary landfill. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage, or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(g)	Accumulation of used tires. No person shall accumulate used vehicle tires in such a manner as to pose a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. Any used tires accumulated on site shall be kept dry, covered and free from mosquitoes and other flying, disease spreading insects. Tires of any description will not be placed in dumpsters under any circumstance. Tires will only be placed in the county landfill at designated locations. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-34. - Public dumpsters. 
(a)	Location. The board of commissioners may designate areas in Fannin County where dumpsters, intended to be for public use, may be located and maintained. These dumpsters may be located on public property, along the right-of-way of public roads or streets, or on private property with the express written consent of the owner and tenant in legal possession of the property, and may be located in such a manner that there is a minimum danger of the spread of noxious odors and the detrimental effect on the environment in minimal. 
(b)	Use by Fannin County residents; unlawful deposits; signs. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons of Fannin County, Georgia, to place or deposit any garbage, refuse, litter, household trash or other material of any kind, not generated within the boundaries of Fannin County, Georgia, in these dumpsters. There shall be located on each dumpster a placard or sign, or a placard or sign shall be posted in an area near a dumpster, visible to persons depositing garbage, stating that said dumpsters are solely intended for the use of residents of Fannin County, Georgia, and that it is unlawful to deposit anything other than garbage or household trash therein. 
(c)	Industrial waste, building materials and commercially collected garbage. It shall be unlawful to place or deposit industrial waste or building materials or commercially collected garbage in public dumpsters unless they are specifically designated for such use by the board of commissioners or its designee. 
(d)	Hazardous refuse. It shall be unlawful to place or deposit any hazardous refuse of any kind in the dumpsters. 
(e)	Hospitals and health care units. All used hypodermic needles should not be recapped, purposely bent or broken by hand, removed from disposable syringes, or otherwise manipulated by hand. Once used, hypodermic needles should be put into a puncture resistant container for disposal by the on-site incinerator at the Fannin Regional Hospital. 
(f)	Ashes. Ashes deposited in the dumpsters shall not be permitted. 
(g)	Combustible liquids. No highly combustible liquid shall be placed or deposited in the dumpsters. 
(h)	Noxious or toxic materials. No material or substance governed or regulated as a noxious or toxic material by any governmental agency or which would pose a hazard to the health, safety and well-being of the collection personnel or residents of Fannin County, or which would pose a danger to the wildlife of the county, shall be placed or deposited in the dumpsters. 
(i)	Garbage or trash to be bagged. It shall be unlawful to place or deposit any garbage or household trash in the dumpster without first placing and securing such in a garbage bag of suitable strength and thickness. Objects which could puncture the garbage bag in the course of ordinary and intended use thereof shall be wrapped or protected so that the bag shall remain intact. 
(j)	Placement of trash on ground adjacent to container. It shall be unlawful to place or deposit garbage or household trash on the ground adjacent to the dumpster or in any location other than the dumpster. Any person using the dumpster shall clean up any spills caused by his/her use of the dumpster and shall not drop or discard any garage or household trash in the area surrounding the dumpster. A fine of $100.00 shall be assessed if convicted for each first time offense. 
(k)	Dead animals. Dead animals shall not be placed or deposited in the dumpster. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-35. - Scavenging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge, disturb, or in any way interfere with the contents of any public dumpster or any public landfill or public waste disposal area. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-36. - Private litter control. 
(a)	Every owner, occupant, tenant and lessee using or occupying any commercial, institutional, or industrial building or property shall be obliged, jointly and severally, to provide litter containers of the character, size, number and type as may be required to hold litter generated by operations of the premises. Specifically, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the requirements for those containers shall apply to shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, fast food restaurants, service stations and similar establishments; and shall likewise apply to commercial establishments, garages, schools, colleges and churches or property thereof. 
(b)	Every owner and every operator of a private or commercial parking lot shall provide litter containers of adequate size, character and number as specified by the board of commissioners, or its designee, to contain the litter generated by the operations of that parking lot. 
(c)	Property owners and prime contractors in charge of a construction site shall be jointly and severally required to furnish litter containers for discarded building materials and other construction litter. All litter from construction and related activities shall be containerized and shall be picked up and placed in containers at the end of each workday. 
(d)	The owner, occupant, and lessee of all property, jointly and severally, are required to remove all litter and place the same in proper containers, and vacant lots, borders, parking lots, embankments, fencing, walls and sidewalks shall be kept free of litter by those persons. Parking lots, shopping centers, convenience stores, drive-in restaurants and all other commercial and industrial enterprises shall see to it that their respective properties are kept litter free. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Secs. 58-37—58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 58-61. - Collection; permit required; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the county except for his/her own residence, business or individual plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and without first having obtained a Fannin County solid waste business permit from the land development office of Fannin County, which is governed by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-62. - Private landfills. 
(a)	Permits required; application. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area intended to be used by the owner or used by others for the disposal or storage of waste without first having filed the proper application for a special use permit with the Fannin County board of commissioners. The owner of any landfill must also obtain a proper permit from the Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, O.C.G.A. Chapter 391-3-4, solid waste management. 
(b)	Issuance of permit; compliance with federal, state and county laws. No permit shall be issued by Fannin County until the applicant has shown, to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners or its designee, that all federal, state, and county regulations and ordinances will be complied with in the operation and management of the landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area, and that the locations of said landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area is such that there is no or minimal detriment to the environment, including, but not limited to, noxious odors, runoff, or contamination of surface water and groundwater, to that the maximum protection is afforded to the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County. 
(c)	Maintenance of site. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(d)	Inspections by county. The board of commissioners shall designate county employees and its designees shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this article and all other pertinent laws and regulations of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-63. - Public landfills. 
(a)	Location; compliance with federal and state laws. Fannin County, through the board of commissioners, may operate and maintain public landfills located on County owned or leased property and in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)	Directional signs to be posted. Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside and at the location of the Fannin County Sanitary Landfill. 
(c)	Maintenance; opening of new sites. Such sites shall be maintained while in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting notices and through public advertisements. 
(d)	Restrictions on types of refuse. The board of commissioners may restrict certain sites or portions thereof to a specific type or types of refuse. 
(e)	Commercial collections. Commercial collections, including yard maintenance men, may use the public designated sites. 
(f)	Fee. Residents of Fannin County, other than commercial collectors, may use public sites upon payment of a fee, if any, to be set by the board of commissioners, in accordance with the regulations for the particular site and under the instructions of the site attendant. 
(g)	Refuse generated outside county. No refuse generated outside Fannin County will be accepted at any disposal site. 
(h)	Hours of operation. Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated Monday through Saturday of each week, with the exception of holidays during the hours designated by the board of commissioners or its designee. 
(i)	Attendant required to be present; deposited material becomes property of the county. No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days stipulated by the Fannin County board of commissioners. All material delivered and deposited in a disposal site shall immediately become the property of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-64. - Transporting garbage in a manner likely to create hazards to the public health, safety or well-being prohibited. 
No person shall engage in solid waste handling or transportation of garbage in a manner which will likely create a nuisance or litter the land, roads or streets of Fannin County; be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impair the air quality; impair the quality of the groundwater or surface water; impair the quality of the environment; or likely create other hazards to the public health, safety or well-being as may be determined by the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58.65. - Applicability of article provisions. 
Provisions of this article shall apply to all persons presently engaged in solid waste handling as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-66. - Prohibited acts. 
The following acts are prohibited: 
(1)	Burning. No solid waste may be burned at a solid waste handling facility, disposal site or processing operation. 
(2)	Open dump. No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor shall any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-67. - Prohibited wastes. 
If, because of unusual physical or chemical properties, or geological or hydrological conditions, or for other reasons, the Fannin County board of commissioners finds that solid waste should be accepted at a solid waste handling facility, the Fannin County board of commissioners may require that such waste be prohibited, and that a proposal for disposal of such waste, with supporting data as may be deemed necessary, be submitted by the originator of such waste for consideration of approval by the Fannin County board of commissioners, and the prohibition of such waste shall continue in effect until an acceptable procedure for processing of disposal has been developed and approved. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-68. - Materials destined for recycling. 
(a)	Exemption from article requirements. Materials which are destined for recycling, including but not limited to glass, paper, metal, plastic, rubber are excluded from this article as solid wastes. To be considered exempt from this article, the material must be processed to recover the usable product, employed as an ingredient in an industrial process to make a product, or employed in a particular function or application as an effective substitute for a commercial product. 
(b)	Materials accumulated speculatively. Materials accumulated speculatively are solid waste and must comply with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(c)	Materials not accumulated speculatively. A material is not accumulated speculatively if the person accumulating it can show that during the calendar year (commencing on January 1) the amount of material that is recycled equals at least 60 percent by weight or volume of the material accumulated at the beginning of the period. 
(d)	Proof of recycling. Proof of recycling shall be provided in the form of manifests, bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the material in question to a recognized recycling facility from the accumulation point. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-69. - Permit by rule for collection, transportation and disposal. 
(a)	Responsibility for collection. The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry, or similar facilities shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution or similar facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with this article unless arrangements have been made for such service with a collector operating in compliance with this article. 
(b)	Permit by rule. Not withstanding any other provision of this article, the following collection, transportation, and disposal operations shall be deemed to have a solid handling permit if the conditions listed are met: 
(1)	Notification. Within 30 days of the effective date (5-19-2009) of the ordinance from which this article is derived or of commencing solid waste handling activities which are covered under a permit by ordinance, notification must be made to the Fannin County board of commissioners of such activity. Notification shall be made on such forms as are provided by the Fannin County board of commissioners. Persons failing to notify the Fannin County board of commissioners of such activities shall be deemed to be operating without a permit. 
(2)	Collection operations. 
a.	Vehicle construction. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible wastes, or rubbish containing such wastes, shall be covered, substantially leak proof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. 
b.	Vehicle maintenance. Solid waste collection and transportation vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent threats to human health and shall be maintained in good repair. 
c.	Littering and spillage. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak or spill therefrom and shall be covered when necessary to prevent the blowing or falling of material from the vehicle. 
d.	Hazardous waste. No regulated quantities of hazardous wastes may be collected and transported except in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act. 
e.	Wastewater from the cleaning vehicles. All wastewater from the cleaning of vehicles must be handled in a manner which meets all applicable environmental laws and regulations. 
f.	Deposit in permitted handling facility. All collected solid waste must be deposited only in a permitted solid waste handling facility authorized to receive the applicable waste types. 
(3)	Transfer stations. 
a.	Solid waste to be confined to interior; maintenance. Solid waste shall be confined to the interior of the transfer stations, and not allowed to scatter to the outside. Waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, and floors shall be kept clean and well drained. 
b.	Sewage solids excluded. Sewage solids shall be excluded from transfer stations and shall be transported directly to the disposal facility, disposal site or processing operation. 
c.	Dust, odors, etc. Dust, odors and similar conditions resulting from transfer operations shall be controlled at all times. 
d.	Rodents, pests, etc. Rodents, insects and other such pests shall be controlled. 
e.	Contaminated runoff washes water. Any contaminated runoff wash water shall be discharged to a wastewater treatment system and, before final release, shall be treated in a manner approved by Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(4)	Hazardous waste. 
a.	No person owning or operating a transfer station shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the handling of regulated quantities of hazardous waste to be stored in or pass thru Fannin County without giving 30 day prior notice to the Fannin County board of commissioners so they may take action upon such matter prior to hazardous waste being allowed into or stored in Fannin County. 
(5)	Inert waste landfill operation. 
a.	Only dirt, concrete, rocks, bricks, yard trimmings, and land clearing debris such as stumps, limbs and leaves, are acceptable for disposal in an inert waste landfill. No industrial or demolition wastes may be accepted. 
b.	Materials placed in inert waste landfills shall be spread in layers and compacted to the least practical volume. 
c.	A uniform compacted layer of clean cover no less than one foot in depth shall be placed over all exposed inert waste material at least monthly. 
d.	The inert waste landfill site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto the landfill surface, to prevent erosion and to drain water from the surface of the landfill. 
e.	Access to inert waste landfills shall be limited to authorized entrances which shall be closed when the site in not in operation. 
f.	Suitable means shall be provided to prevent and control fires. Stockpiled soil is considered to be the most satisfactory firefighting material. 
g.	A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final lift not later than one month following final placement of inert waste within that lift. 
h.	Notice of final closure must be provided to the Fannin County board of commissioners within 30 days of receiving the final load of waste. Any site not receiving waste for in excess of 180 days shall be deemed abandoned and in violation of this article unless properly closed. Notice of closure must include the date of final waste receipt and an accurate legal description of the boundaries of the landfill. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-70. - Biomedical waste. 
(a)	Defined. Biomedical waste means and includes the following: 
(1)	Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues and body parts which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy, and laboratory procedures. 
(2)	Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctioning, and other bulk body fluids which cannot or are not directly discarded into a municipal sewer system. 
(3)	Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures. 
(4)	Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals which have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, during research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(5)	A sharp, which means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV-tubing and syringes with needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
(6)	Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material which has come in contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant agents.) Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV-tubing bags and vials, and other contaminated materials. The above waste must first be classified as empty which means such quantity that it is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
(7)	Discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, that were in contact with infectious agents. 
(b)	Generation of biomedical waste. 
(1)	This section shall apply to all facilities generating regulated quantities of biomedical waste, including but not limited to: clinics, dental offices, funeral homes, health maintenance organizations (HMOs), hospitals, laboratories, medical buildings, physicians' offices, spas, veterinary offices, research and manufacturing facilities, nursing homes, and blood banks. 
(2)	In no case shall a person be a generator of biomedical waste if those wastes are generated from single-family residential premises or a single-family dwelling unit and disposed of as residential solid wastes. 
(3)	The importation for transfer, terminal storage or disposal of medical or biomedical or biohazardous waste within the geographic limits of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia shall be prohibited. 
(c)	Storage and containment of biomedical waste. 
(1)	Containment of biomedical waste shall be in a manner and location which affords protection from animals, rain and wind, does not provide a breeding place or a food source for insects and rodents, and minimizes exposure to the public. 
(2)	Biomedical waste shall be segregated by separate containment from other waste at the point of origin. 
a.	Biomedical waste, except for sharps, shall be placed in containers which are impervious to moisture and have strength sufficient to preclude ripping, tearing, or bursting under normal conditions of use. The containers shall be securely closed so as to prevent the leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage, handling, or transport. 
b.	Sharps shall be contained for storage, transportation, treatment and subsequent disposal in leak proof, rigid puncture-resistant containers which are taped closed or tightly lidded to preclude loss of contents. 
(3)	Rigid containers of discarded sharps and all other disposable containers used for the containment of biomedical waste shall be red or orange in color or clearly identified with the universal biohazard symbol or clearly marked with the word "biohazard." 
(4)	Biomedical waste contained in disposable containers as prescribed above shall be placed for storage, handling, or transport in disposable or reusable pails, cartons, boxes, drums, dumpsters, or portable bins. The containment system shall have a tight fitting cover and be kept clean and in good repair. The containers may be of any color and shall be conspicuously labeled with the universal biohazard symbol and the word "biohazard" on the sides so as to be readily visible from any lateral direction when the container is upright. 
a.	Reusable containers used for the shipment of biomedical waste to a treatment facility of a permitted sanitary landfill shall be thoroughly washed and decontaminated each time they are emptied unless the surfaces of the containers have been protected from contamination by disposable liners, bags, or other devices removed with the waste. 
b.	Reusable pails, drums, dumpsters or bins used for the containment of biomedical waste shall not be used for other purposes except after being decontaminated by procedures as described in this subsection and after the universal biohazard symbol and word "biohazard" are removed. 
(d)	Transfer of biomedical waste to off-site treatment or disposal facilities. 
(1)	Any generator of biomedical waste shall transfer custody of the waste only to a collector who is operating under authority of this section. 
(2)	Biomedical waste shall not be transported in the same vehicle with other solid waste unless the biomedical waste is contained in a separate, fully enclosed leak proof container within the vehicle compartment or unless all of the waste is to be treated as biomedical waste in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)	Biomedical waste shall be delivered for storage, including intermediate transfer, and treatment only to a facility or location for which there is a valid and appropriate operating permit as set forth in this section. 
(4)	Surfaces of transport vehicles that have contacted spilled or leaked biomedical waste shall be decontaminated. 
(5)	Packaged biomedical waste may not be compacted or shredded prior to delivery to the treatment or disposal facility unless such compaction or shredding is in conjunction with chemical or other treatment which renders the waste noninfectious. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-71. - Asbestos. 
(a)	Collection. 
(1)	Vehicles used for the transportation of containerized asbestos waste shall have an enclosed carrying compartment or utilize a covering sufficient to contain the transported waste, prevent damage to containers, and prevent release or spillage from the vehicle. 
(2)	Vehicles used to reduce waste volume by compaction shall not be used because containers may rupture. 
(3)	Vacuum trucks used to transport waste slurry must be constructed and operated to ensure that water does not leak from the truck. 
(b)	Disposal. 
(1)	Asbestos waste is to be disposed of only is a permitted sanitary landfill authorized by the Fannin County board of commissioners for acceptance of asbestos containing waste. 
(2)	Asbestos waste shall be sealed in leak proof containers labeled with: "Caution — Contains Asbestos Fibers—Avoid Opening or Breaking Container—Breathing Asbestos is Hazardous to Your Health." 
(3)	Asbestos waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as not to destroy the integrity of the asbestos-containing materials containers. This waste shall be covered immediately with other solid waste or soil. 
(4)	Asbestos waste must be completely covered immediately after deposition with a minimum of six inches of nonasbestos material. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-72. - Liquid waste restrictions at sanitary landfills. 
One hundred eighty days after the effective date (5-19-2009) of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the following restrictions will apply: 
(1)	Liquid waste, either bulk or containerized, shall not be placed in a sanitary landfill except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(2)	If liquid waste is demonstrated nonhazardous and is admixed with a bladeable material into a bladeable form, it is acceptable for disposal at a sanitary landfill with the concurrence of the sanitary landfill operator. 
(3)	Gas condensate and recirculated leachate disposal at sanitary landfills may be approved on a case-by-case basis by the Fannin County board of commissioners if sufficient evidence is provided to the Fannin County board of commissioners to warrant such disposal. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-73. - Disallowed locations. 
(a)	No solid waste areas, junkyards, salvage yards, used auto parts yards, recycling centers, transfer stations, construction/demolition transfer stations, landfill and solid waste transfer stations or any other such business shall be located within 1,500 feet of a school, public park, childcare facility, hospital, church, residential subdivision, designated forest, waterway or scenic landmark. 
(b)	Distance of 1,500 feet shall be measured by the shortest distance from any point between properties. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Secs. 58-74—58-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLASSIFICATION OF REFUSE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 58-103. - Domestic refuse. 
The following types of refuse shall be classed as domestic refuse and shall be accepted for disposal: 
(1)	Garbage. 
(2)	Business trash. 
(3)	Refuse. 
(4)	Household trash. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-104. - Industrial waste. 
The following types of waste shall be classified as industrial waste and shall not be accepted for disposal: 
(1)	Industrial waste. 
(2)	Hazardous refuse. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-105. - Building materials. 
Building materials, if presented to the county for disposal, may be accepted for disposal upon such terms and conditions as may be determined by the board of commissioners or its designee and specific locations within the landfill may be designated for the disposal of building materials. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Secs. 58-106—58-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 58-124. - Unlawful; disposal by county. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle as provided in Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Any motor vehicle abandoned within Fannin County shall be disposed of by the proper authorities. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-125. - Abandoning vehicle on public property prohibited. 
The dumpster regulation of and ordinance of Fannin County is incorporated herein for purposes of enforcement. It shall be unlawful to park or let stand any junk vehicle or abandoned vehicle on public property or within ten feet of a county or state road located within Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-126. - Abandoning on property adjacent to or abutting a public road. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep any junk vehicle on any property adjoining or abutting any public road, street or other public property within the unincorporated portions of Fannin County, and visible from such public road, street, way or other public property. Said abandoned or junk vehicle shall be screened from public view or removed. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-127. - Disposal at dumpster or landfill. 
It shall be unlawful to dispose of a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle in or at a dumpster or at any sanitary landfill. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 58-128. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement provisions of this chapter as they apply to junk vehicles are not exclusive, but shall be in addition to any other regulations and regulatory codes of the State of Georgia or Fannin County. A fine of $100.00 per vehicle, per incident shall be assessed, to the property and vehicle owner, for each week an abandoned or junk motor vehicle is not screened or removed. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 62-19. - Title, authority, purpose, and jurisdiction. 
(a)	This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Driveway Ordinance for the County of Fannin, Georgia." 
(b)	The purpose of this article is to provide the manner of installation of driveways along public streets and roadways in order to facilitate provision of adequate public safety. 
(c)	The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, is charged with providing for the safety and well-being of the citizens of Fannin County, Georgia. To that end, it is that all driveways installed along public streets and roadways be done in such a manner as to minimize runoff onto public streets and roadways. 
(d)	This article, the regulations, and the procedures contained herein shall apply to and govern each and every driveway installed along the public streets and roadways of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. I) 
Sec. 62-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of commissioners means the board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, which includes the chairman, and two post commissioners, designated as post one commissioner and post two commissioner. 
Developer means a person, firm or corporation submitting an application for development for a subdivision, planned unit development, industrial park or mobile home park and upon whom final responsibility for ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of this article rests. 
Driveway means a private way, beginning at the property line of a lot abutting a public road, private road, easement or private right-of-way, giving access from that public road, recorded easement, recorded private road or private right-of-way, and leading to a building, use or structure on that lot. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building arranged or designed to be occupied by one family. 
Private road means a street not maintained by the Fannin County department of roads which is not intended to become a public street but which shall be used for access to a particular site, group development or business. 
Public road means a street located on public right-of-way and which meets the total improvement requirements for a public street as set forth by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Roadway means any road, street, drive, lane, cartway, tramway, easement, right-of-way, access area, thoroughfare, highway, boulevard, or any other corridor used for or having the potential use as a means of conveyance by a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. II) 
Sec. 62-21. - Driveway installation. 
(a)	Slope; angle of entrance. Any developer or individual installing a driveway which shall connect to a public road or a road which may become public shall do so in a manner that conforms to the sloping of the road. Such installation shall be such that any runoff from the driveway is angled away from the road. 
(b)	Nofication by developer of installation location. Any developer or individual installing a driveway which shall connect to a public road or a road which may become public shall notify the Fannin County right-of-way department as to the location of said installation. 
(c)	County inspection of slope or angle of interest. The Fannin County right-of-way and engineering department shall have a period of 60 days from the date it was notified of said installation to inspect the same and determine if the slopping or angle of entrance is sufficient to minimize runoff on the road. 
(d)	Notification by county of necessary modifications. The Fannin County right-of-way and engineering department shall notify the property owner, in writing, via certified mail, return receipt requested, of any modifications deemed necessary to said installation. 
(e)	Responsibility for corrections or modifications. The developer or individual installing the driveway shall be solely responsible for the correction or modification deemed necessary to said installation. In the event that the property has been sold or title has changed hands, it shall be the responsibility of the party installing said driveway to make the necessary modifications. 
(f)	Record of notification; written receipt. The Fannin County right-of-way and engineering department shall maintain a log including the date it was notified of the installation, the date of inspection and the result of the inspection. It shall also provide a written receipt to the individual or developer indicating the date of notification to the department. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. III) 
Sec. 62-22. - Enforcing officers. 
(a)	Any peace officer of the State of Georgia or Fannin County or the Fannin County board of commissioners may name, by appropriate resolution, an employee of Fannin County to serve as its designee and to oversee all matters concerning the enforcement of this article. 
(b)	The Fannin County board of commissioners may name by appropriate resolution such other persons to be under the designee described in subsection (a) of this section to insure enforcement of this article. 
(c)	The designee of the board of commissioners shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this article or to the owner or any other person who may be in the possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)	Such citations shall be on a form approved by the Fannin County board of commissioners and shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have the identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, and shall be signed by the representative of Fannin County who completes and serves it. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. IV) 
Sec. 62-23. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person violating this article or any part thereof, upon conviction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the following punishment as provided in Georgia Code section 15-10-60. 
(1)	Owners of property which do not comply with this article will be notified and requested to meet these requirements within 30 days from the date of notification. A warning notice will be issued after 30 days if the requirements have not been met. 
(2)	Any person violating the provisions of this article after having been issued a warning notice upon conviction will be guilty of a misdemeanor, and will be fined $50.00 for the first offense. 
(3)	Any subsequent violations after the first offense upon conviction will be subject to a fine of $100.00. 
(b)	Any violation of this article may be subject to civil remedies as set forth in Georgia Code section 15-10-40 to 15-10-51, article 3. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. V) 
Sec. 62-24. - Severability and conflict. 
(a)	Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid such decisions shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(b)	Insofar as the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions or any other local laws, the provisions of this article shall control. Insofar as the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions of any state or federal law, the state or federal law shall control. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. VI) 
Sec. 62-25. - Appeal. 
Any action taken by the property address coordinator or under guidelines set forth in this article may be appealed by the property owner(s) to the Fannin County board of commissioners. Such an appeal must be filed in writing within 30 days of written notification of required owner action or within 30 days of the action from which the property owner takes objection. Said appeal shall be filed with the Fannin County clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. VII) 
Sec. 62-26. - Amendment procedure. 
This article may be amended from time to time by the Fannin County board of commissioners, as specified under board policy for amending county ordinances. 
(Ord. of 8-10-1999, art. VIII) 
Secs. 62-27—62-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF COUNTY SIGNS, CHARACTERS, MARKERS OR INDICATORS 

Sec. 62-56. - Unauthorized removal of signs. 
It shall be illegal for any person to remove, vacate, alter, destroy, demolish, steal or borrow without authorization any signs, characters, markers or indicators adjacent to or on the right-of-way of streets, roads, avenues, and lanes which are a part of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-1-1996, art. I) 
Sec. 62-57. - Possession of signs. 
It shall be illegal for any person to have in his/her possession any signs, characters, markers or indicators adjacent to or on the right-of-way of streets, roads, avenues, and lanes which can reasonable be assumed to have been a part of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-1-1996, art. II) 
Sec. 62-58. - Enforcing officers. 
(a)	Any peace officer of the State of Georgia or Fannin County or the board of commissioners may name, by appropriate resolution, an employee of Fannin County to serve as its designee and to oversee all matters concerning the enforcement of this article. 
(b)	The board of commissioners may name, by appropriate resolution, such persons as it may feel necessary, if any, in addition to the Fannin County sheriff's office, to be road sign monitors. Such monitors shall be under the supervision of the designee described in subsection (a) of this section and shall patrol, inspect and monitor road sign sites to insure compliance with this article, and shall monitor all areas of Fannin County for violations of this article. 
(c)	The designee of the board of commissioners, as the road sign monitor, shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this article or to the owner or any other person who may be in possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of any provision of this article. Such citations shall be on a form approved by the board of commissioners and shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of Fannin County who completes and serves it. 
(Ord. of 8-1-1996, § 3.0) 
Sec. 62-59. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: By fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $500.00, and/or by imprisonment in the Fannin County Jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, which is in accordance with Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 15-10-62. 
(b)	No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate and required to post a bond for his/her future appearance. 
(Ord. of 8-1-1996, § 3.1) 
Sec. 62-60. - Court proceedings. 
(a)	Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations or accusations as described in section 62-59(a) and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney or another attorney designated by the board of commissioners shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)	Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of Fannin County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, chapter 15-10. 
(c)	Nothing in this section shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy by law. 
(d)	Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-1-1996, § 3.2) 
Chapter 66 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTING TAX ON HARVESTED TIMBER 

Sec. 66-19. - Notification of harvesting. 
The Timber Harvesting Contractor shall give written notification to the office of the Tax Assessor of Fannin County, Georgia, within 48 hours after the startup (moving in of equipment or cutting of any trees). Said notice shall be in the following form: 
Notification of Harvesting 

 
At the completion of harvesting of the timber identified in the above notification form, the contractor shall give oral; (phone call sufficient) notification of said completion. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 66-20. - Penalty for failure to comply with reporting requirements. 
For failure to comply with the above reporting requirements the penalty for the first offense shall be a fine of $100.00 and subsequent offenses shall be fines not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 66-21. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by Fannin County, Georgia. Citations for violations shall require appearance before the magistrate court of Fannin County. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1996, § 3) 
Secs. 66-22—66-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-27-2012, adopted No. 27, 2012, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 66-46—66-67, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. of 9-11-1993, §§ I, III—XXIII. 

Sec. 66-46. - Short title. 
The ordinance from which this articles derives may be cited as the "Fannin County Lodging Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § I) 
Sec. 66-47. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to enact an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupational taxes to, the county for operating within the special district a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, rental cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § III) 
Sec. 66-48. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except when the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning. 
Due date. The 20 th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room. A room or rooms occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel/motel/cabin/residence/lodge. Any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodging house, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, rental cabin, or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or motel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
Occupant. Any person (or persons utilizing a single unit) who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room or hotel or motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, agreement or otherwise. 
Operator. Any person operating a hotel/motel (as set out herein) in Fannin County, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sub lessee, lender in possession, licensee, online travel companies, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel / motel, including private owners who rent or lease private residences for more than two days in any one year. 
Person. An individual, firm partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust receiver, trustee, syndicate, business entity, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, to include the plural and well as the singular number, excepting, however, the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the governing authority of Fannin County is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant who as of a given date shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel for at least 90 consecutive days. 
Rent. The considerations or value received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of all kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there-from whatsoever. 
Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § IV) 
Sec. 66-49. - Rate of levy. 
There is hereby set and levied on the occupant of a guest room of any hotel/motel/cabin/residence/lodge/guest room located within the special district a tax in the amount of five percent of the gross rent for such occupancy. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § V) 
Sec. 66-50. - Commencement of levy. 
The tax herein imposed shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after January 1, 2012, including, but not limited to such occupancy that was entered into pursuant to a contract, lease or other agreement entered into prior to such date. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § VI) 
Sec. 66-51. - Exemptions from levy. 
No tax shall be levied pursuant to this article under the following situations: 
(a)	No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of meeting rooms. 
(b)	No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of any jail cell, detention center or other building where such housing or detention is under legal restraint. 
(c)	No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of any hospital medical treatment facility. 
(d)	No tax shall be levied under this section upon the fees or charges for any room, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days to the State of Georgia employees or officials when traveling on official business. 
(e)	No tax shall be levied under this section upon the fees or charges for any room, lodging or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days to local government employees or officials when traveling on official business. 
(f)	No tax shall be levied under this section for rentals over 90 consecutive days. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § VII) 
Sec. 66-52. - Exemption—Permanent residences. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § VIII) 
Sec. 66-53. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator providing lodging accommodations within the unincorporated area of Fannin County to collect the tax on occupants as imposed herein. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § IX) 
Sec. 66-54. - Registration of operator. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in the business of providing lodging accommodations, as above defined, in the special district shall immediately register said business with the Fannin County board of commissioners' office, as the duly authorized representative of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. Persons engaged in such business must so register no later than 30 days after the date this section becomes effective, but such grace period for the filing of the registration after the effective date of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. 
(a)	The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business; the location of the place or places of business, the mailing address of the business, the principal contact person at said business and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(b)	The registration shall be signed by the owner (if a natural person), by an officer (if a corporation) or a partner (if a partnership). 
(c)	A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. However, a realtor offering cabins for rent shall be deemed to be one place of business and shall not require a separate registration for each cabin rented. 
(d)	An operator offering more than one cabin or unit for rent under the same federal and state tax identification number shall be required to file the same number of returns as required by the State of Georgia for the filing of state sales tax returns. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § X) 
Sec. 66-55. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as hereinabove provided, the Fannin County board of commissioners office shall issue to such operator a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupant. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business or person to which it relates. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XI) 
Sec. 66-56. - Due date and required report. 
All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the Fannin County board of commissioners monthly, on or before the 20 th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for a period, and such other information as may be required by the board of commissioners office or governing authority of Fannin County. 
In the event that an operator is permitted under applicable state guidelines to make quarterly sales tax returns to the State of Georgia, said operator shall be permitted to make quarterly sales tax returns to Fannin County, Georgia. At the time of registration, the operator shall indicate that he is permitted to make quarterly sales tax returns together with month and day said quarterly returns are due. The failure of the operator to indicate that he is permitted under applicable state statue to file quarterly reports will infer that monthly reports are due and collectable. 
At the time any such report is due, the operator shall file a copy of the corresponding state sales tax return for the sole purpose of verifying the sums reported and due. 
In the event an operator is permitted under applicable state guidelines to file annual excise, or lodging tax returns, to the State of Georgia, said operator is required to file monthly or quarterly returns for lodging tax to Fannin County, Georgia. 
In the event there are no rentals in a reporting period, lodging providers are required to file a return to Fannin County, Georgia stating they had zero rentals for the period. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XII) 
Sec. 66-57. - Deposit to general fund. 
No later than the 25 th day of each month, the designated representative shall deposit to the general county fund such excise taxes as have been paid under the provisions of this article, and such funds shall thereafter at the direction of the board of commissioners be expended for the promotion of the tourism industry in Fannin County, or such funds at the direction of the board of commissioners of Fannin County, Georgia, may be otherwise be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows as provided by statute. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XIII) 
Sec. 66-58. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XIV) 
Sec. 66-59. - Penalty and interest. 
The operator, in the event of operator's failure to pay tax when due, shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the amount due plus interest on the total amount of delinquent taxes at the rate of eight and one-half percent per annum. In addition, the operator shall not be entitled to the fee allowed in section 66-58 of this article. The late penalty will be strictly enforced. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XV) 
Sec. 66-60. - Failure to file return. 
(a)	If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this section, the county shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the county. 
(b)	The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia or its designated representative(s) shall give to the operator written notice of determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his/her/its last known address as it appears on any of the county's records. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)	The amount of the determination made hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the 20 th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the day of payment. 
(d)	In addition, a penalty of five percent of the tax due or $5.00 whichever is greater for each 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater, shall be assessed and paid by the operator to the County. 
(e)	The estimated tax together with applicable penalties and interest may be collected utilizing any of the enforcement methods set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XVI) 
Sec. 66-61. - Records. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this section shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the county may, in writing, from time to time require. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XVII) 
Sec. 66-62. - Enforcement of provisions. 
The board of commissioners or its designated representative(s) shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the following powers: 
(a)	To examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator subject to this article, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(b)	To require the filing of reports by any person or persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals which are subject to the tax herein levied; and, 
(c)	To allow a credit on any amount due payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XVIII) 
Sec. 66-63. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the county attorney at the direction of the board of commissioners may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XIX) 
Sec. 66-64. - Sale of business prior to payment of taxes. 
If any operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this section and subsequent thereto sells out or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. In the event said purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he/she/it shall become personally liable for the extent of the tax owed, together with any applicable penalties and interest. Any operator or person who ceases to operate the entity under which the same is registered with the county, said operator or person must notify the board of commissioners office in writing within 30 days of closing said enterprise. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XX) 
Sec. 66-65. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)	Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article or who shall fail to do anything required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of Fannin County and upon conviction, shall be assessed with any penalty, including fine, confinement, or both, allowed by law for the violation of county resolutions or ordinances each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)	In order to enforce this article or to correct or abate any violation of the article, the board of commissioners of Fannin County, in addition to other remedies may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XXI) 
Sec. 66-66. - Severability. 
(a)	If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if the provisions of any part of this resolution as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the board of commissioners to provide separable and divisible parts, and it does hereby adopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(b)	All resolutions or parts of resolutions in conflict with the terms of this article are hereby repealed, but it is hereby provided that any resolution or law which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out or making effective the intent, purpose and provisions hereof, which shall be literally construed to be in favor of Fannin County is hereby adopted as part hereof. 
(c)	The effective date of this article shall be the 1 st day of January, 2013. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XXII) 
Sec. 66-67. - License fee. 
In order to comply with the mandates of the applicable laws of the State of Georgia, an administrative fee is hereby implemented on any business or person under the purview of the within ordinance. Said administrative fee shall be in the amount of $25.00 payable annually. Said administrative fee shall be remitted to the board of commissioners, before the 1 st day of September of each year that this article is in effect. The administrative fee after September 1 st will be $75.00. The board of commissioners, or designated representative, shall issue a lodging certificate to said enterprise paying said administrative fee. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2012, § XXIII) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted by reference. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Uniform Rules of the Road, as amended, title 40, chapter 6, code sections 40-6-181 through 40-6-183 and code sections 40-6-370 through 40-6-376, and chapter 14, code sections 40-14-1 through 40-14-16 where applicable, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 1-1-1996, 3-26-1996; Ord. of 7-8-1997) 
Secs. 70-2—70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 70-21. - On system. 
The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
(1)	Enumerated. 
a.	State Route 2. State Route 2 runs common with State Route 515 from mile point 0.00 (SR 515) to mile point 17.17 (Union county line), a distance of 17.17 miles. 
b.	State Route 5. State Route 5 runs common with State Route 515 from mile point 0.00 to mile point 4.16, a distance of 4.16 miles. 
1.	From mile point 4.66 north city limits of Blue Ridge (950 feet north of CR 528) to mile point 12.42 (CR 138), a distance of 7.76 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
2.	From mile point 12.42 (CR 138) to mile point 13.28 (south city limits of McCaysville, 50 feet north of CS 637), a distance of 0.86 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
c.	State Route 60. 
1.	From mile point 0.00 (Union county line) to mile point 17.16 (Morganton city limits, 500 feet north of CR 46), a distance of 17.16 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
2.	From mile point 18.25 (Morganton city limits, 50 feet north of Church Street) to mile point 18.60 (525 feet north of CR 45), a distance of 0.35 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
d.	School zone, east Fannin middle school. 
1.	From mile point 18.10 (739 feet northwest of CR 402) to mile point 18.35 (150 feet south of CR 198), a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour effective 30 minutes prior to commencement to 30 minutes after commencement a.m. and 30 minutes prior to dismissal to 30 minutes after dismissal p.m. during school days only. 
2.	From mile point 18.60 (525 feet north of CR 45) to mile point 20.75 (1,300 feet south of CR 65, Mineral Bluff city limits), a distance of 2.22 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
3.	From mile point 22.03 (Mineral Bluff city limits, 850 feet south of CR 79) to mile point 22.70 (500 feet north of CR 105), a distance of 0.67 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
4.	From mile point 22.70 (500 feet north of CR 105) to mile point 23.39 (1,000 feet north of CR 104) a distance of 0.69 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
5.	From mile point 23.39 (1,000 feet north of CR 104) to mile point 29.07 (McCaysville city limits, 0.49 miles south of CR 100), a distance of 5.68 miles, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
e.	State Route 60 Spur. From mile point 0.52 (Mineral Bluff city limits) to mile point 7.51 (North Carolina state line), a distance of 6.99 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
f.	State Route 515. 
1.	From mile point 0.00 to mile point 2.40 (city limits of Blue Ridge), a distance of miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
2.	From mile point 4.62 (50 feet north of CS 577, Blue Ridge city limits) to mile point 17.17 (Union County line), a distance of 12.55 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
(2)	Erection of signs. Signs are to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(3)	Penalty for violation. Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 1-1-1996, 3-26-1996) 
Sec. 70-22. - On the Fannin County system. 
(a)	Enumerated. The following roads are on the Fannin County system: 
Ada Street (CR 103). Ada Street running from the Blue Ridge City limits to Curtis Switch Road (CR 195) for a distance of 3.4 miles. The speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Aska Road (CR 222). 
Aska Road running from 11.1 miles to Newport Road (CR 8). The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Aska Road running from Old Highway 76 between 1.7 miles and 7.1 miles. The speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Aska Road running from Old Highway 76 between 7.1 miles and 9.0 miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Aska Road running from Old Highway 76 between 9.0 miles and 11.1 miles. The speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Aska Road running from Old Highway 76 for a distance of 1.7 miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Chestnut Gap Road (CR 215). Chestnut Gap Road running from Old Highway 2 to Sugar Creek Road (CR 217) for a distance of 3.8 miles. The speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Doublehead Gap Road (CR 218). Doublehead Gap Road running from the Gilmer County line to the Noontootla Creek bridge for a distance of 1.7 miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Galloway Road (CR 195). Galloway Road running from Ada Street (CR 103) to State Highway 5 for a distance of 3.2 miles. The speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Hardscrabble Road (CR 79, 80, 82, 83). Hardscrabble Road running from State Highway 60 to State Highway Spur 60 for a distance of 7.3 miles. The speed limit will be 45 miles per hour. 
Lebanon Church Road (CR 219). Lebanon Church Road running from Madola Road (CR 212) to Old Highway 2 for a distance of 3.5 miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Loving Road (CR 220). Loving Road running from the Union County line to State Highway 515 for a distance of 5.1 miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Madola Road (CR 212). Madola Road running from Church Street (CR 155) to the Fightingtown Creek Bridge for a distance of 2.7 miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Mineral Springs Road (CR 268). Mineral Springs Road running from Aska Road (CR 222) to the Blue Ridge city limits (Church Street) for a distance of one mile. The speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Mobile Road (CR 167). Mobile Road running from the Tennessee State line to Macedonia Church Road (CR 177) for a distance of 3.9 miles. The speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Mountain View Road (CR 177, 178, 179). Mountain View Road running from Mobile Road (CR 167) to Macedona Church Road (CR 177) for a distance of 3.4 miles. The speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Newport Road (CR 8). Newport Road running from Doublehead Gap Road (CR 218) to Dial Road (CR 5) for a distance of 4.7 miles. The speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Old Highway 2. Old Highway 2 running from State Highway 5 for a distance of nine miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Scenic Drive (CR 217). Scenic Drive running from the Blue Ridge city limits to State Highway 5 for a distance of 2.5 miles. The speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Sugar Creek Road (CR 217). 
Sugar Creek Road running from Chestnut Gap Road (CR 215) to Scenic Drive (CR 217) for a distance of 1.5 miles. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Sugar Creek Road running from the Gilmer County line to Chestnut Gap Road (CR 215) for a distance of 2.5 miles. The speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Tennis Court Road (CR 118). Tennis Court Road running from Old Highway 2 to Sugar Creek Road (CR 217) for a distance of 2.2 miles. The speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
(b)	Erection of signs. The appropriate signs to be erected by Fannin County, Georgia. 
(c)	Violation. Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 70-23. - Construction speed zone. 
(a)	Purpose. The board of commissioners of Fannin County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, hereby enacts a county ordinance in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety and well-being of Fannin County, Georgia, and those who may be traveling or working in said political subdivision, to institute and maintain countywide speed limits controlling the speed of travel through or around construction sites. 
(b)	Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as "The Construction Speed Zone Ordinance of Fannin County, Georgia." 
(c)	Definitions of terms. Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a "firm," "corporation," "association," "organization," "trust" or "partnership." The use of the "masculine" gender includes the "feminine," and the use of the "feminine," includes the "masculine." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive and is not mandatory. The word "commissioners" refers to the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(d)	Speed zones. A speed limit of ten miles per hour is hereby established in, through or around any construction site located on or adjacent to any street, road or highway under the jurisdiction of the Fannin County board of commissioners. 
(e)	Notice of speed limit. 
(1)	There shall be erected or posted signage of adequate size at the beginning point of such speed zone designating the zone and the speed limit which is to be observed therein. 
(2)	There shall be erected or posted signage of adequate size at the end of such speed zone indicating the end of such speed zone. Said signage shall further indicate such different speed limit as may then be observed. 
(3)	Where the speed limit established pursuant to subsection (d) of this section is at least ten miles per hour less than the speed limit on the street, road or highway, there shall be erected at least 600 feet in advance of the beginning of the speed zone a sign of adequate size which shall bear the legend "REDUCE SPEED AHEAD." 
(f)	Enforcement officer. 
(1)	Any peace officer of this state or of Fannin County, Georgia, or as the board of commissioners may formally designate by appropriate resolution, shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(2)	Any of the parties identified in subsection (f)(1) of this section shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this section. Such citation shall be on a form approved by the board of commissioners or a standard form utilized by the Sheriff's Department of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(g)	Penalty. Any person violating this section, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 12 months, or both. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1997, arts. I, III—VII) 
Sec. 70-24. - Severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the preceding section be declared invalid for any reason, the remainder of said section shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1997, art. VIII) 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSTALLATION OR RELOCATION OF UTILITY LINES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-19. - Height of cables installed above road right-of-way. 
The height of cable installed over said county road right-of-way shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the National Electrical Code as it now exists, or as subsequently modified. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1977, § VI) 
Sec. 74-20. - Violation; penalty. 
Violation of this article is hereby declared punishable as a misdemeanor as defined under the laws of the State of Georgia; each day in violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1977, § VII) 
Secs. 74-21—74-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 74-44. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or municipality to install or relocate existing utility lines, including water, sewerage, electrical and telephone lines, and other lines, including cable television, whether located above, upon, or beneath the surface of the ground upon any road right-of-way under the jurisdiction of Fannin County without first obtaining a permit for such installation or relocation. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1977, § I) 
Sec. 74-45. - Application. 
Prior to the beginning of construction the applicant shall file with the board of commissioners of Fannin County an application for a permit for such construction or relocation, said application to be on a form prescribed by the board of commissioners and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The location of the proposed construction; 
(2)	The nature, type, or method of proposed construction; 
(3)	Specifications, including description of materials proposed to be used, description of the right-of-way space sought to be occupied; 
(4)	Degree of interference with traffic, if any, expected during construction. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1977, § II) 
Sec. 74-46. - Filing; grant or denial. 
Upon filing of said application together with any additional information required by the chairman of the board of commissioners, an investigation will be made and a permit issued or denied by the chairman within five days. If denied, the applicant shall be given the reason for denial in writing signed by the chairman; if granted, the permit may issue in accordance with the application, or may issue upon terms and conditions required in the public interest. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1977, § III) 
Sec. 74-47. - Applicant's right to review by board of commissioners. 
In the event the applicant is dissatisfied with the permit as issued, or in case of a denial of the permit, he/she shall have the right to review by the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting providing he/she files notice of such intent in writing with the clerk of the board of commissioners within five days of the action complained of. If the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners falls within said five-day period, then the matter will be heard at the following regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The findings of the board of commissioners at such hearing shall be the final determination in said matter. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1977, § IV) 
Sec. 74-48. - Granting of permit does not vest any interest in road right-of-way in applicant. 
The granting of any permit hereunder shall not vest any interest in said road right-of-way in the applicant. If it should become necessary to relocate any lines, poles, or other equipment of the applicant due to relocation, widening or other improvements of said county road, such utility and other lines will be removed or relocated by the applicant at his/her expense upon notice. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1977, § V) 
Secs. 74-49—74-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 74-70. - Installation permit required; form. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install a sewage system without having first applied for and obtained from the county board of health a construction permit for the installation of such sewage system. The aforesaid construction permit shall be in a form adopted and approved by the authorized members of the board of health of Fannin County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-14-1985) 
Sec. 74-71. - Final inspection and written approval required prior to use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cover or use a new on-site sewage system, which includes a septic tank, until final inspection has been made by the Fannin County board of health to determine compliance with the provisions of the construction permit issued under section 290-5-26-03(3) of the Rules of the Department of Human Resources Public Health of the State of Georgia, and written approval has been issued by the county board of health. The aforesaid written approval shall be in a form adopted and approved by the Fannin County board of health. A copy of the final inspection of an on-site sewage management system shall be provided to the owner, builder, developer, or agent, whichever is appropriate, by the Fannin County board of health. 
(Res. of 5-14-1985) 
Sec. 74-72. - Permit required for permanent connection to dwelling or commercial building; penalty for violation. 
It will be unlawful for any power company to make a permanent connection to any dwelling or commercial building until the health inspector has made a final inspection of the dwelling or commercial building. Upon approval by the inspector, he/she shall issue a permit to the owner to be delivered to the sewage contractor or installer and electrical company whereby same can be connected. The contractor or electrical company, upon violation of this article shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $500.00. Any owner who attempts to evade the purpose of this article by not having proper sewage installed and inspected by the sanitation inspector shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
(Res. of 5-14-1985) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of  ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 

 