THE CODE OF THE CITY OF CANTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2012 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: March 15, 2012  Effective: March 15, 2012 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CANTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Gene Hobgood 
Mayor 
____________ 
Sandy McGrew 
Bill Grant 
Nick Estes 
Jack Goodwin 
JoEllen Wilson 
Farris Yawn 
City Council 
____________ 
William A. Peppers 
City Manager 
____________ 
Robert M. Dyer 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lou Stewart 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2002 Code, as supplemented through December 12, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2002 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Robert M. ("Bobby") Dyer, City Attorney, and Coty Ervin, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Canton, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Canton, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Canton, Georgia. 2012. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2012-02 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CANTON, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of Canton, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 120, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 18, 2011, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Canton City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 18, 2011 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective March 15, 2012. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 15 day of March, 2012. 

ATTEST: 

  
[Approved as to Form:] 

  
1st Reading:  2nd Reading: 03-15-12  Board Action 
Approved by Council on: 
03-15-12 
  
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 15th day of March, 2012. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Legislative Branch 
Organization and Procedures 
Personnel Administration 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Charter, being 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 348), page 3876. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; creation, dissolution, merger, boundary changes, and deannexation of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-2; municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities and authority for amendment of local charter by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; requirement for filing and publication of charter, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-5; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; terms city, town, and municipality declared synonymous, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Canton, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter [September 1, 2005] with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Canton, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps, which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  Said map at time of Charter amendment is hereby attached [to the ordinance] and noted as exhibit A [and to be designated as:] "The Official Corporate Boundary Map of the City of Canton, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-19-2012) 
Editor's note— The map attached as exhibit A to Ord. No. 200509010-2 is omitted from this publication but available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 1.12. - Election wards for council posts. 
(a)  The boundaries for the three wards shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated as: "Official Map for City Elections Identifying City Wards." 
(b)  Said map at time of Charter amendment is hereby attached and noted as exhibit B [and to be designated as:] "The Official Map for City Elections Identifying City Wards." 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 1.13. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of the State of Georgia as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 1.14. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of the government of the City of Canton to be exercised by the city council, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air, and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city in performing its duties as charged; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing, and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 22], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(10)  Fees. To establish fees, assessments of special districts for purpose of business improvement districts; 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof, including but not limited to life safety code; 
Editor's note— The numbering error of two subsection (10) is from the original Charter and was not altered at the time of this publication. 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(12)  General health, safety and welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city, to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(16)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, road, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(17)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(18)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(19)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(20)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(21)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(22)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(23)  Ordinances, rules and regulations and plans. To make, establish, and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(24)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(25)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(26)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen, and to establish, operate, contract or consolidate for a police and a fire fighting agency; 
(27)  Public hazards: Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(28)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, heliports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 22], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter by enacted; 
(29)  Public peace. To provide for the enforcement of the public peace and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(30)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(31)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the public service commission; 
(32)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance or signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(33)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(34)  Roadways and commuter rail. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city, for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses and underpasses for private use at such location, and to charge a rental therefore in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands, and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(35)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(36)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(37)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the illegal manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, body piercing and tattooing, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(38)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(39)  Taxes: Ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(40)  Taxes: Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(41)  Taxicabs and vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(42)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(43)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 1.15. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 
LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.10. - Council: Creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The city council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.11. - Terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall be a United States citizen 21 years of age or older, who has been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of the mayor and councilmembers and must have been a bona fide resident of the ward which they represent for a period of six months previous to the election to which they are a candidate; each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.12. - Election at large; majority elects. 
The councilmember for each ward and the mayor shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city at large, and each candidate for city council receiving a majority of the votes cast from the city at large shall be declared elected as city council. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.13. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 45], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. If a current council member runs for the position they must first resign from their current position. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment by the city council if less than 12 months remains in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election, as provided for in section 5.14 of this Charter and in accordance with titles 21 and 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. titles 21 and 45], or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.14. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.15. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents as per the ethics ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, heliports, commuter rail, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Thursday in January after an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (Councilmember) of this City and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular, called and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance and such call meetings as the mayor may think best to call for any specific purpose. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1], or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All city council committees and committee chairman and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any city council committee at any time. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor, or in the mayor's absence the mayor pro tem, and three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. For voting purposes, the mayor pro tem shall be counted as one of the councilmembers, even when presiding over the meeting. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote or another means of voting approved by council and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote by majority shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. No ordinance shall be adopted, however, unless it shall receive at least three affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 3, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Canton" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  The difference between an ordinance and a resolution is that a resolution deals with matters of a special or temporary character and an ordinance prescribes some permanent rule of government. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.22A. - Mayor's veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor for signature. 
(b)  The mayor shall have the right to veto any ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(c)  The mayor, within ten calendar days of the date of adoption of the ordinance, shall either (i) approve the ordinance and return it to the city clerk, or (ii) return the ordinance to the city clerk with his veto, along with a written statement of the mayor's reason or reasons for the veto. If the mayor has approved the ordinance, it shall become effective upon the date of his approval. If the mayor neither approves nor vetoes the ordinance, then it shall become effective at 12:00 noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption. 
(d)  If the mayor has vetoed the ordinance, then the city clerk shall place the ordinance on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting of the city council. If the next scheduled meeting is a work session, then a special meeting shall be advertised and held to vote on the ordinance. At the meeting, should the city council adopt the ordinance with the affirmative vote of at least four members, the ordinance shall become effective immediately and shall not be subject to any further veto by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 4, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
(a)  The distinction between an ordinance and resolution is usually considered to be that, while a resolution deals with matters of special or temporary character, an ordinance prescribes some permanent rule of government. 
(b)  An ordinance prescribes some permanent rule or code of government. A resolution denotes something of a temporary character, something less formal than an ordinance. Generally, a resolution is a mere expression of the opinion or mind of the council concerning some matter of administration coming within its official cognizance and provides for the disposition of a particular item of the administrative business of the city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor and three council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least a majority of councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 90 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of section 2.22(b) for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.26. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Canton, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment. 
The mayor will from [form] a selection committee consisting of the mayor and two councilmembers. The selection committee will interview all qualified candidates and present a list of recommended finalists to the city council for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.28. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager works at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office with or without cause. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.29. - Acting city manager. 
At the beginning of each calendar year, the city manager shall designate, subject to the approval of the city council, another city employee to act as acting city manager in the event that the city manager is unavailable to perform his duties. The acting city manager shall be authorized to act for up to 14 days. In the event that the city manager shall be unavailable to perform his duties for longer than 14 days, then the city council shall designate the employee to be acting city manager during such period. The city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 6, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. As the chief administrative officer, the manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove city employees and administrative officers the manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law, or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. The manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(3)  Attend all open city council meetings, and attend all closed meetings as required by the city council. 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget, including any and all requested substantiating detail supporting planned line item revenues and expenditures, to the city council. The annual operating and capital budgets for the next fiscal year are to be submitted 75 days in advance of the start of the next fiscal year. 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision. 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the manager deems desirable. Reports to the city council shall be in the format of monthly income and expenditure statements in line item detail corresponding to the approve annual budgets, providing such substantiating detail as may be requested. 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council. 
(10)  Meet with the mayor bi-weekly (or as required) for consultation and advice on the affairs of the city. 
(11)  Advise the mayor immediately of any reported situation in the city that would likely attract public attention and/or create press inquiries. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 7, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.30A. - Interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of informal inquiries and investigations, or upon approval of the city council, the individual members of the city council shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the city manger solely through the city manager, and the members of the city council shall not give orders or direction to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 8, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.31. - Purchasing limits of city manager. 
All purchases by the city manager or contracts to pay out money in excess of the sum of $20,000.00 shall be approved in writing by the city council, or by some person or committee appointed by an ordinance for said person. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2007021502; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.32. - Selection of mayor pro tem. 
The mayor shall nominate, subject to the approval of the city council, a mayor pro tem from among the members of council. In the event that the member nominated by the mayor shall not receive approval by a majority of the city council, then any member of the city council may make a motion to name the mayor pro tem, and the mayor's nomination shall no longer be required. The mayor pro tem shall not have a veto power, but shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a councilmember. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 9, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 2.33. - Mayor pro tem. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, or in his/her absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue, except that the mayor pro tem shall not have veto power. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tem or selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in section 2.14. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 10, 4-19-2012) 
Editor's note— Section 2.14 of this Charter states the compensation and expenses for the mayor and councilmembers, section 2.15 is titled "Conflict of interest; holding other offices," but only states the elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and shall act in a fiduciary capacity and per the ethics ordinance. No other sections within this Charter pertains to conflict of interest. 
Sec. 2.34. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a citizen of the United States and a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his service. The mayor shall forfeit his/her office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 2.35. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(a)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(b)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(c)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(d)  Preside as chief executive officer of the city; 
(e)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(f)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish; 
(g)  Conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such duties as may be provided by ordinance; 
(h)  Prepare or have prepared an agenda for each meeting of the city council which shall include all business submitted by the mayor, any member of the city council, the city manager, the city attorney, and any member of the public as provided by ordinance; 
(i)  Meet with the city manager on a bi-weekly basis, or as required, for consultation and advice on the affairs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 11, 4-19-2012; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 1-3-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 2013, shall be effective Jan. 11, 2013. 
Sec. 2.36. - Chief executive officer. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative power granted to the city under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, unless other wise stipulated, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  Members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be nominated by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council, for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms or office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. In the event that the person nominated by the mayor shall not receive approval by a majority of the city council, then any member of the city council may make a motion, and the mayor's nomination shall no longer be required. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until he/she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself/herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his/her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of majority members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair[man] and one member as vice-chair[man], and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 12, 4-19-2012) 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The mayor shall nominate a city attorney, subject to the approval of the city council, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized. In the event that the person nominated by the mayor shall not receive approval by a majority of the city council, then any member of the city council may make a motion to approve a city attorney, and the mayor's nomination shall no longer be required. The city council shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by virtue of his/her position as city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, §§ 1, 13, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The mayor shall nominate a city clerk, subject to the approval of the city council. In the event that the person nominated by the mayor shall not receive approval by a majority of the city council, then any member of the city council may make a motion to approve a city clerk, and the mayor's nomination shall no longer be required. The city clerk shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council; shall maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city; and shall perform such duties as may be required by law or ordinance or as the city council may direct. The city council shall determine the compensation of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 14, 4-19-2012) 
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. for purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Secs. 3.15, 3.16. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3.17. - Personnel policies. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court and Code Enforcement Court of the City of Canton. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court and environmental court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court or environmental court unless he/she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his/her office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.20. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court and environmental court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 4.13. - Municipal court; jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations of a criminal nature as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail, and can turn prisoners over for detention. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now, or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operations, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his/her bond shall be forfeited by the presiding judge at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his/her sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 4.14. - Code enforcement court; jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The code enforcement court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations that are not of a criminal nature as provided by law. 
(b)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the sheriff, marshal, or city police department or any other individual authorized by O.C.G.A. § 24-10-23 to serve subpoenas. 
(c)  Order the violator to pay an administrative fine in an amount set in accordance with state law. 
(d)  Impose an administrative fine for a violation that is not a violation involving the health or safety of a third party but shall not exceed that which is authorized by state law. 
(e)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings in the same way as provided by paragraph (2) of this section. 
(f)  Take testimony under oath. 
(g)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring the violation into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 4.15. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Cherokee County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 4.16. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code (title 21, chapter 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.]) as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in the odd years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and three councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 5.14. - Special election; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in section 2.12 [2.13] of this Charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, chapter 3 of title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 21-9-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 45], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is said to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Cherokee County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Cherokee County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Canton. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. the city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, telecommunication companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the chief finance officer in a registration book kept by the finance department. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa.s; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of section 36-60-13 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13], or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the City of Canton begins October 1 and ends September 30. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating, budget, a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.25. - Submission of operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager or his designee shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager or his designee containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.26. - Action on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager or his designee; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year or until such time as prescribed by city council. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.24. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least by sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but no later than 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year or until such time as prescribed by city council, the city manager or his designee shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget that is compatible to the comprehensive plan and his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. This proposal will include the capital improvement plan in the comp plan adopted by the city council. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.24. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year or until such time as prescribed by city council. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager or his designee may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(a)  It is in writing; 
(b)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney, and as a matter of course, is signed by him/her to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(c)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.21. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribed procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager or his designee and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager or his designee to sell and convey said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of 60 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 7.16. - Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Canton in the County of Cherokee, approved 1922, p. 604, is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
Sec. 7.17. - Effective date. 
This Charter shall become effective on September 1, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 200509010-2, 9-1-2005) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; municipal corporation defined, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Canton, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Canton City Code." 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-1; Code 2002, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
As used in this Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless otherwise specifically provided, and the following rules of construction shall be applied. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the city council means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire council. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "city" or "the city" means the City of Canton in the County of Cherokee and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the governing body of the City of Canton, Georgia. 
City officials; city officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, e.g., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Canton, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Cherokee, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a section appears requiring the head of a city department to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Department; city council; agency. The name or title of any department, city council, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the words "of the City of Canton, Georgia," were added thereto. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and city council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the phrase "of the City of Canton" is added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means a place. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the Sheriff of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 1-3-3, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Title of office. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words "of Canton, Georgia." 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1985, §§ 1-1-2, 1-1-4, 1-1-8; Code 2002, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-3; Code 2002, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catch lines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-7; Code 2002, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-6; Code 2002, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2002, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Canton, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-9; Code 2002, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2002, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-10; Code 2002, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such section of this Code or provision of any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor. All sentences may be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the city ordinances or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1-11; Code 2002, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; general authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipalities, and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations for acts or omissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; municipal acquisition and disposition of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to bind subsequent council, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; councilmen incompetent to hold other municipal office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4; effect of residence in annexed territory as qualification for office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-5; voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; method of calling election in the event all seats in municipal governing authority are vacant, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-13; initial terms of office of members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - General duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer. It shall be his duty to preside at all meetings of the council and to cast the deciding vote in case of a tie in the functions of the council. He may appoint such committees to assist in the general supervision of the city as may be necessary from time to time. He shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as shall be prescribed in the city Charter and this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-2; Code 2002, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-20. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The mayor pro tempore shall act in the absence, sickness, disqualification or inability of the mayor and when so acting shall have all the powers of the mayor. Upon the death of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall discharge the duties of the office of mayor until the vacancy is filled by the election of a successor. Also, the mayor pro tem shall likewise perform the duties of the judge of the municipal court under the same conditions he would be required to act as mayor under this section. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-3; Code 2002, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-21. - Chairperson. 
The mayor shall act as chairperson of the city council and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the mayor shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the city council. The chairperson shall be impartial and shall conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
(Code 2002, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-22. - Committees. 
All city council committees and committee chairman and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members of the city council committee at any time. The mayor shall be an ex-officio member of all committees but shall have no vote. 
(Code 2002, § 2-37; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 1-17-2013) 
Sec. 2-23. - Compensation of mayor and council. 
(a)  Councilmembers shall be paid $8,000.00 annually, and the mayor shall be paid $10,000.00 annually, for their services, to be paid monthly, in 12 equal installments, for each month the councilmember or mayor is in office. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in performing their duties on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-02, § 1, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 6-20-2013) 
Secs. 2-24—2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council; due notice requirement for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.; excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 

Sec. 2-48. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Code 2002, § 2-38) 
State Law reference— Meetings of departments, agencies, and boards to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-49. - Organizational meeting. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Tuesday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk, and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members of the city council whose terms of office shall begin the day and hour of taking the oath of office. 
(Code 2002, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-50. - Work sessions and regular meetings. 
Work session meetings of the city council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first Thursday of each month. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the third Thursday of each month. All work session meetings and regular meetings will be held at the city hall. A notice containing this information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-40; Min. of 11-5-1992, § B; Ord. of 3-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-51. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting of the city council may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the mayor for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided in the city Charter. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the city or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-52. - Emergency sessions. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the city council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the city or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each councilmember as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Code 2002, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-53. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the city council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. 
(b)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the city clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the city council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Code 2002, § 2-43) 
State Law reference— Attorney-client privilege and confidential tax matters exempt from open meeting requirement, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-2; other exceptions to open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-54. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the city council. A quorum is a majority of all of the councilmembers then in office. It is the duty of the mayor to enforce this rule. Any councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the mayor if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the mayor with the approval of the councilmembers present. 
(Code 2002, § 2-44) 
Secs. 2-55—2-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-82. - Rules of procedure. 
The rules of procedure for the conduct of the meetings of the mayor and city council shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-4; Code 2002, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-83. - Parliamentarian. 
The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for city council meetings. 
(Code 2002, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-84. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of a motion of the city council shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in this division, the term "majority" means more than half of the councilmembers present, excluding abstentions. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, the term "majority vote" means at least two-thirds of the councilmembers present, excluding abstentions. If a tie vote occurs, the mayor shall vote to break the tie. 
(Code 2002, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-85. - Abstentions. 
A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest that would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Code 2002, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-86. - Agenda. 
(a)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and received at least ten days before the meeting. 
(b)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the city council. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the city council. 
(c)  A copy of the agenda and a list of those councilmembers present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Code 2002, § 2-47; Ord. No. 2018-1220-06, § 1, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 2-87. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  A consent agenda may be prepared by the city clerk for the city council to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)  At the appropriate time of the meeting, the mayor shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a councilmember objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the mayor shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the mayor will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(Code 2002, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-88. - Minutes. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee shall promptly record the minutes for each city council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the city council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the city council but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the city council. The minutes shall specify the names of councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the councilmember who proposed each motion, the councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. If a roll-call vote occurs, the name of each councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the city council. 
(b)  The city council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the city council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the councilmembers at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the city council at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-89. - Order of business. 
All regular city council meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Call to order, roll call. 
(2)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
(3)  Invited guests. 
(4)  Reports from committees and departments. 
(5)  Consent agenda. 
(6)  Old business. 
(7)  New business. 
(8)  Public comments. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 2002, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-90. - Decorum. 
(a)  All councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. A councilmember is not allowed to speak at a regular meeting until he/she has been recognized by the mayor. All comments by the councilmember shall address the motion being discussed and should be directed to the mayor and not individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. 
(b)  At city council work sessions, a councilmember, after being recognized by the mayor, may ask a question of another councilmember or staff in attendance. After the question has been answered the councilmember originating the question retains the right to speak until finished, at which time the mayor may recognize the next speaker. 
(c)  The mayor shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The mayor can rule on the point of order or he may allow the city council to debate the point of order and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Code 2002, § 2-51; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 2-21-2013) 
Sec. 2-91. - Public participation. 
(a)  Generally. Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. Every member of the public who wishes to address the city council must submit his name and the topic of his comments to the city clerk at least three business days before the city council meeting. These individuals will be allotted 15 minutes to make their comments, and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the city council. 
(c)  Public engagement on agenda items. By a majority vote, the city council may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the city council. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for 15 minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the city council. Anyone wishing to speak at any city council meeting must be recognized by the mayor before addressing the city council. 
(d)  Decorum adhered to. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a city council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the city council may be ruled out of order by the mayor or on a point of order made by a councilmember. A majority vote of the councilmember will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the mayor. 
(e)  Public hearings. The councilmembers may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the councilmembers. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the councilmembers or at such other places and times as the councilmembers may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(Code 2002, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-92. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order of the city council must be submitted by a councilmember in writing to the city manager three business days before a regular meeting of the city council. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all councilmembers. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the city council to be adopted. 
(Code 2002, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-93. - Suspension of rules of order. 
City council rules of order may be suspended in an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a two-thirds vote of the city council. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to councilmembers of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Code 2002, § 2-54) 
Sec. 2-94. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings of the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-55) 
Secs. 2-95—2-116. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOTIONS 

Sec. 2-117. - Main motion. 
In order for the city council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chairperson until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the city council has voted on that motion. 
(Code 2002, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-118. - Debate. 
(a)  After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the city council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the mayor in a manner that is fair to all members of the city council. Councilmembers may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the mayor. 
(b)  During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the city council take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a certain time. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
(c)  Councilmembers may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(Code 2002, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-119. - Procedure for voting on debatable and undebatable motions. 
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Debatable motions. For debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.  If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the chairperson can call for the vote. If there are no objections, the chairperson can proceed with the vote. 
b.  If the mayor calls for the vote and there is an objection, a city councilmember may move to vote immediately (move the previous question). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The mayor will then read the proposed motion to the city council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers. 
(2)  Undebatable motions. For undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The mayor shall read the proposed motion to the city council and then call for the vote. 
(Code 2002, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-120. - Ranking of motions. 
(a)  Each subsidiary and privileged motion of the city council is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the city council returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
(b)  A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this subsection. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list: 
(1)  Main motion (lowest rank). 
(2)  Subsidiary motions (debatable): 
a.  Postpone indefinitely. 
b.  Amend. 
c.  Refer to committee (commit). 
d.  Postpone to a certain time (postpone definitely). 
(3)  Subsidiary motions (undebatable): 
a.  Limit debate or extend limits. 
b.  Vote immediately (previous question). 
c.  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). 
(4)  Privileged motions (undebatable): 
a.  Question of privilege. 
b.  Recess. 
c.  Adjourn (highest rank). 
(Code 2002, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-121. - Subsidiary motions. 
(a)  Generally. During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce motions that propose that the city council take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow the city council to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions: amend, limit debate and vote immediately, also may apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(b)  Postpone indefinitely. If a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered by the city council, that councilmember may move to postpone the consideration of the main motion indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops, and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(c)  Amend. If a councilmember believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. 
(1)  Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. 
(2)  Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a certain time and the motion to recess can also be amended. 
(3)  A motion cannot be amended more than two times. 
(4)  Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. 
(5)  A majority vote is required for the city council to adopt an amendment. 
(6)  If the amendment is adopted, the city council shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(d)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a councilmember believes that further information is needed before the city council can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the city council. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(e)  Postpone to certain time (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the mayor will bring the original motion back to the city council for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(f)  Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the councilmember who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(g)  Vote immediately (previous question). If a councilmember believes that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the councilmember may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable, and a vote of two-thirds of the city council is required for the motion to pass. 
(h)  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the city council during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2002, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-122. - Privileged motions. 
(a)  Generally. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the city council meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(b)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chairperson concerning the rights of a councilmember or of the city council as a whole is referred to as a "question of privilege." It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chairperson is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(c)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion, but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(d)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a councilmember must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2002, § 2-88) 
Sec. 2-123. - Incidental motions. 
(a)  Generally. Incidental motions allow councilmembers to exert their rights as a city councilmember. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(b)  Appeal. If a councilmember disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that councilmember may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the councilmembers. The chairperson has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The councilmembers may then debate the appeal. The councilmembers shall decide by majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(c)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a councilmember has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chairperson to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the councilmember. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(d)  Point of order (question of order). If a councilmember believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson can make a ruling on the question or can allow the councilmembers to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(e)  Point of information (request for information). If a councilmember has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chairperson and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required, and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(Code 2002, § 2-89) 
Sec. 2-124. - Supplementary main motions. 
(a)  Generally. Three motions allow the councilmembers to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the councilmembers. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified. 
(b)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the councilmembers to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the councilmembers to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any councilmember may make a motion to reconsider, and any councilmember may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the councilmembers is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided, and the councilmembers will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(c)  Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the councilmembers overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any councilmember. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the councilmember seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-86. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, the councilmembers shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(d)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the councilmembers to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2002, § 2-90) 
Secs. 2-125—2-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 2-147. - Legislative authority. 
The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city; provided, however, such ordinance or resolution is not in conflict with the city Charter, the constitution or the laws of the state, or the constitution or the laws of the United States. 
(Code 2002, § 2-116) 
Sec. 2-148. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
(Code 2002, § 2-117) 
Sec. 2-149. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. 
(Code 2002, § 2-118) 
Sec. 2-150. - Required elements of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the council shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: 
(1)  Ordinance number. 
(2)  Title and purpose. 
(3)  Enacting clause. 
(4)  Body of the ordinance by sections. 
(5)  Severability clause. 
(6)  Penalty clause, when applicable. 
(7)  Repealing clause, when applicable. 
(8)  Adoption date. 
(9)  Effective date. 
(10)  Authentication of city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 2-119) 
Sec. 2-151. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the city council must be introduced and sponsored by a councilmember. 
(Code 2002, § 2-120) 
Sec. 2-152. - Action restricted; emergencies. 
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced. However, when an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the councilmembers. 
(Code 2002, § 2-121) 
Sec. 2-153. - Reading of ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the city council. This section may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
(Code 2002, § 2-122) 
Sec. 2-154. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(Code 2002, § 2-123) 
Sec. 2-155. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions and contracts. 
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-124) 
Sec. 2-156. - Effective date of ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
(Code 2002, § 2-125) 
Secs. 2-157—2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to provide for, regulate, etc., officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; liability of municipality for acts of officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; personal liability of municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; local government officers and employees not subject to liability for torts involving use of government vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-92-3; fixing of salaries of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; training of members of municipal governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-4; local referenda for abolishing local offices or shortening or lengthening term, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-11; authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

Sec. 2-181. - Acting city manager. 
During the absence from the city, disability or vacancy in office of the city manager, the mayor shall serve as acting city manager and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as prescribed by the city Charter or other sections of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-1; Code 2002, § 2-166) 
Sec. 2-182. - Duties of city clerk. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; and 
(3)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-2; Code 2002, § 2-167) 
Sec. 2-183. - Duties of city attorney. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and city council; 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; 
(3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and city council; and 
(4)  Assist city staff on legal requirements. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-3; Code 2002, § 2-168) 
Sec. 2-184. - Penalty for neglect of duty. 
Any appointed officer who is guilty of neglect or failure to perform the duties prescribed or required of him by the Charter, this Code or the mayor and city council or who shall be guilty of any misconduct in office shall forfeit his right to hold such office and shall be immediately removed from office by the mayor and city council, if, after a public hearing of the charges against such officer, for failure to perform such duty, for neglect of duty, or misconduct in office is justified under all of the circumstances of the case. This section is cumulative and shall not bar any other punishment or penalty provided by this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-5; Code 2002, § 2-169) 
Sec. 2-185. - Municipal court judges. 
(a)  Municipal court judges shall be appointed for terms of one year and until a successor is appointed. The initial term shall begin on July 1, 2016 and run for one year. 
(b)  Municipal court judges may be removed from office on the grounds set forth in and following the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 32-32-2.2, as may be amended. 
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1, 6-16-16) 
Secs. 2-186—2-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-207. - Established. 
The following city departments are hereby established: 
(1)  Police; 
(2)  Fire; 
(3)  Water and sewer (maintenance and operations); 
(4)  Sanitation; 
(5)  Streets; 
(6)  Transportation; 
(7)  Building and development; 
(8)  Technology; 
(9)  Finance; and 
(10)  Planning and zoning. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-4; Code 2002, § 2-211) 
Secs. 2-208—2-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-238—2-267. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-268. - Created. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the "City of Canton Tree Commission." 
(Code 2002, § 2-286; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 2-269. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the tree commission shall be to: 
(1)  Regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs in public places; 
(2)  Provide for the pruning and removal of trees on private property which endanger public safety; and 
(3)  Generally improve the general welfare and health of the people of the city and county. 
(Code 2002, § 2-287; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 2-270. - Members. 
(a)  The tree commission shall consist of six members who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  There shall be three ex officio members of the tree commission as follows: 
(1)  The city manager or his designee. 
(2)  The head of the parks and recreation division or his designee. 
(3)  An appointed member of the mayor and city council or their designee. 
(c)  The six members appointed by the mayor and city council shall be citizens of the city or represent a business in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 2-288; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 1; Ord. of 10-1-1992(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-271. - Terms. 
The terms of the members of the tree commission shall be for staggered periods of four years, and successors shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-289; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-1991; Ord. of 10-1-1992(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-272. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies in the membership of the tree commission caused by death, resignation, or otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-290; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-1991; Ord. of 10-1-1992(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-273. - Duties. 
The tree commission shall have the following power and authority: 
(1)  To study and determine the problems and needs of the city for the planting of trees and shrubbery in public places. 
(2)  To recommend to the proper city authorities and officials the types and kinds of trees or shrubs to be planted upon the right-of-way of municipal streets, public parks, and public facilities. 
(3)  To assist the city and parks and recreation department in a program to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas on all city-owned property and public properties. 
(4)  To recommend to the mayor and city council the removal of any trees or shrubbery deemed to be hazardous to the public safety or public health. 
(5)  To assist the proper officials and make available to the general public, news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees, shrubbery and other greenery within the city; recommend from time to time, as necessary, ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas; and encourage private property owners to develop landscaped areas with trees and shrubs. 
(6)  To develop guidelines for placement and maintenance of new trees or existing trees that will be updated as needed by the commission. These guidelines will be mandatory for trees on city property and public rights-of-way, but not mandatory for private property. However, these guidelines will be given to new developers and contractors in the city for them to follow. 
(Code 2002, § 2-291; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 3; Ord. of 10-1-1992(2)) 
Sec. 2-274. - Officers. 
Upon appointment of the initial tree commission by the mayor and city council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairperson and one of its members as secretary. 
(Code 2002, § 2-292; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 4) 
Sec. 2-275. - Rules of procedure for meetings. 
The tree commission shall provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Code 2002, § 2-293; Ord. of 6-12-1990, § 4) 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-276. - Created. 
There is hereby created a board to be known and designated as the "City of Canton Parks and Recreation Advisory Board." 
(Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 9-15-2016) 
Sec. 2-277. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the board is to make recommendations to and advise the mayor and the city council of the city about policies and actions regarding the parks and recreation activities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 9-15-2016) 
Sec. 2-278. - Duties. 
The board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To research issues facing city parks, including recreation programs, and to advise the city, including the mayor and city council, on appropriate action. 
(2)  To research matters of policy and administration of the city parks and provide recommendations to the city, including the mayor and city council, regarding same. 
(3)  To research and review investigations or reports referred to the board by the mayor and city council and provide the mayor and city council with an advisory opinion or recommendation regarding same. 
(4)  To review proposed ordinances and make a recommendation to the mayor and city council regarding same. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 9-15-2016) 
Sec. 2-279. - Members; term; vacancies; removal. 
(a)  The City of Canton Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  The mayor and each councilmember shall appoint a person to be a member of the board. The member appointed by the mayor shall be a resident of the city. The members appointed by the councilmembers shall be residents of the city, but also must reside within the councilmember's ward. 
(c)  The board members shall serve at the pleasure of the person (mayor or councilmember) who appointed them. If the mayor or any councilmember shall leave office, then the term of the board member shall expire on the last day of office of the mayor or councilmember. Any vacancy caused by the resignation or death of the member of the board shall be filled by the person (mayor or councilmember) who appointed that member. 
(d)  Any member may resign at any time by giving written and notarized notice to the chairperson or to the secretary of the committee, along with any other notice required by law. Such resignation shall take effect on the date of receipt or at any later time specified in the resignation and its acceptance by the mayor and city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 9-15-2016) 
Sec. 2-280. - Meetings; quorum. 
(a)  The board shall establish a regular monthly meeting time. Any regular meeting may be cancelled by the chairperson or secretary if there is no business to be conducted. A special meeting may be called by the chairperson or secretary. 
(b)  The board shall provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(c)  A quorum of the board shall consist of four members for any meeting of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 9-15-2016) 
Sec. 2-281. - Officers. 
The officers of the committee shall be a chairperson and a secretary. No member shall hold more than one office at one time. The duties of the officers shall be: 
(1)  Chairperson. The chairperson shall be the principal executive officer of the committee and shall preside at all meetings of the committee. The chairperson shall be an ex officio member of all sub-committees of the board. The chairperson shall have the authority to sign and execute on behalf of the committee all documents that the board has authorized. 
(2)  Secretary. The secretary shall provide for the keeping of the minutes and the keeping of a record of the attendance of all meetings of the board. The secretary shall act as custodian of all board records and reports and of the seal, assuring that it is affixed, when required by law, to documents executed on behalf of the board. The secretary shall perform all duties incident to the office and such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the chairperson or the committee. In the absence of the chairperson, or in the event of their concurrent disability, inability or refusal to act; the secretary shall perform the duties of the chairperson with the full powers of, and subject to the restrictions upon, the chairperson. This power shall also include the right to sign all documents on behalf of the board that the board has authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 9-15-2016) 
Secs. 2-282—2-298. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; adoption of budget articles and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1; municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-38-1; standards for city and city audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8; officer responsible for political subdivision investments, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-4; public works bidding, O.C.G.A. § 26-91-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-299. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on October 1 and end on September 30 of each year. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-1; Code 2002, § 2-346) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required to be established by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-300. - Budget; appropriations. 
The proposed budget and appropriations ordinance shall be prepared by the chief finance officer along with the finance committee and submitted to the mayor and city council no later than the first Thursday of August of each year. The mayor and city council shall schedule such public hearings on the proposed budget as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5. The annual operating budget shall be adopted by the mayor and city council on or before the first Thursday of September. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-2; Code 2002, § 2-347) 
State Law reference— Annual budget generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3 et seq. 
Sec. 2-301. - Fee schedule; fees established by resolution. 
The city maintains a schedule of fees for permits, licenses, and other municipal charges. The amount of fees or charges imposed by the city including, but not limited to, those encompassed in the city's fee schedule, shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, as it deems necessary. 
Secs. 2-302—2-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECOVERY OF EXPENDITURES 

Sec. 2-321. - Purpose and intent. 
It is intended that this division provides a means for recovering the cost of the city's and/or other agencies' resources used to respond to and/or provide extraordinary services for situations caused by persons or other entities. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-3; Code 2002, § 2-2(a); Ord. No. 2004-04-01, §§ I—IV, 4-1-2004) 
Sec. 2-322. - General requirements. 
(a)  All departments within the city are hereby authorized to take appropriate steps to generate an invoice for services when, in their judgment, it was necessary to render the services in the best interest of the citizens the city. 
(b)  Services provided by the city may be the result of an accident, carelessness, willful intent, negligence, or failure to take actions that will eliminate reoccurring situations which impact the city's cost of providing services and its ability to provide services for all citizens. 
(c)  In lieu of monetary reimbursement, the party receiving the services may replace supplies and equipment expended by the city with equal or greater quantities. Any such materials must be of equal or better specifications than that which was expended. This material reimbursement must be preapproved by the department head of the department being reimbursed. 
(d)  Invoices shall be submitted to the city manager for approval prior to presenting the invoice to the party responsible for paying the reimbursement. An exception to this section will be procedures involving hazardous materials incidents. 
(e)  During incidents involving a spill or release of a hazardous material, the city, along with other agencies shall be allowed to submit invoices to the responsible party for paying the reimbursement. 
(f)  The cost used to calculate the invoice amount shall be based on fair market values for the services, labor rates for city employees, and the prevailing cost of goods and equipment utilized. Compensation for overtime hours worked will be calculated by the city at the rate of one and a half times the normal hourly rate for the employees performing the services. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-3; Code 2002, § 2-2(b); Ord. No. 2004-04-01, §§ I—IV, 4-1-2004) 
Sec. 2-323. - Preparing and submitting invoices. 
Department instructions, standard operating procedures, and instructions as published by the city finance department shall be followed when preparing invoices and obtaining approvals. The city finance department shall be responsible for tracking the invoices and collecting the reimbursements for the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-3; Code 2002, § 2-2(c); Ord. No. 2004-04-01, §§ I—IV, 4-1-2004) 
Sec. 2-324. - Enforcement. 
Department heads shall be responsible for determining when invoicing for reimbursement is appropriate. Failure to reimburse the city as specified by the invoice shall be processed in accordance with the procedures of the city finance department. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-3; Code 2002, § 2-2(d); Ord. No. 2004-04-01, §§ I—IV, 4-1-2004) 
Sec. 2-325. - Other agencies. 
(a)  Additional fees from the county fire department and/or other agencies may apply. 
(b)  The county fire department's cost recovery fee schedule for hazardous materials incidents shall be established by the county fire department plus the actual replacement cost of all expendable equipment and goods used during the incident. 
(c)  The county finance specialist will handle incidents involving the county's hazmat team. 
(d)  All other agencies are required to handle invoicing per their policies. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-3; Code 2002, § 2-2(e); Ord. No. 2004-04-01, §§ I—IV, 4-1-2004) 
Secs. 2-326—2-353. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PAYMENTS BY CREDIT CARDS 

Sec. 2-354. - Authorized. 
All sums due the city, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The chief finance officer, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 2-376; Ord. of 7-7-1996, § 101) 
Sec. 2-355. - Discounted fees approved. 
A credit card agreement made pursuant to this division may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
(Code 2002, § 2-377; Ord. of 7-7-1996, § 102) 
Sec. 2-356. - Cancellation of agreement. 
Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance or payments via credit made pursuant to this division shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 2-378; Ord. of 7-7-1996, § 104) 
Sec. 2-357. - Personal liability for final payment. 
No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Code 2002, § 2-379; Ord. of 7-7-1996, § 105) 
Sec. 2-358. - Identity theft prevention program. 
For the purpose complying with 16 CFR 681.2 and in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft and, pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the city has adopted an identity theft prevention program, a copy of which is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-359—2-389. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-390. - Supervision and control of public property. 
The mayor and city council shall have the general supervision and control of all property, real and personal, owned by or under the control of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-1; Code 2002, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-391. - Authority to pass rules and regulations governing city property. 
The mayor and city council shall have the right and authority from time to time to fix, by ordinances or resolutions which shall be spread on its minutes, rules and regulations governing any city property. When such rules have been made, it shall be the duty of the mayor and city council to cause the rules to be posted at some public place upon the premises affected thereby. After such rules are posted, any person violating the rules shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-2; Code 2002, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-392. - Personal use of city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any city officer or other person to use or take from its place of keeping any of the tools, equipment, motor vehicles, or other personal property or any fixtures, for the purpose of using the tools, equipment, motor vehicles, or other personal property or fixtures otherwise than provided by the rules of the mayor and city council or for the personal use or benefit of such officer or other person. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1) 
Secs. 2-393—2-412. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC RECORDS 

Secs. 2-413—2-437. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Inspection and copying of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 

Sec. 2-438. - Open records. 
All municipal records, except those that by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any state during the hours of operation of the administrative service herein below prescribed. 
Sec. 2-439. - Fees for records and other administrative services. 
Fees for photocopies and other media provided to and facsimile transmissions sent or received by city personnel on behalf of and at the request of city residents, as well as fees for other city administrative services, shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 2-440. - Records management policy. 
The city council adopts all applicable state law regarding municipal records management plans and records retention. The city clerk shall manage the city's records and is authorized to act for and on behalf of the mayor and city council in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., and records retention schedules approved by the state. No record shall be destroyed except as authorized by the state records retention schedule. 
State Law reference— Inspection and copying of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 
Secs. 2-441—2-463. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ETHICS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20111020-01, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 20, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VII, §§ 2-400—2-413. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. X, §§ 2-464—2-477. 
State Law reference— Ethics in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-464. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Code 2002, § 2-400; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-1, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 20111020-01, § 2, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 2-465. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the office of the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any city councilmember and any member appointed to any city board or commission. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits, unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Code 2002, § 2-401; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-2, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 20111020-01, § 2, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 2-466. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his official position for his or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Use his official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
(7)  Use his position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; [or] 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes. 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; and 
(9)  Use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself or persons having an interest. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Prohibition subsection (a)(2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; or 
d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law. 
(2)  Prohibition subsection (a)(5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-467 are made to the council, board or commission chairperson prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Code 2002, § 2-402; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-3, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 20111020-01, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 2-467. - Conflicts of interest. 
A member of the governing authority may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with his responsibilities and duties as a government servant; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from his office. Aside from these restrictions, members of the governing authority are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens; 
(3)  Knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence or judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(Code 2002, § 2-403; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-4, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 20111020-01, § 2, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 2-468. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
A member of the governing authority who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions, or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and he shall abstain from discussion and voting. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he has an interest. 
(Code 2002, § 2-404; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-5, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 20111020-01, § 2, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 2-469. - Prohibited contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 16-10-6 (O.G.C.A. § 16-10-6); 
(4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; or 
(5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city manager following disclosure. 
(Code 2002, § 2-405; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-6, 6-8-2001) 
Sec. 2-470. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Code 2002, § 2-406; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-7, 6-8-2001) 
Sec. 2-471. - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the office of the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro tem, shall appoint two members of the city council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation, or if it is found by a majority to be unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing it will be forwarded to the board of ethics for disposition. 
(Code 2002, § 2-407; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-8, 6-8-2001) 
Sec. 2-472. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition. 
(1)  The board of ethics shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two named herein, subject to approval by a majority of the city council. The third member of the board of ethics shall be a member in good standing of the state bar. All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a two-year term; and 
(2)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  Duties and powers. The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction, and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; and 
(7)  To take final action and impose penalties as it deems appropriate. 
(Code 2002, § 2-408; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-9, 6-8-2001) 
Sec. 2-473. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
The board of ethics, as appointed in this article, shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and city council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Code 2002, § 2-409; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-10, 6-8-2001) 
Sec. 2-474. - Penalty and member rights. 
(a)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right: 
(1)  To written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing; 
(2)  To be represented by counsel; 
(3)  To hear and examine the evidence and witnesses; and 
(4)  To present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(b)  For any member of the governing authority who is found by a preponderance of the evidence to have knowingly violated any provision of the code of ethics as provided in this article, the board of ethics may subject such member to public reprimand or censure. 
(Code 2002, § 2-410; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-11, 6-8-2001) 
Sec. 2-475. - Appeals. 
Any final decision by the board of ethics pursuant to this article shall be reviewable by the county superior court. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the board of ethics which supported its decision. Provided, however, no action of the board of ethics refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this article shall be reviewable by the court. 
(Code 2002, § 2-411; Ord. No. 20010608, § 2-5-12, 6-8-2001) 
Sec. 2-476. - Repealer. 
Any ordinances covering the subject matter contained in this article are hereby repealed and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-01, § 2, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 2-477. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect from and after June 8, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-01, § 2, 10-20-2011) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 8182011-01, adopted Aug. 18, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 6 and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2002; Ord. No. 2000-04-05, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 2000-11-16, 11-16-2000; Ord. No. 2000-12-18, 12-18-2000; Ord. of 10-18-2001(1); Ord. No. 2002-0502-1, 5-2-2002; Ord. of 5-2-2002(1); Ord. No. 2002-0919, 9-19-2002; Ord. No. 2002-1003, 10-3-2002; Ord. No. 2003-0417-2, 4-17-2003; Ord. No. 2003-0619, 6-19-2003; Ord. No. 20050901, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 2005090102, 9-1-2005; Ord. No. 20051206, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 2006072011, 7-20-2006; Ord. No. 2006072022, 7-20-2006; Ord. No. 20090402, 4-2-2009; Ord. No. 2009040202, 4-2-2009; Ord. No. 20100323, 3-23-2010. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed listing of repealed sections. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
The mayor and council, in the exercise of its police power, wishes to permit, but not promote, the sale of malt beverages, wines, and distilled spirits, in the incorporated city limits, this being necessary for the effective regulation and control of the sale of those alcoholic beverages and for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. It is the further intent of the mayor and council, through the licensing and regulation of the sale of alcoholic beverages, to protect property values and individual rights of the citizens and to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages from being an undesirable intrusion on the rights of the citizens of the city and to raise sufficient revenues to cover the costs of licensing, regulating and policing the sales of alcoholic beverages within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine and fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer with a valid license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink or by the package, and pursuant to sections 6-66 and 6-341 through 6-344. 
Beer and malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Building code means the standard mandatory and optional construction codes promulgated by the state and as adopted by the city. 
Business location means the location or proposed location of the premises wherein alcoholic beverages as permitted in this chapter may be sold. 
Church means an institution or building that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities, including education, day care and recreation facilities when owned and operated by such church which qualifies for tax exempt status from ad-valorem or property taxation or is owned by the public. 
Clerk, unless otherwise designated, means the city business license clerk. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wine. 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation (excluding commissions on profits, tips or gratuities) paid to any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for such person by its members, directors or governing body from time to time 
Floor space means internal space of business location licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes but is not limited to brandy, sherry or port. 
Growler means a professionally sanitized reusable container not exceeding 128 ounces in volume used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption. 
Licensee means the individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company to whom a license is issued. A partnership, corporation, or limited liability company shall include all partners, officers, directors, members or managers of a partnership, corporation or limited liability company. 
Liter means a metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container or multiple containers. 
Permitted manager means that person who, on a day-to-day or per shift basis, does or will actually manage or operate a business location licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and shall include any person designated as a manager upon a business license or license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Pour means sale for consumption on the premises of a business location licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Premises means floor space or curtledge thereof possessed, owned or controlled by the licensee or its agents of a business location licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means any association in which a person must seek and be approved for membership or which charges a membership fee or which has established qualifications to become a member. 
Private residence means building occupied for residential purposes as defined by the ordinances of the City of Canton. 
Restaurant means any space, kept, used, maintained, advertised, offered and held out to the public where food, meals and/or snacks are prepared, served, or provided to members of the public for compensation. 
Retailer and retail dealer means, any person who sells alcoholic beverages to members of the public. 
Retail consumption dealer means any retailer offering alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Retail outlet means any business location where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public. 
School means a facility that provides a curriculum of elementary, secondary, or post graduate academic instruction, including kindergarten, elementary school, junior high/middle school, high school, college or technical school. 
Sport/recreation establishment means an indoor or outdoor facility that contains regulation size courts, facilities, alleys or playing fields where physical sporting activity takes place and equipment related to the activity is available for rent or sale. Examples of such establishments include, but are not limited to: golf courses, equestrian centers, bowling alleys, ball fields, and sports arenas. 
Wholesaler and wholesale dealer mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, or combinations of such beverages; vermouths; special natural wines; rectified wines; and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 3, 3-20-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1, 3-19-2015; Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 1, 6-15-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2.1. - Officer to act includes designee. 
Any time an officer is designated or authorized to act within this chapter, such designation or authorization shall include the officer's designee as those persons designated or authorized to act. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-3. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No person may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 350 feet of any church, church grounds, shrine, chapel of a mortuary or other place used exclusively for religious services or within 600 feet of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. 
(2)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 350 feet of an alcohol and/or drug treatment center owned and operated by the state, county or the city. 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 350 feet of any private residence unless such residence is itself in or abuts a commercial district. 
(4)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 350 feet of any public library or branch thereof. 
(b)  Distances shall be measured along a straight line, "as the crow flies" from the nearest entrance of an outlet to the nearest property line of any protected grounds described in this section. 
(c)  Every license application shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed building, showing the distance from any protected grounds described in this section and a certificate of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer that the location complies with the distance requirements in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by licensees for consumption on the premises within the central downtown core, within planned unit development zoning districts, or when the protected grounds are a tenant within a commercial shopping center. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-4. - Condition of premises. 
(a)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall be kept clean and shall be in full compliance with all building codes, ordinances and regulations of the city, county and state. 
(b)  The county health department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all city, county and state health rules and regulations and shall report any violation to the business license clerk. 
(c)  The city fire department shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all city, county and state fire regulations and shall report any violations to the business license clerk. 
(d)  The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to inspect regularly the licensed premises to determine whether the licensed premises is in compliance with all city technical codes. 
(e)  The city police department shall have the authority to inspect periodically the licensed premises to determine if the licensed premises is in compliance with all sections of this chapter and shall report any violation to the business license clerk. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-5. - Prohibited sales. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by section 6-152, no licensee shall sell or permit to be sold alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age. Every person who seeks to purchase alcoholic beverages must provide a government-issued picture identification as proof of age. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises the sale, barter, exchange, giving, providing or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication. 
(c)  No licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall sell or permit to be sold any single beer, wine cooler or similar alcoholic beverage that is customarily packaged for sale as part of a four-pack, six-pack, 12-pack or similar package, unless such single beer, wine cooler or similar alcoholic beverage is displayed for sale in an enclosed case, cabinet or other structure located not closer than 20 feet from the front door of the premises and not closer than 20 feet from any cash register in the premises. The intent of this subsection is to prohibit sales of single beers, wine coolers or similar alcoholic beverage from open, cooled containers such as ice-filled buckets, tubs or barrels and to prohibit such sales from other containers located within 20 feet of the front door and cash register of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 1-17-2013) 
Sec. 6-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-0920-01, § 1, adopted September 20, 2018, repealed § 6-6, which pertained to advertising and derived from Ord. No. 8182011-01, adopted August 18, 2011. 
Sec. 6-7. - Required signs; posted information. 
(a)  In addition to other postings required in this chapter or by law, all licensees shall post in a prominent location on the licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the city and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage, intoxicated or pregnant persons. Each such sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the chief of police and shall include either the language of the applicable Code sections or summaries approved by the chief of police. The police department is authorized to design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price to be established by the chief of police. 
(b)  All licensees shall display in prominent places or on their menus their current prices of alcoholic beverages by the drink. Any price change must remain valid for seven consecutive calendar days. The licensee shall furnish to any customer who so desires an itemized list of such prices. All charges shall not exceed the established price list. 
(c)  All licensees shall indicate plainly the price of all alcoholic beverages exposed for sale by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below the space where the containers are placed. 
(d)  All licensees shall post in a conspicuous location near the front entrance of the licensed premises a sign, to be provided by the City of Canton, which provides a reminder not to drink and drive and that Canton's Police Department is available for free ride to any city resident. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2015-19, § 1, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-8. - Contents of bottles. 
(a)  Except during the initial bottling by the manufacturer it shall be unlawful for any licensee to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition, package malt beverage licensees, who are not also licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, may fill growlers with draft beer at the licensee's licensed location from kegs lawfully procured by the licensee, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The filled growler must be securely sealed, on premises, with a tamper proof plastic cap; 
(2)  At least 75 percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from the packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine; and 
(3)  The licensee complies with all state, federal and local packaging and labeling laws regarding alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Each filled growler must be removed from the premises in its securely sealed condition. 
(d)  Except as permitted by an ancillary tasting license, consumption on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 4, 3-20-2014; Ord. No. 2017-0803, § 1, 8-3-2017) 
Sec. 6-9. - Drinking in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage or to consume any alcoholic beverage while on any streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parking areas, city parks, or other open areas owned, operated, or controlled by the city, except as permitted under section 6-150 (Patio sales/outdoor sales), section 6-379 (Special event permit), or within the restaurant district as provided below. 
(b)  From October 1, 2018 until October 1, 2019, during the hours 5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., on Fridays and Saturdays, it shall not be a violation of subsection (a) above to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage or to consume any alcoholic beverage within the approved restaurant district, and any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises which is located within the approved restaurant district is authorized to dispense alcoholic beverages in a plastic cup for removal from the premises, on the following conditions: 
(1)  The plastic cup to be used must be approved in advance by the city manager or his designee. The plastic cup in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall contain only a single serving of alcohol, shall not exceed 16 fluid ounces in size, and shall be marked with the date by the server. No person shall possess on the streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parking areas, city parks, or other open areas owned, operated, or controlled by the city within the restaurant district any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size or which is not marked with the date. 
(2)  Drinking from a can, bottle, or glass is prohibited. Except as specifically set forth in this section with respect to an approved plastic cup, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage or to consume any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, glass, cup, or container, on the streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parking areas, city parks, or other open areas owned, operated, or controlled by the city. 
(3)  Open containers of alcoholic beverages possessed or consumed within the restaurant district must be purchased from a licensed establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises located within the approved restaurant district. Licensed establishments shall only be permitted to serve from their approved premises as approved on their alcohol license and shall not serve from temporary locations unless specifically allowed by issuance of a special event permit in accordance with section 6-379. It shall be a violation of subsection (a) for a person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage or to consume an alcohol beverage within the restaurant district which has not been purchased from a licensed establishment. 
(4)  No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision may be possessed or consumed outside the boundary of the approved restaurant district unless specifically allowed by issuance of a special event permit in accordance with section 6-379. 
(5)  Sales for consumption off premises within the restaurant district shall be permitted only from only from October 1, 2018 through October 1, 2019 during the hours 5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. Except for during those hours, licensees within the restaurant district shall not allow alcoholic beverages to be removed from their licensed premises. 
(6)  Any licensed establishment that allows patrons to leave an establishment with an alcoholic beverage as regulated herein shall have an 11-inch by eight and one-half inch sign posted at the door for public view so that a patron exiting the establishment can read the following: 
"All patrons leaving this establishment with an alcoholic beverage do hereby take full responsibility to only consume an alcoholic beverage served in a clear plastic cup not to exceed 16 ounces in size and obtained by an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages in the Restaurant District boundary outlined on the map below. Any individual who leaves the permitted area with an alcoholic beverage in an open container is in violation of city code and may be subject to a citation and/or fine." 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to abrogate or otherwise impact any state law or local ordinance pertaining to public drunkenness, disorderly conduct, driving with an open container or under the influence of alcohol, or similar laws. 
(d)  The restaurant district shall be that geographic area shown on a map identified as restaurant district as may be approved by the city council from time to time. 
(e)  The minimum fine for any violation of the restaurant district requirements shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 4-19-2012; Ord. No. 2018-0920-03, § 1, 9-20-2018) 
Secs. 6-10—6-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Declaration of business of manufacturing, selling and other dealings in alcoholic beverages as privilege subject to regulatory requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1; powers of local authorities as to granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereof on premises prohibited, exception for sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-66. - Required; constitutes a privilege. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, deliver, sell or offer to sell, or manufacture any alcoholic beverage, within the corporate city limits, without having the appropriate license issued upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code, and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter then this chapter shall control. 
(c)  All licenses shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by city ordinances and state law. 
(d)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the front these words: 
This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted. 
(e)  Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)  Manufacturing of malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits, including the right to sell for consumption on the premises and the right to sell packages for consumption off the premises, as permitted by state law. 
(2)  Wholesale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits. 
(3)  Retail package sales of malt beverages or wine. 
(4)  Retail consumption on the premises of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits. 
(5)  Brew pub, including the right to sell for consumption on the premises and the right to sell packages for consumption of the premises, as permitted by state law. 
(6)  Sunday sales permit. 
(7)  Ancillary tasting of wine and malt beverages for manufacturing or retail package. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 3, 6-15-2017) 
State Law reference— Dealing in malt beverages at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40; county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41; restriction on county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43; dealing in wine at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-40; license as privilege, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1. 
Sec. 6-67. - Sale or possession for sale without license or beyond boundaries of licensed premises. 
No person shall sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage unless such person has a license from the city to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages or sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-68. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  All applicants for licenses under this article shall be bona fide residents of the state at the time of the filing of the application and shall remain a bona fide resident of the state during all times the license and any renewal thereof is in effect. All applicants for licenses and renewal of licenses for retail distilled spirits shall be residents of the state for at least 12 months immediately preceding the date the application is submitted to the business license clerk. All applicants and all permitted managers shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(c)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. Notwithstanding the license provision in this subsection, subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be waived for a corporation if the following shall be established: 
(1)  All majority stockholders of the corporation shall meet all the subsections of this section other than those provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section; 
(2)  The corporation: 
a.  Is qualified and registered to do business within the state; 
b.  Has and continuously maintains in the state a registered agent who is a resident of the state and upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee may be served; and 
c.  Consents to being subject to the jurisdiction and venue of the courts of the City of Canton and/or Cherokee County. 
The licensee shall file written proof of compliance with this subsection, as well as its agent's written consent to serve as agent and its consent to be subject to the jurisdiction and venue of the courts of the City of Canton and Cherokee County with the business license clerk in such form as the business license clerk may prescribe; and 
(3)  The partnership or corporation must meet one of the following criteria: 
a.  The corporation must have a net worth of not less than $5,000,000.00 as determined on the basis of the corporation's most recent audited financial statement, prepared within 12 months of the date upon which the applicant applies for a license under this article; 
b.  The corporation owns real property within the city in which it holds an equity value of not less than $1,000,000.00, and the city shall be the sole determinant of such equity value; or 
c.  The corporation must have obtained liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in this state which identifies the City of Canton as an additional insured for the purpose of indemnifying the City of Canton from damages it may suffer as a result of a violation of this chapter or any obligation arising therefrom. The amount of the liability insurance coverage shall be an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(d)  If the licensee is a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholders, if such stockholders are individuals; provided, however, that if stock in the corporation is traded on any of the national stock exchanges, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under this section. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under this section. For a partnership, the license will be issued to one of the partners. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who, within five years prior to the filing of the application for such license, has a felony violation or has violated any federal, state or local law, relating to the use or sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, an indictment or a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a violation. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any city license revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain a registered agent for service of process in the state who consents to jurisdiction in the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the business license clerk in such form as the clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-69. - Separate application for license for each location of sale. 
A separate application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made for each location, and a separate license shall be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-70. - Application generally. 
(a)  All persons, as owners, desiring to engage in activities permitted by this chapter shall make written application to the council for the appropriate license on forms prescribed by and filed with the business license clerk. All completed applications shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee, without interest, shall be refunded, but the investigative fee shall be retained. 
(b)  The application shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The proposed business to be carried on; 
(3)  If a partnership or limited liability company, the names, ages and addresses of the partners or members; 
(4)  The name and address of the agent for service of process; 
(5)  The name, age and address of the manager(s) to be licensed or permitted under the terms of this chapter; and 
(6)  If a corporation, the names and addresses of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment. 
If the manager changes prior to the grant or denial of the application, the applicant must furnish the business license clerk with the name, age and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. The applicant shall also disclose whether the applicant (its partners if a partnership; its members if a limited liability company; its officers, manager, and shareholders having more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, if a corporation) has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or a violation of any municipal ordinance. 
(c)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(d)  All applications shall be accompanied by a current certificate from a registered surveyor or engineer containing a scale drawing of the building or proposed building, as situated on site, the proposed off-street parking facilities available to the location, the current zoning of the location, and the distance measurements as may be required under section 6-3. 
(e)  There shall be attached to the completed application a copy of the applicant's license or application for a license from the state. 
(f)  There shall be attached to each completed application a set of fingerprints of the applicant and any other person required to complete an application or file information with the city under this article, the accuracy of which must be certified by the person making the prints, or in lieu thereof fingerprints may be made by the city police upon payment of costs as determined by the chief of police. 
(g)  The applicant shall timely file proof of compliance with the advertising requirements set forth in this chapter before licensing is considered by the mayor and council. 
(h)  The business license clerk shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications. All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the business license clerk to ensure compliance with this chapter. An application filed and submitted not containing substantially all the information required may be rejected. Failure to furnish such data as required or as requested shall automatically serve to deny the application. 
(i)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material statement omitted from an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial, suspension or revocation of the license. 
(j)  Each applicant shall certify that applicant has read this chapter, and if a license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of the licensee's employees to be familiar with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-71. - Public notice of application. 
The applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall prepare and pay for publishing a notice of the application, on materials and forms prescribed by the business license clerk, which notice shall include the date the application will be considered and heard by the council, the location or street number of the premises where the applicant proposes to conduct activities permitted by this chapter and the name of the applicant and, if a partnership, the name of the partners; if a limited liability company, the name of the members; and, if a corporation, the names of the president, secretary and treasurer of such corporation. The applicant shall pay all publication and materials costs. The applicant shall be responsible for publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, which shall appear once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration and hearing of the application by the council. Each applicant for a license for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages shall post on the premises where the activities permitted by such license are to be conducted, continuously for a period of not less than ten days prior to consideration and hearing of the application by the council, a notice of the pending application prescribed by the city which shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises, facing the most frequently traveled road, street or highway abutting the premises, and not more than ten feet therefrom. The sign will be provided to the applicant by the city. The applicant shall provide to the business license clerk a dated photograph of the posting required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-72. - Review and investigation. 
(a)  The business license clerk shall review the application for the alcoholic beverage license and shall send a copy to all affected departments of city government to determine compliance with city regulations and laws and to the police department to investigate the criminal record of the applicant. Each department notified shall submit a report within 15 days to the business license clerk. 
(b)  Within 15 days from the time proof of advertisement is filed, the business license clerk shall notify the chief of police of the application, who shall make investigation of the criminal record of the applicant and report to the city manager. The clerk shall also refer such application, together with any objections filed, to the city manager. The city manager shall make recommendations to the mayor and council at its next regular council meeting. 
(c)  If any questions are raised regarding the application by the business license clerk or any city officer charged with alcoholic beverage administration, the application may be returned to the applicant for further information or clarification of unresolved questions. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-73. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
Sworn officers of the city police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other sections of law. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-74. - Temporary permit. 
Where an application for an alcoholic beverage license is awaiting final fingerprint clearance through the state bureau of investigation, the business license clerk may issue a temporary permit to the applicant authorizing the applicant to operate under this chapter; provided, however, the application shows full compliance with all other sections of this chapter. Such temporary permit shall be valid for no longer than 90 days after issuance and shall be prominently displayed as annual licenses are required to be displayed under section 6-80. When fingerprint clearance from the state bureau of investigation is not received within 90 days, the city manager may extend the time that a temporary permit is valid, as circumstances warrant. In all cases, a temporary permit issued under this section is conditional upon fingerprint clearance, and the business license clerk shall revoke the temporary permit upon failure of fingerprint verification. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-75. - Fees. 
All fees required under this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the chief finance officer. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-76. - Criteria for grant or denial. 
In addition to all other requirements stated in this chapter, the mayor and council in reaching its final determination on an initial application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be guided by the following factors as whether or not to grant such license: 
(1)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the neighborhood is predominantly residential, industrial or business; 
(2)  The proximity of churches and schools; 
(3)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons; 
(4)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom; 
(5)  The criminal record of the applicant and the proposed permitted manager; 
(6)  Whether the applicant has satisfied all requirements pertaining to the application process and all requirements as to notice and advertisement; 
(7)  Evidence presented for or against the application; 
(8)  Consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and preservation of surrounding neighborhoods, with reference to such factors as light, noise, pollution, traffic and loitering; 
(9)  Whether any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages previously issued for such location has been revoked for cause; 
(10)  The history or reputation of the building or establishment (proposed for outlet) for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law; 
(11)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought; and 
(12)  Any circumstance, such as the type and number of schools, churches, libraries or public recreation areas in the vicinity of the place of business of the licensee, which may cause minors to frequent the immediate area, even if the location meets the distance requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-76.1. - Appeal from denial of license. 
(a)  The decision of the mayor and council to deny an application for an alcoholic beverage permit or license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(b)  If an applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council regarding a permit or license, the applicant may appeal such decision by certiorari to the Superior Court of Cherokee County within 30 days after the decision by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-77. - Reapplication after denial. 
When an application is denied under this article, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-78. - Compliance and fee payment prior to issuance; term; proration of fees; no refund. 
(a)  Before a license shall be granted under this article, the applicant shall comply with all city rules and regulations pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed, from time to time, by the council and kept on file in the office of the business license clerk. 
(b)  Approval of an application by the mayor and council shall expire after 90 days from the date of such approval, unless the applicant has procured and paid the fee for the approved license. The mayor and council may extend such approval up to an additional 90 days for cause, provided the request for such extension is made within the initial 90-day time period. 
(c)  All licenses shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. 
(d)  License fees are not refundable. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-79. - Audits. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have the authority and responsibility; to conduct an audit of the books and records of any alcoholic beverage licensee to ensure the licensee's compliance with this chapter. In such event, the licensee shall be provided with written notice, received by the licensee not less than five business days prior to the proposed audit date, of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-80. - Display at place of business. 
The license issued under this article shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-81. - Nonprofit civic organization's temporary permit. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, a bona fide nonprofit civic organization is defined as an organization which is an exempt organization under section 501(c) or (d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 USC 501(c) or (d)), as amended. 
(b)  Any bona fide nonprofit civic or cultural organization whose primary function is not the serving of alcoholic beverages but the promotion of civic and cultural activities may be issued a temporary permit authorizing the organization to sell beer and/or wine for consumption only on the premises, for a period not to exceed one day, subject to any section in this chapter regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
(c)  The nonprofit organization must make any necessary application with the business license clerk and pay a processing fee in addition to a beer permit fee and/or a wine permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the city clerk's office for each temporary permit. These fees are nonrefundable. 
(d)  No more than two permits may be issued to any one organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. 
(e)  Permits issued under this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. No permit may be issued unless the sale of beer and/or wine is lawful in the place for which the permit is issued. 
(f)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable laws of the state relating to this application and shall obtain all necessary state permits. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-82. - Renewal. 
All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew his license shall file a renewal application accompanied by the requisite license fee with the business license clerk upon forms prescribed by the business license clerk on or before November 15 of each year without penalty, and not later than December 15. Applications for renewal filed after November 15 and on or before December 15 shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the license fee. All licensees applying for a renewal license must establish for each renewal year that they are in compliance with all of the provisions set forth in section 6-68, including but not limited to section 6-68(c)(3). No renewal license shall be granted on an application filed after December 15, but such application shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued. For purposes of this section, the date of postmark or actual receipt by the city shall constitute the day of filing. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-83. - Transfer. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  If the death of a licensee occurs, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 90 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall occur first; provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the business license clerk. 
(c)  If a license is surrendered or a licensee severs such person's association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender or from the date determined to be the date of severance; provided that no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, such application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted in this article. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership, nor one or more members of a limited liability company, holding a license to withdraw from the partnership or limited liability company in favor of one or more of the partners or members who were partners or members at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing such person's stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(e)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(f)  Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine as provided under this chapter. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-84. - Licensee or manager on-site. 
No licensee shall permit any sale or service of alcohol on the licensed premises unless either the licensee (if it is an individual) or a permitted manager is physically present on the premises. In the event of a violation of this section, the licensee shall be subject to a monetary fine up to the maximum amount permitted by law for the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-85. - Underage persons on licensed premises. 
(a)  Under this article, no licensee shall knowingly permit any person under the age of 21 years to be present in the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or custodian; provided, however, that such person shall be permitted in eating establishments or private clubs without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or custodian and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to persons who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  No licensee shall allow or require a person in the licensee's employment who is under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit persons between the ages of 16 and 18 years who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(d)  No licensee shall knowingly employ any person under the age of 18 years to work as an entertainer in any licensed establishment, unless such person has obtained written notarized permission from such person's parents or legal guardian, nor shall any licensee allow any such person to work without such proof of permission. 
(e)  In addition to subsections (a) through (d), the following shall be imposed and shall apply to all persons becoming employed by a supermarket, convenience store, brewery or drugstore: 
(1)  For the first six months of employment, all employees shall be on probationary status. During probationary status, the employee shall be trained and supervised periodically with respect to the procedure for requesting proper age identification and declining to sell alcoholic beverages to those under 21 years of age or to those failing to produce proper age identification. 
(2)  During an employee's probationary status period, the employee's supervisor shall periodically monitor and review the employee's request of proper age identification and decision to sell or not to sell alcoholic beverages to various customers. Should an employee, during his probationary status period, be found to sell or attempt to sell alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age, the supermarket, convenience store, brewery or drugstore employing such employee shall be required to terminate the employee. 
(f)  In addition to the requirements of this section, all supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, drugstores and any other store selling wine or malt beverages by the package shall post a notice no smaller in size than eight inches by ten inches in a conspicuous place on the premises which provides as follows: 
Pursuant to local ordinance, employees are required to request proper government-issued age identification before selling alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-86. - Failure to require and properly check identification; misrepresentation of age. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 6-152, it shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold or served or does not have in such person's possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification," as used in this subsection, shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card. 
(1)  With regards to a licensee, if it is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction that any employee or agent of the licensee negligently or knowingly served or sold alcohol to a person under the age of 21 years while on the licensed premises, the licensee shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00 for a first violation, provided no such violation has occurred on the licensed premises within the preceding 365-day period. 
(2)  If a second violation occurs within any 365-day period of a first violation, the licensee shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and a mandatory ten-day suspension of its license. 
(3)  If a third violation occurs within any 365-day period of a first violation and second violation, the licensee shall be subject to a fine in the maximum amount permitted by law for the municipal court, and a mandatory 30-day suspension of its license. 
(4)  If four or more violations occur within any 545-day period of a first, second, and third violation, the licensee shall be subject to a fine in the maximum amount permitted by law for the municipal court, and a mandatory termination of its license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent such person's age for the purpose of procuring alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-87. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person not a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-88. - Annexed areas. 
Any person who holds a license from the county for the sale, manufacture, package or distribution of alcoholic beverages and which is located in an area annexed by the city shall have 30 days from the effective date of the annexation to apply for the appropriate licenses and permits under this article. The applicant shall pay all applicable fees and costs for the equivalent license to the city. The applicant, however, shall be entitled to a credit for the amount of any license fee paid to the county in the year of annexation. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Secs. 6-89—6-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-116. - Malt beverages. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of malt beverages within the city a specific excise tax as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages. Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-117. - Wine. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of wine within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to the following: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or 
(4)  Wine which contains less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
(c)  Each licensed wholesale dealer responsible for the payment of the excise tax under this section shall file a report with the clerk by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each such person shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-118. - Distilled spirits sold by the drink. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of distilled spirits within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter. In addition, an excise tax of three percent is hereby levied and imposed on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink on charges to the public for the beverages. 
(b)  The excise tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. 
(c)  Each person responsible for the payment of the excise tax levied under this section shall remit payments and file reports as provided in section 6-116(b); provided, however, that persons collecting the tax authorized by this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. Failure to submit timely reports will result in the imposition of a ten-percent penalty. After 30 days, interest will accrue at the maximum rate permitted by state law from the due date of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2016-14, § 1, 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 6-119. - Distilled spirits in private clubs. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of distilled spirits in private clubs within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter. In addition, an excise tax of three percent is hereby imposed on the sale of mixed drinks by private clubs. 
(b)  The excise tax levied and imposed under this section with respect to distilled spirits by the package is hereby imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in distilled spirits; the taxes levied and imposed by the director shall be paid by the licensed private club selling mixed drinks. 
(c)  The payment and filing of returns by each person responsible for the payment of the excise tax under this section shall be as provided in section 6-116(b). 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Secs. 6-120—6-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-146. - Locations where prohibited; minimum food requirements; reporting; limitations on bar areas. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the terms "hotel" and "motel" shall be interchangeable and shall mean an establishment that contains not less than 35 separate rooms for overnight lodging. 
(b)  Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, no alcoholic beverages may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health department and city fire department). When located in hotels, motels and high-rise office and apartment buildings, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(c)  Except for establishments within the boundaries of Historic Downtown Canton, establishments shall derive a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. Establishments within the boundaries of Historic Downtown Canton shall derive a minimum of 40 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. For purposes of this Code section only, the boundaries of Historic Downtown Canton are defined as being East Main Street from John T. Petit Street to North St.; North Street and along Waleksa Street to Railroad St.; Railroad St. to West Marietta St.; West Marietta Street to John T. Petit Street; John T. Petit Street to East Main Street. Properties which abut the boundary streets shall be included within the boundary. Hotels or motels containing such establishments shall derive a minimum of 75 percent of their total annual gross income from the sales of prepared meals or food and from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(d)  On or before the 15th day of January, April, July and October of each year, each such establishment shall file a report of the previous calendar quarter's operations with the business license clerk verifying compliance with this section. Such reports shall be filed on forms designated by the business license clerk. Any licensed establishment that fails to meet the appropriate percentage requirements for two consecutive quarters shall be subject to immediate revocation. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  If such establishment provides a bar or counter service for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, the seating capacity of such bar shall not exceed ten percent of the total seating capacity of the premises; provided, however, that this limitation on seating capacity shall not apply to hotel bars that are available for the use of hotel guests. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit hotel room service of alcoholic beverages. 
(g)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sales of consumption on the premises by a retail package licensee that meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The retail package licensee has also obtained a separate license for the consumption on the premises, and all other requirements for consumption on the premises are met; 
(2)  The retail package licensee is engaged in the business of selling beer in growlers or other packages and/or wine, and the package sales are at least 75 percent of the gross sales of the business. The beer sold must come from craft beer breweries who each produce six million barrels of beer or less annually; 
(3)  The sale of distilled spirits is prohibited; 
(4)  Any beer or wine sold for consumption must come from a container opened by an employee of the retail licensee, and may not come from a package also sold on the premises. Beer or wine sold in growlers, bottles or other packaging may not be opened by the customer on the premises; and 
(5)  The retail package store is located in Historic Downtown Canton, as defined in section 6-146(c) above. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 7-19-2012; Ord. No. 2017-0803, § 3, 8-3-2017) 
Sec. 6-147. - Hours of sale. 
Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-147.1. - Sunday sales. 
A Sunday sales permit is required for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays. The following criteria is applicable to such sales: 
(1)  The establishment holds a valid city alcoholic beverage pouring license. 
(2)  The establishment has paid the fee for a Sunday sales permit, as provided in section 6-75. Sunday sales permits are granted for the full calendar year for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold and served for consumption on the premises only on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. Hotels or motels containing such establishments shall derive a minimum of 75 percent of their total annual gross income from the sales of prepared meals or food and from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(4)  Applicants for Sunday sales permits shall complete an application form furnished by the business license clerk, supplying such information as may be requested. Prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant must make available records for determining whether the applicant meets the requirements of subsection (3) of this section. The permit may be denied or revoked for failure to conform or failure to produce satisfactory evidence of conforming as referenced in subsection 6-146(d). 
(5)  Annual Sunday sales permit renewals shall be made in the same manner and during the same time periods as other alcoholic beverage license renewals. All holders and applicants of an alcoholic beverage license must make available records for audit purposes upon the request of the city manager or his or her designee. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage holder or applicant shall be open for inspection at any time by a city license inspector and/or agents of the city police department. 
(6)  Sunday sales permits are not transferable. 
(7)  The Sunday sales permit shall be automatically revoked if the alcoholic beverage license is revoked. 
(8)  When any application for a Sunday sales permit has been denied for a location, no application for a Sunday sales permit may be made for the same location for a period of 12 months from the date of filing of the application which was denied. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2018-0621-02, § 1, referendum 11-6-2018) 
State Law reference— Regulation of sale on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 6-148. - Consumption sales only. 
(a)  Persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not sell alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(b)  The requirements of this shall not apply to the sales of consumption on the premises by a retail package licensee that meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The retail package licensee has also obtained a separate license for the consumption on the premises, and all other requirements for consumption on the premises are met; 
(2)  The retail package licensee is engaged in the business of selling beer in growlers or other packages and/or wine, and the package sales are at least 75 percent of the gross sales of the business. The beer sold must come from craft beer breweries who each produce six million barrels of beer or less annually; 
(3)  The sale of distilled spirits is prohibited; 
(4)  Any beer or wine sold for consumption must come from a container opened by an employee of the retail licensee, and may not come from a package also sold on the premises. Beer or wine sold in growlers, bottles or other packaging may not be opened by the customer on the premises; and 
(5)  The retail package store is located in Historic Downtown Canton, as defined in section 6-146(c) above. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2017-0803, § 4, 8-3-2017) 
Sec. 6-149. - Employees; permit. 
The following regarding employees shall apply to all establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under this chapter: 
(1)  No alcohol serving permit shall be issued to any alcohol server who: 
a.  Within two years prior to the filing of the application for such permit has a conviction for any felony; or 
b.  Within two years prior to the filing of the application for such permit has two or more convictions for any misdemeanor federal, state or local law relating to the use or sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages; or 
For purposes of this subsection, a plea of nolo contender, no contest, or sentences under First Offender Act shall constitute a conviction. 
(2)  No person shall be permitted to dispense, sell or serve alcohol at an establishment holding a pouring license until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and the police department has issued a permit indicating that such person is eligible to serve alcohol. The permit issued under this section shall be an alcoholic beverages serving permit which shall be issued to a person, who must be at least 18 years of age, who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages serving permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the chief of police and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. Such application shall include but not be limited to the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the including of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The chief of police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this article, the chief of police shall issue an alcoholic beverages serving permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the chief of police shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. 
(5)  All alcoholic beverages serving permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the chief of police or his/her designee. 
(6)  This section shall not be construed to require an alcoholic beverages serving permit of those employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook or dishwasher, or any other employee whose duties do not include the serving of alcohol. 
(7)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold an alcoholic beverages serving permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has a current, valid alcoholic beverages serving permit issued by the chief of police. A serving permit shall be valid at any licensed premises. 
(8)  All alcoholic beverages serving permits issued under this section must be kept on the person while on duty and shall be made available for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the city police department. 
(9)  The City of Canton Police Department shall provide each establishment with a list of its employees whose serving permits are valid (including the expiration date). This list shall be provided at the beginning of each quarter (January, April, July and October). 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 1-21-2016; Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 2, 6-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-149.1. - Mandatory employee training. 
(a)  Every person who is issued a serving permit under these ordinances in the City of Canton for the first time shall be required to attend at least one alcohol service training seminar within 100 days of the date such permit is issued. If the person does not attend a seminar within 100 days, then the permit shall be suspended until the person attends a seminar and pays a reinstatement fee. For purposes of this section, any serving permit issued to a person who has not had a valid serving permit in the City of Canton for more than two years shall be considered as a first time issuance and that person shall be required to go to the training seminar. 
(b)  An "alcohol service training seminar" shall mean any class conducted by the chief of police for the City of Canton Police Department, or his/her designee, which consists of not less than one or more than four hours of instruction on the laws and ordinances applicable to alcohol service, and means and methods to prevent illegal use or service of alcohol. 
(c)  The City of Canton Police Department shall provide alcohol service training seminars not less than once every month, so as to permit all individuals who are issued a serving permit an opportunity to attend an alcohol service training seminar as required by this chapter, and each individual who obtains a serving permit shall be notified of the date for the next such training. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 2, 1-21-2016) 
Sec. 6-149.2. - Permitted managers. 
(a)  As provided in section 6-84 above, it shall be a violation of these ordinances for any licensee to permit any sale or service of alcohol on the licensed premises unless either the licensee (if it is an individual) or a permitted manager is physically present on the premises. 
(b)  The following regarding permitted managers shall apply to all establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under this chapter: 
(1)  No manager permit shall be issued to any person who, within two years prior to the filing of the application for such permit, has a felony violation or has violated any federal, state or local law, relating to the use or sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, an indictment or a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a violation. 
(2)  No person shall be permitted to qualify as a permitted manager until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and the department has issued a permit indicating that such person is eligible to serve alcohol. The permit issued under this section shall not be issued to any person who has not attained the age of at least 21 years of age. 
(3)  No manager permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the chief of police and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. Such application shall include but not be limited to the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the including of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The chief of police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this article, the chief of police shall issue manager permit to the individual, stating that the person is eligible to be a permitted manager. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible to be a permitted manager, the chief of police shall notify the licensee that this person is not eligible for such employment. 
(5)  All manager permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the chief of police or the business license clerk. 
(6)  All manager permits issued under this section shall be made available for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the city police department. 
(7)  It is not mandatory that any individual designated as a manager by the establishment necessarily be a permitted manager, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-149.3. - Mandatory permitted manager training. 
(a)  Every person who is issued a manager permit under these ordinances shall be required to attend at least one alcohol service training seminar within 100 days of the date such permit is issued. The City of Canton Police Department shall provide alcohol service training seminars not less than once every 90 days, so as to permit all individuals who are issued a manager permit an opportunity to attend an alcohol service training seminar as required by this chapter. 
(b)  An "alcohol service training seminar" shall mean any class conducted by the Chief of Police for the City of Canton Police Department, which consists of not less than one or more than four hours of instruction on the laws and ordinances applicable to alcohol service, and means and methods to prevent illegal use or service of alcohol. 
(c)  The City of Canton Police Department shall provide alcohol service training seminars not less than once every 90 days, so as to permit all individuals who are issued a manager permit an opportunity to attend an alcohol service training seminar as required by this chapter, and each individual who obtains a manager permit shall be notified of the date for the next such training. The chief of police shall issue a certificate completion to each individual who completes an alcohol service training seminar. 
(d)  All certificates confirming that a person has attended an alcohol service training seminar shall be maintained on file, at the licensed premises where that person is employed, and shall be made available for inspection upon demand by any officer of the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-149.4. - Revocation, suspension or other penalty regarding server permits. 
The chief of police shall suspend the serving permit of any permit holder who is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have committed any of the following offenses: 
(1)  A permit holder has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication; 
(2)  A permit holder has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person without requiring proof of age identification as required in this chapter; 
(3)  A permit holder has violated any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments; 
(4)  A permit holder has given false or misleading information in his or her application for serving permit; 
(5)  A permit holder has violated any other provision of this alcoholic beverage chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-149.5. - Revocation, suspension or other penalty regarding manager permits. 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend the permit of any permitted manager who is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have been present and on-duty on the licensed premises on two or more separate occasions during any 12-month period in which any licensee's employee or agent holding an alcoholic beverages serving permit committed any of the following offenses on said premises: 
(1)  Served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication; 
(2)  Served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person without requiring proof of age identification as required in this chapter; 
(b)  The chief of police shall suspend an alcoholic beverages serving permit of any permitted manager who is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have committed any of the following offenses: 
(1)  A permitted manager has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication; 
(2)  A permitted manager has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person without requiring proof of age identification as required in this chapter; 
(3)  A permitted manager has violated any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments; 
(4)  A permitted manager has given false or misleading information in his or her application for serving permit; or 
(5)  A permitted manager has violated any other provision of this alcoholic beverage chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-149.6. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
Except as provided in section 6-152, it shall be a violation of any person serving alcohol on the licensed premises not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold or served or does not have in such person's possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification," as used in this subsection, shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card. 
(1)  With regards to a any licensee's employee or agent holding an alcoholic beverages serving permit or permitted manager, if it is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction that said employee or agent of the licensee or permitted manager negligently or knowingly served or sold alcohol to a person under the age of 21 years while on the licensed premises, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  If a second violation occurs within any 365-day period of a first violation, the offender shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and his or her permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-149.7. - Failure to require and properly check identification—Permitted managers. 
Any permitted manager who is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have been present and on-duty on the licensed premises on any occasion on which any licensee's employee or agent holding an alcoholic beverages serving permit committed any of the following offenses on said premises: 
(1)  Served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication; 
(2)  Served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person without requiring proof of age identification as required in this chapter; 
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 per offense. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-150. - Patio sales/outdoor sales. 
(a)  The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises shall be allowed in enclosed patio areas that are accessible through the interior of the restaurant, provided that the licensee is in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment, including but not limited to regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(b)  The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises shall be allowed on public sidewalks within the city. The licenses premises shall provide and maintain dining tables and chairs located on the sidewalk which shall be located contiguous to, or as close as possible, to the licensed premises. In areas where the sidewalk is 146 inches in width, table and chairs shall not exceed 36 inches from the edge of the sidewalk contiguous to the licensed premises. In areas where the sidewalk exceeds 146 inches, for example in shopping centers, the distance the dining table and chairs may extend onto the sidewalk shall be within the discretion of the police chief, fire chief, or his designee. 
(c)  Except as may be permitted pursuant to section 6-379(h) (Special event permit) or as permitted in an restaurant district as provided in section 6-9(b), no establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave the premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. 
(d)  The licensee shall be in compliance with all other appropriate regulations as to the safe and orderly operation of such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 3, 4-19-2012; Ord. No. 2018-0920-03, § 2, 9-20-2018) 
Sec. 6-151. - Happy hour promotions prohibited. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for alcoholic beverages during the same calendar day. 
(c)  No person licensed pursuant to this article or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink for any 24-hour period by up to one-half the price customarily charged; 
(4)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage; and 
(5)  The sale or service of alcoholic beverages by the pitcher to any party that includes less than two individuals who are at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-152. - Prohibited sales. 
At pouring establishments only where alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises, such as restaurants and hotels, the requirement of a patron showing proper picture identification prior to being served alcoholic beverages shall apply unless a manager on duty in his discretion determines that the patron appears to be at least 35 years of age. In this instance alone, alcoholic beverages may be served to such a person without picture identification. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-153. - Pitcher sales prohibited in recreation areas. 
In addition to the requirements in section 6-151(c)(5), there shall be no pitcher sales of alcoholic beverages within the recreational area of a sport/recreation establishment except within the area designated immediately around the restaurant section of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Secs. 6-154—6-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 6-181. - Conditions for sales. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable city ordinances and regulations governing the sale of such beverages, except as expressly exempted therein, and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-182. - Exemption from percentage of sales of food. 
Private clubs shall not be required to derive a certain percentage of annual gross receipts from the sale of prepared food. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-183. - Hours of sale. 
Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises of a private club except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-184. - Employees. 
The employee requirements set forth in section 6-149 pertaining to establishments holding a license for consumption on the premises shall also apply to private clubs licensed for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Secs. 6-185—6-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PACKAGE BEER AND WINE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20111215-01, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2011, repealed the former Div. 5, §§ 6-211—6-213, and enacted a new Div. 5 as set out herein. The former Div. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011. 

Sec. 6-211. - Type of retail establishment. 
No beer or wine shall be sold at retail except in the following type of establishments: 
(1)  Establishments duly licensed by the city to sell beer or wine by the package; 
(2)  Establishments maintaining 80 percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other products and located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use; and 
(3)  Establishments with at least 1,500 square feet of floor space, floor space being calculated by interior retail space. 
(4)  The restrictions set forth in subsections (2) and (3) above shall not apply to establishments within the boundaries of Historic Downtown Canton. For purposes of this code section only, the boundaries of Historic Downtown Canton are defined as being East Main Street from John T. Petit Street to North St.; North Street and along Waleska Street to Railroad St.; Railroad St. to West Marietta St.; West Marietta Street to John T. Petit Street; John T. Petit Street to East Main Street. Properties which abut the boundary streets shall be included within the boundary. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-01, § 1, 12-15-2011; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-212. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale. No package beer or wine may be sold on Sunday, except as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-01, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 6-213. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Beer and wine package retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-01, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 6-214. - Sunday sales. 
A Sunday sales permit is required for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays. The following criteria is applicable to such sales: 
(1)  The establishment holds a valid city beer and wine package license. 
(2)  The establishment has paid the fee for a Sunday sales permit, as provided in section 6-75. Sunday sales permits are granted for the full calendar year for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable. 
(3)  Package beer and wine may be sold on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. in any licensed establishment. 
(4)  Applicants for Sunday sales permits shall complete an application form furnished by the business license clerk, supplying such information as may be requested. 
(5)  Annual Sunday sales permit renewals shall be made in the same manner and during the same time periods as other alcoholic beverage license renewals. All holders and applicants of an alcoholic beverage license must make available records for audit purposes upon the request of the city manager or his or her designee. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage holder or applicant shall be open for inspection at any time by a city license inspector and/or agents of the city police department. 
(6)  Sunday sales permits are not transferable. 
(7)  The Sunday sales permit shall be automatically revoked if the alcoholic beverage license is revoked. 
(8)  When any application for a Sunday sales permit has been denied for a location, no application for a Sunday sales permit may be made for the same location for a period of 12 months from the date of filing of the application which was denied. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-01, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
State Law reference— Regulation of sale on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 6-215. - Off-premises sales for downtown events. 
The holder of a retail package license located within Historic Downtown Canton (as defined in section 6-211(4) shall be permitted to sell wine bottles or beer growlers off-premises as a vendor at any special event located in Historic Downtown Canton at which alcohol is permitted. The licensee shall notify the city that it will be a vendor at such event. Such sales shall only be permitted during those hours that sales are permitted generally for a retail package license, and only during the hours of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 4, 3-19-2015) 
Secs. 6-216—6-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 6-241. - Financial interest restricted. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirits license. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-242. - Purchases restricted. 
No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-243. - Deliveries restricted. 
No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Secs. 6-244—6-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - BREW PUBS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 4, adopted June 15, 2017, repealed the former division 7, §§ 6-271—6-274, and enacted a new division 7 as set out herein. The former division 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 8182011-01, adopted August 18, 2011. 

Sec. 6-271. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Barrel means 53 gallons. 
Brew pub means an eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises or for retail package sales. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 4, 6-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-272. - Regulations. 
Brew pubs shall operate according to the following regulations: 
(1)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brew pub without first obtaining a proper brew pub license from the council pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in this article and each brew pub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements; and 
(2)  A brew pub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
a.  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail on the premises and solely in draft form; and 
b.  Operate an eating establishment that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer and may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter; provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises only and provided further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers. 
c.  Sell up to a maximum of 5,000 barrels annually to licensed wholesale dealers. Under no circumstances shall such malt beverages be sold by a brew pub licensee to any person holding a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the purpose of resale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 4, 6-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-273. - Other licenses available. 
Possession of a brew pub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this article for the same premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 4, 6-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-274. - Payment of fees and taxes. 
A brew pub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this article as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesalers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0615, § 4, 6-15-2017) 
Secs. 6-275—6-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SPECIALTY GIFT SHOPS 

Sec. 6-306. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Specialty gift shop means any retail gift shop that derives not more than 15 percent of its gross sales from the sale of packaged gift baskets or similar items containing unbroken containers of wine or beer. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-307. - Exception; permit required. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter to the contrary, a limited exception to sections 6-70 through 6-72, 6-74 and 6-77 shall exist for the owners of specialty gift shops, provided that the owner shall first obtain a specialty gift shop alcohol permit as provided in this division and the only sale of alcohol by the owner is through the sale of gift items as specified and not for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-308. - Permit application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to engage in activities permitted by this division shall make written application to the business license clerk for a specialty gift shop alcohol permit on forms prescribed by and filed with the business license clerk. All applications shall be accompanied by the license fee and the investigative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges in the office of the city clerk. If the application is denied or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee, without interest, shall be refunded. The application shall include the name, age and address of the applicant; the address of the business location; and the name, age and address of the manager. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the business license clerk with the name, age and address of the new manager and the information as requested within ten days of such change. The applicant must meet the character requirements of this article. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(b)  The business license clerk shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications. All applicants shall furnish data and information on records as required by the business license clerk to ensure compliance with this chapter. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-309. - Notice of permit application. 
The business license clerk shall prepare and cause to be published a notice of each pending application for a specialty gift shop alcohol permit, which notice shall include the date the application will be considered by the clerk, the location or street number of the premises where the applicant proposes to conduct activities permitted by this division and the name of the applicant. The applicant shall pay the publication costs. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall appear once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-310. - False or misleading information on permit application. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material statement omitted from an original or renewal application for a specialty gift shop alcohol permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-311. - Term of permit. 
If the business license clerk grants the applicant a specialty gift shop alcohol permit, it shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-312. - Time lapse for reapplication after permit denial. 
When an application for a specialty gift shop alcohol permit is denied under this division, the applicant may not reapply for a new permit for at least one year from any final date of such denial. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-313. - Familiarity with division. 
Each applicant for a permit required under this division shall certify that the applicant has read this division. If a specialty gift shop alcohol permit is granted, each permittee shall maintain a copy of this division on the premises and shall require each of the permittee's employees to be familiar with this division. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-314. - Age of employees. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, all of the employees of the applicant for a permit required under this division must be at least 18 years of age to sell any gift item containing alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-315. - Compliance with chapter. 
Except as set forth in this division, a holder of a specialty gift shop alcohol permit must comply with all other sections set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Secs. 6-316—6-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LICENSED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, adopted June 16, 2016, repealed the former division 9, §§ 6-341—6-346, and enacted a new division 9 as set out herein. The former division 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 8182011-01, adopted August 18, 2011. 

Sec. 6-341. - Off-premises license and permit requirements—Resident caterers. 
(a)  Any caterer who possesses a valid city license to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales of the same off-premises at authorized catered events or functions. 
(b)  Any caterer who possesses a valid city license to sell malt beverages or wine by the package for consumption off the premises within the city and is also located in Historic Downtown Canton (as defined in section 6-211(4)) may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales of the same class of alcoholic beverages by the drink off premises at authorized catered events or functions. 
(c)  Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid through December 31 of the year for which they are issued. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution. 
(d)  In order to distribute or sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits at an authorized catered function, a resident licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall file an application for an off-premises event permit with the business license clerk at no additional fee. 
(Ord. 2016-11, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 6-342. - Off-premises permit requirements—Non-resident caterers. 
A non-resident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the director of public safety or designee. The fee for each such permit shall be $50.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(Ord. 2016-11, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 6-343. - Application requirements for off-premises permit. 
(a)  The application for an off-premises permit shall include the name, age, address and telephone number of the applicant; the date, address and times of the proposed catered event; and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's state license number. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(b)  An off-premises permit shall be good only for the specific event at the specified address and times set forth in the application, not in excess of five days. 
(c)  The original off-premises permit and other documents required by state law shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(Ord. 2016-11, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 6-344. - Excise taxes. 
Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by resident caterers as provided in this chapter. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverages served by a non-resident caterer in the amount set forth in this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(Ord. 2016-11, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 6-345. - Sunday events. 
Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(Ord. 2016-11, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 6-346. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises except within the scope of the off-premises event permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or otherwise dispense alcohol other than as authorized by its alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, it may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a food caterer to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages off the premises of the food caterer's business without a permit issued pursuant to this division. This subsection shall not affect any other section of this chapter which may require a food caterer who has a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises of the food caterer's business. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages during any hours in which the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises is not permitted. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 2016-11, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Secs. 6-347—6-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PUBLICLY OWNED FACILITIES 

Sec. 6-371. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public facilities means a historic structure owned by the city and operated as a welcome or convention center by a local historical society or similar nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-372. - Permit required. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter to the contrary, a limited exception to sections 6-70 through 6-72, 6-74, 6-77 and 6-146 shall exist for that person possessing a public facilities permit, as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-373. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in activities permitted by this division shall make written application to the business license clerk for the appropriate public facilities permit on forms prescribed by and filed with the business license clerk. All applications shall be accompanied by a public facilities permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. If the application is denied or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the permit fee, without interest, shall be refunded. The application shall include but not be limited to the name and address of the applicant; the date, address and times of the proposed event; and the location of the public facility. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(b)  The business license clerk shall have authority to prescribe forms for applications. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to deny the application. 
(c)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material statement omitted from an original or renewal application for a public facilities permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-374. - Permit duration. 
If a public facilities permit is granted by the business license clerk under this division, it shall be good only for the specified event at the specified address and times set forth in the application, not to exceed five days. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-375. - Scope of permit. 
A public facilities permit for a welcome center or convention center shall only permit the holder to serve and sell alcoholic beverages within the premises of the welcome center or convention center; however, the alcoholic beverages may only be consumed on the premises of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-376. - Permit issuance restricted. 
A public facilities permit shall only be issued to an alcoholic beverage caterer licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-377. - Compliance with chapter. 
Except as set forth in this division, a public facilities permit holder must comply with all of the sections set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-378. - Canton Theatre alcoholic beverages license. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages and consumption of mixed drinks on the premises of the Canton Theatre shall be allowed only as provided in this section. 
(b)  The consumption on the licensed premises shall be exempt from any food service requirement. 
(c)  The city shall offer for bid an alcoholic beverages license, except as provided in subsection (f) of this section: 
(1)  For consumption on the premises at the Canton Theatre. 
(2)  Each bid shall be according to the terms and provisions set forth in the invitation to bid by the city council. 
(3)  The right to sell alcoholic beverages under this bid system shall go to the highest and best bidder which is deemed in the overall best interest of the city and shall entitle each license holder to the exclusive sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at the Canton Theatre. 
(4)  All sales of alcoholic beverages under each license shall be competitive and be of sufficient quality as is required by the franchise agreement that will be entered into between the city and the grantee of the franchise. 
(d)  The bidder must provide sufficient proof that he would be entitled to a business license and an alcoholic beverages license for consumption on the premises under this article. 
(e)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed on the premises of the Canton Theatre unless the alcoholic beverages are delivered or sold by the holder of the alcoholic beverages license provided for in this section. 
(f)  The director of the Canton Theatre or his designee may hold an alcoholic beverages license for the Canton Theatre so that the orderly operation of the Canton Theatre will not be interrupted if the person holding the alcoholic beverages license for the facility is unable to serve alcoholic beverages for any reason. There shall be no city license fee paid by the director of the Canton Theatre under these circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 8182011-01, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-379. - Special event permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to allow alcohol to be possessed or consumed on public property during a special event shall file an application for a special event permit. 
(b)  The application for the special event permit shall be made to the business license clerk, and shall be accompanied by the special event permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges available at city hall. If the application is denied or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the permit fee, without interest, shall be refunded. The application shall include but not be limited to the name and address of the applicant; the date, address and times of the proposed event; and the location of the public areas where the special event shall take place. 
(c)  The application shall also describe the boundaries of the special event, and shall state whether alcohol will be permitted within the entire area of the special event, or whether alcohol shall be permitted only within an area to be marked off. 
(d)  The application must state whether alcohol at the special event must be purchased from an authorized vendor of the special event. In that event, only alcohol purchased from the authorized vendor may be permitted at the special event. 
(e)  The application shall be reviewed by the police department prior to approval. 
(f)  When a special events permit is approved and issued, persons attending the special event shall be authorized to possess and consume alcohol on public property within the boundaries of the special event. 
(g)  The permit holder shall place signs at the boundaries of the special event or designated alcohol area containing the following language: "NO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE PERMITTED BEYOND THIS POINT." 
(h)  If a special event is permitted, then any on-premises consumption licensee located within the boundaries of the special event shall be permitted to allow customers to leave the premises with alcohol in a paper or plastic cup, containing no more than 16 ounces during the hours of the special event. No glass containers or cans shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 4-19-2012) 
DIVISION 11. - FARM WINERIES 

Sec. 6-380. - Definitions. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery, or domestic winery that: 
(1)  Makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in this state; 
(2)  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the Georgia agricultural produce used in its annual production, and for this purpose, such production of a substantial portion of such Georgia agricultural produce shall be determined by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of Georgia; and 
(3)  Produces less than 100,000 gallons per year. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine may be given complimentary or for a fee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-381. - Permitted sales. 
A farm winery may sell its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery licensee at retail in a tasting room or other facility on the premises of the winery for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises and to sell its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery licensee at retail for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises in tasting rooms at a location within the City of Canton that is one of the five additional locations in the State of Georgia authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(b). 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-382. - Licensee qualifications. 
The license created in accord with this division shall be limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the State of Georgia in accord with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 et seq., and the licensee shall be permitted to perform only acts allowed in accord with such statutes. No license is hereby created authorizing any other use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-383. - Applicable provisions. 
The license holder of a farm winery license shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter as to the qualifications of the licensee, package sales of malt beverages and wines, and licenses for consumption on the premises. To the extent that any provision of this chapter shall conflict with any provision of this division, the terms of this division shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-384. - License fees. 
The applicant for a retail license for the sale of wine and operation of a farm winery tasting room shall pay the license fee as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-385. - Sunday sales. 
Sunday sales shall be permitted only to the extent permitted under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-386. - Hours of sale. 
Wine may be sold or distributed in a tasting room or other licensed farm winery facility during the same hours as any other retail package licensee is permitted to sell. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
DIVISION 12. - ANCILLARY TASTING LICENSE 

Sec. 6-387. - Ancillary tastings permitted. 
The holder of a retail sales license, other than for distilled spirits, shall be eligible for an ancillary tasting license to provide samples of malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this ordinance. No location where distilled spirits are sold shall be eligible for an ancillary tasting license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, § 2, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-388. - Tasting limitations. 
(a)  Tastings shall be limited to malt beverages and wines only. Tastings shall be on limited occasions either when a customer requests a sample of a malt beverage or wine offered for sale within the premises or in conjunction with sampling designed to promote malt beverage or wine appreciation and education. 
(b)  No person shall consume more than 16 ounces in any one day on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, § 2, 3-20-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 6-389. - Serving limitations. 
(a)  Malt beverages and/or wine products used in conjunction with tasting shall be opened and poured by the licensee or a person who has obtained a manager's permit as specified in this chapter. 
(b)  No open containers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(c)  Holders of an ancillary tasting license shall not charge for tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, § 2, 3-20-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 3, 3-19-2015; Ord. No. 2017-0803, § 2, 8-3-2017) 
Sec. 6-390. - Additional fee required. 
The annual fee for an ancillary tasting license shall be published in the adopted fee schedule for the City of Canton. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, § 2, 3-20-2014) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to restrict adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; state regulation of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; state regulation of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state regulation of carnivals, circuses and itinerant entertainers, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARD ROOMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of operators of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, definitions shall be the same as those utilized and contained within O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1, except as contained and defined elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 10-176; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-20. - Compliance with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, control, own, frequent or enter any billiard room without having complied with this article. 
(Code 2002, § 10-177; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-21. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep alcoholic beverages within any business licensed under this article except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  A billiard room or a place operated in connection therewith shall not be prohibited in an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages and derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  A billiard room or a place operated in connection therewith shall not be prohibited in an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages that are sold by the drink for consumption on the premises if the establishment derives at least 60 percent of its revenue from the sale of food products other than alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  The city manager shall be authorized to request from the establishment proof that such sales of products and services are in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 2002, § 10-178; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-22. - Hours for operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. 
(Code 2002, § 10-179; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-23. - Sanitation; disturbance of the peace, immoral conduct or betting. 
(a)  All premises licensed under this article shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit, participate in, and/or encourage any disturbance of the peace, immoral conduct, betting or wagering on any licensed premises. 
(Code 2002, § 10-180; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-24. - Frequenting by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator, owner or employee of any business licensed under or operated under this article to allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to enter or remain within the confines of such business if alcohol is sold on the premises to be consumed off the premises or sold to be consumed on the premises. There shall not be an age restriction for persons entering or remaining on the premises if alcohol is not sold or consumed on the premises. 
(Code 2002, § 10-181; Ord. of 2-7-1991(1)) 
Sec. 10-25. - Order of temporary closing. 
Temporary closings and/or suspensions of a license issued pursuant to this article for reasons of public safety may be ordered by the mayor, municipal judge or chief of police. Such order shall have a duration of not more than five days and shall be issued for good cause only. 
(Code 2002, § 10-182; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Secs. 10-26—10-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 10-54. - Required. 
No billiard room shall be opened or operated except under a license granted by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 10-211; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-55. - Scope; compliance with laws. 
All licenses granted under this division shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license and subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by the city Charter and related laws; applicable sections of this Code; other ordinances; and state, county and federal laws and regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 10-212; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-56. - Modification of division. 
(a)  This division may be modified in whole or in part and at any time, and all persons seeking or holding licenses are hereby notified that they may be affected by changes to this division that might in the future occur. 
(b)  All persons are expressly placed on notice that any license granted under this division shall be and is a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article, and that this article is subject to modification and that they are subject to any modification thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 10-213; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-57. - Application form; content. 
All persons desiring to obtain a license under this division shall make a written application to the city for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor and city council. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the proposed location of the business; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; proof of compliance with state license laws; proof of ownership of a county license; and such other information as may be required by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2002, § 10-214; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-58. - Investigation of application; report. 
All applications required under this division shall be investigated by the police department. The police department shall file its report with the police committee. 
(Code 2002, § 10-215; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-59. - Denial—Conditions. 
No license shall be granted under this division where the application, the investigation by the police department, or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had a license for a similar establishment suspended or revoked within the five-year period next preceding the date of application unless such applicant can show that such suspension was lifted or unless such revocation was lifted and the license later restored. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of more than one misdemeanor within the five-year period next preceding the date of application. Minor traffic violations with a fine of less than $100.00 shall not be considered in the determination of such misdemeanors. A conviction of a misdemeanor shall include the adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or the forfeiture of a bond of $100.00 or more. Violations of city ordinances shall be considered misdemeanors for the purposes of this subsection. 
(Code 2002, § 10-216; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-60. - Same—For felony conviction or dishonorable military discharge. 
No license shall be issued under this division to any person who shall have been convicted of any felony, or to any person who shall have received a dishonorable discharge from the armed forces of the United States. 
(Code 2002, § 10-217; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-61. - Same—For false information in application. 
Any material omission or any untrue statement contained in an original or renewal application for a license under this division shall furnish grounds for denial thereof or sufficient grounds for revocation thereof, as the case may be. 
(Code 2002, § 10-218; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-62. - Designated areas. 
No license required under this division shall be issued to any person for the operation of a business except in a properly zoned area. 
(Code 2002, § 10-219; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-63. - Fee. 
The annual license fee for licenses issued under this division shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. All annual license fees under this division shall be paid in advance at the time of application for or renewal of the license. 
(Code 2002, § 10-220; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-64. - Refund of fee after revocation. 
Upon revocation of a license issued under this division, no refund of any kind or of any part of any license fee paid therefor shall be made. 
(Code 2002, § 10-221; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-65. - Investigation, report and approval prerequisite to issuance. 
All applications for a license required under this division shall be investigated by the police department, shall be reported to the police committee, and shall be favorably acted upon by the mayor and city council before the city manager shall be authorized to issue any license under this division. 
(Code 2002, § 10-222; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-66. - Time for obtaining after approval. 
All licenses required by this division must be obtained and all fees paid within 30 days of approval of the application by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2002, § 10-223; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-67. - Transferability. 
No license granted under this division shall be transferred. 
(Code 2002, § 10-224; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-68. - Annual renewal. 
(a)  All businesses operating under this division shall be required to renew their licenses annually, upon the forms prescribed by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Prior to renewal, all persons holding licenses and requesting renewal thereof shall obtain the required county license and shall display such county license to the city manager at the time the application for renewal is submitted. 
(Code 2002, § 10-225; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-69. - Suspension and revocation authorized. 
All licenses granted under this division are subject to revocation and/or suspension by either the mayor and city council or by the municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 10-226; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-70. - Conditions and grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No license issued by the city under this division shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as defined in subsection (b) of this section and after a hearing and upon five days' written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or for the revocation of any license issued under this division shall consist of the violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business; the violation of any state or federal law; the violation of any city ordinance, other than traffic ordinances; or the falsification, by either material omission or untrue statement, of any application or information in obtaining any license or the renewal thereof. 
(c)  The hearing for determination of grounds for suspension or revocation shall be held by the municipal court, with appeal therefrom to the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2002, § 10-227; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-71. - Automatic revocation upon revocation of county license. 
Whenever the county shall revoke any county license, the comparable city license is thereby revoked. It shall be necessary to have all required county licenses in order to hold a valid city license. 
(Code 2002, § 10-228; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Secs. 10-72—10-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 10-101. - Certificate of eligibility required. 
No person shall be employed by any establishment holding any license under this article until such person has been issued a certificate of eligibility by the police department. 
(Code 2002, § 10-256; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-102. - Fingerprinting required. 
All persons subject to this division shall, within 72 hours after the date of their first work in an establishment, report to the police department for fingerprinting. 
(Code 2002, § 10-257; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-103. - Personal history required. 
All persons reporting to the police department as required under this division may be required to fill out a personal history statement for the purposes of an investigation into their eligibility for employment. 
(Code 2002, § 10-258; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-104. - Investigation of applicant. 
The police department shall make a search relative to the police record of the person fingerprinted pursuant to this division. The commission of a felony and the conviction thereon shall act as a complete bar to employment in an establishment licensed under this article. The conviction for misdemeanors shall likewise act as a bar if they are of such numbers or of such types as to indicate that the individual has a bad reputation or include convictions of misdemeanors involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 2002, § 10-259; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-105. - Issuance; denial. 
The police department shall either issue a certificate under this division or shall inform the license holder and the prospective employee why the certificate cannot be issued. 
(Code 2002, § 10-260; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-106. - Appeals. 
The licensee may appeal an adverse finding under this division to the municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 10-261; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-107. - Review after issuance; suspension. 
The police department may, from time to time, and as additional information becomes available, review certificates issued pursuant to this division and may, as circumstances dictate, withdraw and/or suspend certificates for cause. Adverse findings may likewise be appealed to the municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 10-262; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Sec. 10-108. - Fee. 
The licensee shall pay a fee to the police department before employment of any individual. Such fee shall be utilized to pay the costs of the police investigation made pursuant to this division. 
(Code 2002, § 10-263; Ord. of 10-4-1990) 
Secs. 10-109—10-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, adopted January 19, 2017, repealed the former article III, §§ 10-130—10-144, and enacted a new article III as set out herein. The former article III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 2002, §§ 10-291—10-305 and an ordinance of April 1, 1993. 

Sec. 10-130. - Purpose. 
The city council recognizes the impact that special events have on the availability of city services and therefore adopts this procedure to license and regulate activities of this nature. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-131. - Definition; permit required. 
Special event, as used in this article, means any activity which occurs upon private or public property: 
(1)  That will affect the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, or otherwise impacts the delivery of public safety services. 
(2)  That disrupts the flow of traffic on public streets or sidewalks. 
No person or organization shall advertise, engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any special event, unless a special event permit shall first have been obtained from the city manager or his designee. Private social gatherings located on private property which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking do not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-132. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from the special event permit requirement: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Activities conducted by the City of Canton or one of its component entities; 
(3)  Activities involving a demonstration, march, assembly, or other exercise of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution ("free speech event") unless the activity will affect the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks or the activity will disrupt the flow of traffic on public streets or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-133. - Permit application; deadline; content. 
(a)  An application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee: 
(1)  Not less than seven days prior to a free speech event; 
(2)  Not less than two weeks prior to an event if city resources are not required and the anticipated crowd will be less than 100 people; 
(3)  Not less than 90 days prior to an event if the anticipated crowd will be more than 100 people but less than 500 people; 
(4)  Not less than 90 days prior to an event if road closures are required for the event; 
(5)  Not less than six months for any event which is anticipated to have more than 500 people in attendance; 
(6)  Not more than one year prior to an event. 
(b)  Contents. The city council shall approve special event policies, including an application form. For every event, there shall be an individual designated as the contact person, who shall be the person responsible for the event. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-134. - Permit fee; cost analysis. 
(a)  Permit fee. 
(1)  Cost analysis. The city manager or his designee shall send copies of special event applications to all city departments who may be impacted by the event. Each department shall evaluate and itemize the costs associated with this event for their department, the total of which shall be the permit fee. The city manager or his designee shall compile the departmental figures and give in writing to the applicant the final cost of the permit fee (to include any city facilities/city personnel/park rental fees) as soon as practicable but not later than ten business days after the completed application has been received. 
(2)  Permit fee. The permit fee and all applicable rental fees shall be paid in full prior to issuance of a permit. 
(3)  Refund. If the event does not take place due to inclement weather, fire, or other public safety emergency, and the event cannot be rescheduled within three months from the original date, a refund for the permit fee will be given to the applicant. There will be no refund of the permit fee nor deposit if the applicant fails to notify the city of an event cancellation no less than fourteen days prior to the date of the event. The cancellation notice must be in writing to the City Manager. If the event involves a road closure, the same notification method used for the road closure must be used for notification of cancellation of event. 
(4)  All applicable fees shall be made payable to and through the City of Canton, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-135. - Police protection. 
The applicant shall be required to provide police protection as required by the special events policy. The police department shall determine whether and to what extent additional police protection will be required for the event for purposes of traffic, crowd control and security. The applicant then shall have the obligation to secure police protection acceptable to the chief of police at the sole expense of the applicant and shall pay the expenses of such protection as required. The chief of police shall consider what additional manpower, equipment, and supplies are needed, as well as any other items or expenses which will be necessary. An estimate of these costs will be provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of a permit. Private security may be used by the applicant with approval of the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police may designate someone to act on his behalf regarding any portion of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-136. - Fire protection and emergency medical services. 
(a)  The applicant shall be required to provide fire protection and emergency medical services as provided in the special events policy. The applicant may be required to provide for additional fire watch personnel and emergency medical personnel, if the event creates an unusual fire hazard or threat to the safety of people attending the event. Private fire/EMS services may be used by the applicant with approval of the fire marshal or his designee. The fire marshal may designate someone to act on his behalf regarding any portion of this section. 
(b)  The conduct of the event shall not introduce extraordinary hazard to fire protection and/or to the life or safety of the spectators or participants in the immediate or adjacent areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-137. - Parks and recreation and/or public works department staff. 
The applicant shall be required to provide for services of the parks and recreation and public works department staff for purposes of traffic control, park and/or street cleaning and maintenance as provided in the special events policy. The parks and recreation director and the public works director shall consider what additional manpower, equipment, and supplies are needed, as well as any other items or expenses which will be necessary. The applicant then shall have the obligation to secure event staff acceptable to the parks and recreation director at the sole expense of the applicant and shall pay the expenses of such maintenance as required. The parks and recreation director and/or the public works director may designate someone to act on his behalf regarding any portion of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-138. - Standards for permit issuance. 
The city council shall establish standards for the issuance of special events permits in the special events policy. The city manager, or his designee, shall issue a permit as provided herein upon receipt of verification from the applicable city department directors that the standards for issuance of the permit have been substantially satisfied or found not applicable to the requested permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-139. - Standards for denial of permit; notice; appeal. 
(a)  The city council shall establish standards for the denial of special events permits in the special events policy. 
(b)  Should the application be denied, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant by personal delivery or certified mail within seven business days of the denial. A copy of this notification shall include the reasons for the denial of the permit and shall advise of the appeal procedure. 
(c)  Any applicant aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or revocation of permit to the city council. The appeal shall be submitted by the applicant within five business days after receipt of the notice of denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next scheduled city council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-140. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The responsible individual shall maintain custody of the permit and upon demand shall produce it to the city authorities. Under no circumstances may a permit be transferred from the applicant to any other person or organization. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-141. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager, or his designated representative, shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued hereunder instantly upon violation of any one or more of the Code, ordinances or conditions or standards of issuance as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-142. - Insurance. 
The applicant shall provide insurance as required by the special events policy. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-143. - Indemnification. 
The applicant and any other persons, organizations, or corporations on whose behalf the application is made by filing a permit application shall represent, stipulate, contract, and agree that they jointly and severally indemnify and hold the city harmless against liability. This includes court costs and attorney's fees, including appeal, or any and all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from issuance of the permit or the conduct of the event or any of its participants or the revocation of the permit for reasons herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-144. - Save harmless agreement. 
The applicant is required to provide a save harmless agreement in which the applicant agrees to defend, pay and save harmless the city, its officers and employees, from any and all claims or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the special event; excepting any claims arising solely out of the negligent acts of the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-145. - Penalties for offenses; misrepresentation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided by the Code of the City of Canton. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
If, at the discretion of the city manager or his designee, the city has to provide additional personnel due to the applicant misrepresenting facts on the application; or failure to provide agreed upon private security/staffing; or for any other just and lawful reason and for protection of public safety, it shall be at the sole expense of the applicant. 
The city manager shall cancel an event at any time should the event be deemed a public safety risk or operate in any fashion other than as permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-19-2017) 
Secs. 10-146—10-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, adopted August 21, 2014, repealed article IV, §§ 10-172—10-177, 10-208—10-216 and 10-241—10-246, which pertained to sexually oriented businesses and derived from the Code of 2002, §§ 18-205—18-225 and Ord. No. 20071212, adopted December 12, 2007. 

Secs. 10-172—10-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ESCORT SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-271. - Compliance. 
No person shall conduct the business of an escort and/or dating service in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article, and obtaining an escort service license, in addition to obtaining an occupational tax certificate pursuant to article II of chapter 18. 
(Code 2002, § 54-400; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-400, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-272. - Copy of article provided upon request. 
Upon request, the city manager shall provide each applicant hereunder with a copy of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 54-401; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-401, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-273. - Filing information concerning employees; background investigation required. 
(a)  All licensees under this article must file with the city manager their home address, home telephone number, and place of employment. Changes thereto shall be filed with the city tax collector within ten days from the date the change becomes effective. 
(b)  All employees of the licensee must submit to a background investigation not less than 15 days prior to commencing work to allow for the investigation of the employee. The city manager shall provide the release form used to conduct the background investigation. After the release has been signed, the city police department shall investigate the police record of the employee. 
(Code 2002, § 54-402; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-402, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-274. - Records of clients to be kept. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving escort and/or dating services and to provide the name of the employee providing such service. Records shall be kept for a minimum of three years. These records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city manager and the police department. 
(b)  Failure to maintain records as required in this section is a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 54-403; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-403, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-275. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
No person under 18 years of age shall be employed by an escort and/or dating service in any capacity. 
(Code 2002, § 54-407; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-407, 11-1-2007) 
Secs. 10-276—10-298. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 10-299. - Application; information to be given. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of providing and/or arranging dates, escorts, or partners for persons shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, file an application for an escort service license with the city tax collector. This application shall be typewritten or legibly handwritten and shall contain the following as appendices: 
(1)  Name, home and business address of applicant, date of birth, social security number, and sex. 
(2)  The applicant and employees must submit to a background investigation. The city tax collector shall provide the release form used to conduct the background investigation. After the release form has been signed and witnessed, the police department shall investigate the police record of the employee. The release form must be signed at least 15 days prior to the issuance of a license to allow for the investigation of the applicant, and for the employee, at least 15 days prior to the commencement of work to allow for the investigation of the employee. 
(3)  The applicant must furnish a list of at least three character witnesses by name, address, and telephone number. 
(4)  Applicants shall furnish the name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant (in whatever position) for the last two years, if applicable. 
(5)  Applicants shall provide two recent identical photographs to the city tax collector. The photographs must have been taken within the past six months and be a good likeness of the applicant. The photographs must be clear with a full front view of the applicant's face. Photographs may be in color or black and white and the size must be two inches by two inches. The photograph must be taken without head covering unless a signed statement is submitted indicating that the head covering is worn daily for religious or medical reasons. Dark glasses may not be worn in the photographs unless a doctor's statement is submitted supporting the wearing of dark glasses for medical reasons. The city tax collector shall permanently affix one photograph to the permit. 
(b)  The police department shall be notified within ten days of any change of ownership and/or partners/employees. 
(c)  A corporation, partnership, or other business entity being established for the purpose of engaging in the business, trade or profession of providing and/or arranging dates, escorts, or partners for persons, must also obtain a license. 
(Code 2002, § 54-404; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-404, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-300. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No escort service license shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Code 2002, § 54-405; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-405, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-301. - Fees. 
License fees are established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. No license can be issued by the city manager until applicant satisfies the qualifications listed in this article and pays all license fees. 
(Code 2002, § 54-406; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-406, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-302. - Notice of denial. 
The city manager shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial of the escort and/or dating service license. The notice of denial shall include the grounds for denial. 
(Code 2002, § 54-408; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-408, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-303. - Transferability; denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  License transfers. No license issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(b)  Denial, suspension, revocation. Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to denial, suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the city now in force or hereafter adopted relating to the operation of the business in question. 
(c)  Notice of intention. Whenever the city manager determines there is cause to deny, suspend or revoke a license applied for or issued hereunder, the city manager must give the applicant or licensee ten day's written notice of intention to deny, suspend or revoke the license. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the applicant or licensee may present a defense to the suspension or revocation before the mayor and city council or such board as the mayor and city council may designate. The ten-day written notice must include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. After the hearing, the mayor and city council or the board may deny, suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder if any of the grounds set forth in this subsection exist. A license may be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee is engaged in the escort and/or dating service under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(2)  The applicant or licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his duties; 
(3)  The applicant or licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(4)  The applicant or licensee has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If after having been granted a license, the licensee pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses set forth in this subsection, said license shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(5)  The application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The applicant/licensee fails to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The applicant or licensee fails to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to initial issuance of a license under this article; 
(8)  The applicant or licensee refuses to accept a client solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, or sex. License holders shall not refuse to accept a client unless the client is obviously intoxicated or dangerous; 
(9)  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
(10)  Any other violation of this article. 
(d)  Process. After the city manager makes a recommendation to the mayor and city council to deny, suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the mayor and city council, or such board as they may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to said decision. 
(1)  At the hearing, the city manager or his designee proceeds first and presents all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
(2)  The mayor and city council members or their designees will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(3)  After the city manager makes his presentation, the applicant or licensee or the licensee's legal counsel, will present evidence and argument as to why the license issued hereunder should not be issued, suspended or revoked. The mayor and city council members or their designees will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(4)  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the mayor and city council will render a decision. The denial, suspension or revocation of a escort/dating service license is final unless the licensee files a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Code 2002, § 54-409; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-409, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 10-304. - No proration of fee. 
No license fees shall be prorated. 
(Code 2002, § 54-411; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-411, 11-1-2007) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, adopted September 21, 2017, repealed the former Chapter 14, §§ 14-1—14-5, 14-29—14-33 and 14-55—14-61, and enacted a new chapter 14 as set out herein. The former chapter 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code 1985, §§ 11-3-1, 11-3-2, 11-3-5, 11-3-22—11-3-24, 11-3-26—11-3-29; the Code of 2002, §§ 14-1—14-5, 14-31—14-35, 14-61—14-67; Ord. of October 1, 1992(1); Ord. No. 2002-06-27, adopted June 27, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-06-17, adopted June 17, 2004 and Ord. No. 2004-07-08, adopted July 8, 2004. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Enforcement. 
(a)  By joint agreement of the City of Canton with the governing authority of the county, enforcement of this chapter shall be by the county governing authority. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the assistance of law enforcement persons within the City of Canton. 
(b)  Where not specified, fees and costs shall be established from time to time by the governing authority of the county and posted publicly at the county animal shelter. Any such moneys received in connection with the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid to the county governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-2. - Conflicts. 
(a)  Where there is a conflict between this chapter and another county or municipal ordinance, this chapter shall apply. 
(b)  Where there is a conflict among articles or sections within this chapter, the article or section that is more restrictive and stricter shall apply. 
(c)  Definitions in article II of this chapter may be used to define other parts of this chapter unless the context is clear that the definition does not apply. 
(d)  This chapter shall apply to the City of Canton, notwithstanding the use of the word "county" instead of "city." 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-3. - Bird sanctuary; wildlife. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Canton is designated as a bird and wildlife sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any wild bird or to rob any wild bird's nest; however, if nuisance birds such as starlings are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the director of the animal control shelter, those birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible, under appropriate supervision, in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the director. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any other wild game in the city except by order of the director of the animal control shelter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-4. - Fowl or livestock running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any domestic fowl or livestock to allow that domestic fowl or livestock to run at large within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-5. - Enclosures for fowl. 
Where the keeping of fowl is allowed pursuant to applicable zoning, any housing or enclosure used shall be well drained, free from accumulations of excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation or shelter, for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of noncontaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age, and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species, and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species, and breed of animal. For dogs, adequate space means an enclosure with a minimum of 150 square feet per dog. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: Snow, ice, and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal means any living organism, except a plant, bacterium, or human, which can move voluntarily and has specialized sense organs, included domesticated animals and fowl. 
Animal control board means the board constituted and appointed by the board of commissioners to perform the duties of the animal control board under this chapter. 
Animal control facility means and includes any vehicle, building, structure, pasture, paddock, pond, impoundment area or premises where any animal is kept or housed by Cherokee County for the purpose of impounding or harboring stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, neglected or abused animals. 
Animal control officer means the county marshal or his/her designees, who shall serve as dog control officers for purposes of article III of this chapter, as contemplated by O.C.G.A. tit. 4, ch. 8, art. 2. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal by an act, an omission, or neglect. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dogs' running at large means any dog not under immediate control, not on a leash, not at heel, not beside a competent person, not in a vehicle driven or parked, or not confined within the property limits of his owner. Hunting and tracking dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's permission. Working farm dogs are deemed under the control of the owner when acting in conjunction with farming operations and/or otherwise under the general command of the owner. 
Domestic animal means an animal that, through long association with humans, has been adapted to human living conditions. 
Fighting dog means any dog that is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained, or maintained for the purpose of fighting. Fighting dogs are illegal in Cherokee County. 
Guard or protection dog means any dog trained for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A dog shall not be considered a guard or protection dog if it otherwise meets the criteria for being defined as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and transporting it to the animal control facility. 
Livestock means and includes horses, cows, goats, pigs, or any other hoofed animal used for pleasure or profit. Fowl and rabbits are expressly included within this definition. 
Necessary veterinary care means veterinary medical attention appropriate to the circumstances, whenever an animal is known or suspected to have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate, or exhibits signs of disease process such as shock, temperature fluctuation, tremors, swelling, broken bones, open wounds, inability to eat or drink, blistering, irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or total paralysis, abnormal discharge or bleeding, mange, or other signs of health problems. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Police officer means any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests or cause to be issued citations or summonses in unincorporated areas of this county. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A structure which is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping; 
(2)  A structure with secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; 
(3)  A structure whose sides are so constructed at the bottom so as to prevent the dog's escape by digging under the sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad; 
(4)  A structure which provides appropriate protection from the elements for the dog. The structure must contain adequate shelter inside it; 
(5)  A structure which is inside a perimeter or area fence; 
(6)  The gate to the structure shall be of the inward-opening type and shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
Provocation means committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or possessor of the animal, or teasing, tormenting, or abusing the animal or committing or attempting to commit a crime against a person. 
Sanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area that is not contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-7. - Enforcement and penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person violating this chapter may be issued a citation and summons to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction, and the offending animal may be immediately impounded by the marshal's office pending disposition of the citation by the court. Any person violating this chapter, may be deemed guilty of violating a county ordinance, and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment, in addition to the more stringent penalties that are provided for under state law for violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Each act or omission in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of any sentence, may do a combination of any of the following: 
(1)  Prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in Cherokee County any animal during the term of the sentence; 
(2)  Order that the animal be removed from the county; 
(3)  Order that the animal be surrendered to the county animal control facility; 
(4)  Order that the animal be humanely euthanized; 
(5)  Order restitution to the victim(s). 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-8. - Adoption of chapter by municipalities within county boundaries. 
In accordance with state law, Cherokee County may enter into agreements with the municipalities located within the territorial limits of the county to provide animal control services within the corporate limits of such municipality. This chapter is adopted pursuant to such agreement to authorize enforcement by the Cherokee County Marshal's Office. The Cherokee County Marshal's Office is authorized to charge such fees as it may establish, and any fees charged by the Cherokee County Marshal's Office shall be retained by the county to defray the costs of the marshal's office related to animal control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-9. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of any dog to fail to keep a dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(b)  A dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, guardian, possessor, or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other proper enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system. If using an invisible containment system, a sign must be posted on the property indicating that the system is in place; 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person, or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsections (1) or (2) above, while on the owner's property; 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of any animal to restrain or anchor an animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, unless the tether or other restraint is being held by a competent person. An exception shall be made for the limited purpose of allowing the animal's owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian to temporarily restrain the animal by such means to allow the animal's needs to be met, such as the time necessary to clean the animal's living quarters, feed, and water. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements in subsection (b)(1), the following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of guard or protection dogs: 
(1)  Owners, possessors, guardians or custodians of any guard or protection dog must confine all such dogs within a perimeter fence sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times. 
(2)  A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(3)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on the property, have the dog(s) microchip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to the marshal's office. 
There shall be a fee for each guard or protection dog for the first year or any part thereof that the dog is in the county and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year. 
(4)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall report to the marshal's office within 24 hours of any of the following: 
a.  Escape of the dog; 
b.  An attack on a human or animal by the dog; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the dog; 
d.  Death of the dog. 
(5)  A guard or protection dog shall be deemed under control only when the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dogs prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length. 
(d)  Dogs found running at large or in violation of this section, may be immediately impounded by officers of the marshal's office or any law enforcement officer. 
(1)  Any animal that is impounded under this section shall not be returned to its owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian in any event without strict proof of compliance with the provisions of this section 10-29. 
(2)  If the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian has not complied with this provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded or within 20 days of the date of disposition of the charges by the court if the marshal's office has determined to hold the dog pending such disposition, said dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(e)  The marshal's office or any law enforcement officer may pursue the dog onto private property to effect capture of a dog believed to be in violation of this section. Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-10. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or to aid in the abandonment of any animal. An animal relinquished through written agreement with the marshal's office, licensed rescue group, licensed shelter, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the respective entity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-11. - Transient dogs and cats. 
Any dog or cat shipped or transported through the county, or entering the county only for the purpose of a temporary stay, when such stay shall not exceed 15 days, shall be exempt from collar, and tag sections of this article. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-12. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of cruelty towards any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally train, breed, possess, harbor, keep, and have custody or control of an animal for the purpose of animal fighting. It shall be unlawful to be a spectator at or bet on an animal fighting activity. The intentional fighting of dogs, dog and hog, and cocks is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and animal control officers who euthanize animals under the direction of the marshal's office per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, Georgia Department of Agriculture, and this article shall not be guilty of cruelty to animals. 
(d)  A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him/her or another person or animal, provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-13. - Public nuisance animal. 
(a)  A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal, excluding livestock maintained on properly zoned property, that: 
(1)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner; 
(2)  Attacks a human or another animal without provocation; 
(3)  Makes any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if the vocalization is intermittent; 
a.  These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
b.  Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter. 
c.  Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the officer with the address of the owner, and a physical description of the offending animal. 
d.  If the disturbance is not resolved within two days, or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odors in enclosures or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept; 
(5)  Is in heat and not confined within a secure enclosure to prevent unintentional breeding; or 
(6)  Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or fail to control an animal in such a manner that results in the animal becoming a public nuisance animal, and the owner, guardian, or possessor of a public nuisance animal may be cited for violation of this section. 
(c)  Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded immediately by an animal control officer, and the animal may remain impounded pending the court's disposition of the charges against the owner, guardian or possessor of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-14. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal shelter may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after three days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the marshal's office by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately. All persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide adequate and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required. 
Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for breeding, fighting, or profit and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted in the discretion of the marshal's office. 
(b)  Any person adopting an animal from the Cherokee County Animal Shelter shall pay an adoption fee in an amount stated in the Cherokee County Animal Shelter schedule of fees, and charges may also include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats. 
(c)  Any person adopting an intact animal shall cause to have the animal spayed or neutered (sterilized) within a period specified as follows, within 30 days from the date of adoption for animals over the age of six months, or within the first six months of age for sexually immature animals. Any adopted animal not sterilized within the time specified may be reclaimed by the marshal's office. 
If an animal becomes pregnant after the time specified for the animal to be spayed, the owner may receive a citation for violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-15. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law shall be detained at the animal control facility. The marshal's office shall notify the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within three days after notice or attempted notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus a boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded, and the cost of rabies vaccination if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period, unless the marshal's office has determined that the animal should be held pending disposition of charges by the court. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control facility. 
(b)  If any animal seized or impounded by the marshal's office evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the marshal office shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or humanely euthanize the animal; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the marshal's office may, upon approval of the marshal, proceed with euthanization and prepare a complete report on the reason for euthanization. 
This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal. 
(c)  Upon approval of the marshal, and at the request and expense of the owner, impoundment may be at a veterinary or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing, provided that the owner can demonstrate to the marshal's office that the owner cannot cause the animal to be released from the boarding facility without the approval of the marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-16. - Humane disposition. 
(a)  If an animal is not claimed by the owner within three days of the mailing of notice to the owner, or an animal of unknown ownership is not adopted within three days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the director of the animal shelter to euthanize the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible. 
An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the three-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the director of the animal shelter. Animals may be released to approved rescue groups or to approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(b)  Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be euthanized under the direction of the director of the animal shelter in as humane a manner as possible. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of the director of the animal shelter, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment, so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, he shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of administering necessary treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-17. - Biting animals and quarantine. 
(a)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Cherokee County Board of Health, all dogs and cats known to have bitten or scratched a person shall be confined to the animal control facility, veterinarian's hospital, or at a boarding facility approved by the marshal or under home supervision with the approval of the marshal for a period of ten days. All expenses incurred for boarding the animal during this period of time shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. 
(b)  In accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies. 
(c)  Unvaccinated or unwanted animals bitten or scratched by a known potentially rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately. 
(1)  If the owner of the unvaccinated animal is unwilling to have the animal euthanized, upon approval of the marshal, the exposed animal shall be placed in quarantine for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. 
(2)  The owner or possessor is responsible for quarantining the exposed unvaccinated animal in strict compliance with the policies and procedures of the animal control unit and county board of health and for all costs associated with same. 
(d)  Dogs and cats that are bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal that are current on their vaccinations shall be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the marshal. 
(e)  For purposes of subsections (c) and (d), any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal including, but not limited to, bobcats, raccoons, foxes, skunks, or coyotes, which are not available for testing, should be considered exposed to rabies. 
(f)  Failure to comply with the quarantine and/or confinement requirements of this section, the marshal's office, or the county board of health constitutes a violation of this article and may result in the impoundment of the animal. In that event, the owner or possessor remains responsible for all veterinary, boarding, and other expenses incurred on behalf of the quarantined animal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-18. - Livestock. 
(a)  All livestock shall be properly housed with adequate food and adequate water and confined within a fenced enclosure. The fenced enclosure shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any average livestock animal from escaping the enclosed compound and causing damage, accidents, or injury to any person or property. Owners of such livestock shall be liable for any damage, accidents, or injuries. Those who provide boarding/pasturing space and/or services for hire shall have the responsibility for enclosure maintenance as described in this subsection. 
(b)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any livestock within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. 
(c)  Owners or possessors of livestock impounded for violation of this article or any state and/or federal laws, will be charged in accordance with actual costs of impoundment, plus impounding and boarding fees. 
(d)  Impounded livestock shall be held for a period of 21 days. If such impounded animals are not claimed by the owner during that period of time, the animals may be given to persons willing to accept them, in the discretion of the marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-19. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting, shall be forwarded to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Game and Fish Division or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division, for proper disposition, i.e., compliance, apprehension, control and/or enforcement, as may be necessary and as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-20. - Dead animals. 
(a)  Officers of the marshal's office are authorized to remove dead animals from public property. 
(b)  Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal or property owner or possessor in accordance with state laws and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal, its parts, or blood on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal in a well or open pit of any kind, on private or public land. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-21. - Vaccines used and time of vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats owned, possessed, harbored, or residing within the limits of the county shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies before and no later than four months of age. Any dog or cat found not vaccinated by four months of age must have the consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reasons. 
(c)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any type of animal in his/her possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies, but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-22. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Upon administering antirabies vaccines, a certificate of vaccination must be issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, to provide evidence of vaccination. 
(b)  Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination, provided he furnishes one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the marshal's office upon request by the marshal's office, and one copy is retained by the veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-23. - Animal license. 
(a)  The owner, possessor, or harborer of each dog or cat residing in the unincorporated area of the county must obtain and possess a current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(b)  Upon vaccination, county veterinarians shall be responsible for issuing a metal tag with a vaccination and identification number. Tags must be renewed within 30 days of the expiration date of the vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-24. - Collar and rabies vaccination tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner, or possessor, to provide a collar and tag for each dog and cat, and the tag and collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under the immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal. Animals participating in organized or controlled competitions are exempt from this section only for the duration of the competition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-25. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
No person who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-26. - Citations; summons; subpoenas. 
(a)  The animal control officer or county law enforcement officer, at his/her discretion, may choose not to impound the animal or livestock found in violation of any section of this chapter, but may return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the animal or livestock to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction on a certain day to stand trial for the violation(s) of this chapter. 
(b)  If a violation(s) of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the animal control officer or a county law enforcement officer, a subpoena may be issued to any witness or the person(s) complaining to appear on the day and time set for trial to testify on behalf of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-27. - Liability of the county, marshal's office, officers, and employees. 
The county, the marshal's office, and its officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal control facility or any facility designated by the marshal's office to house such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-28. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control facility, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-29. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  Any animal or livestock owner or possessor who fails to provide adequate drink, adequate food, adequate space, adequate shelter, sanitary conditions, necessary veterinary care, and/or who causes unnecessary suffering of any animal or livestock shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave animals unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from heat exhaustion. 
(c)  Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law may impound any animal found to be neglected, as defined by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-30. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-31. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane/adequate care, collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this article, or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-32. - Right of entry. 
A law enforcement officer may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above, outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the law enforcement officer shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-33. - Animals transported in vehicles. 
No animal shall be transported on a public road in an open vehicle including an open top vehicle or open truck bed, unless the animal is humanely secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or having the ability to extend over the edge of the vehicle that could result in an injury or strangulation of the animal while the vehicle is in motion. No animal shall be transported in the trunk of a vehicle or under a pickup truck's tonneau cover. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-34. - Training guard or protection dogs. 
It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog, unless the trainer holds a state kennel license, a county business license, and maintains at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog or dogs being trained, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog on public property, including but not limited to, public parks. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-35. - Limitation on ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect, abandonment or hoarding of an animal as provided in this chapter or has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of such animal, may not own, possess, or have on his premises in Cherokee County any animal for one year from the date of conviction. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on the owner's property as provided in this chapter and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, may not be allowed to own a pet in their Cherokee County household for one year from the date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-36. - Backyard breeders. 
It is unlawful for any person who does not hold a license from the Georgia Department of Agriculture to breed an animal if they are required by the Georgia Department of Agriculture to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL 

Sec. 14-37. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to implement the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1, et seq. (the "Act"), relating to dangerous dog and vicious dog control, and in some instances, to strengthen the requirements of the Act in furtherance of a community that is safe and secure from the harms of dangerous and vicious dogs. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to amend or supersede any other ordinances relating to animal control. Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in this chapter and in the Act. 
(b)  (1)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a potentially dangerous dog in Georgia shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. 
(2)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a dangerous dog or vicious dog in Georgia shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. 
(c)  The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (b) of this section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-38. - Exceptions. 
No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a police officer or military officer to carry out the police or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be considered a dangerous dog, or vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 5. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-39. - Classification as dangerous dog or vicious dog; notice to owner. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within the county, the animal control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. When the animal control officer classifies any dog as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog under this article, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner within 72 hours of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's determination of the dog's classification as a dangerous or a vicious dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing on the classification within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the animal control board shall conduct the hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if the owner does not request such a hearing within the allotted time, the classification of the dog as a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such a request. 
(b)  When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing from an owner, it shall schedule such a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the request, provided that such hearing may be continued by the animal control board for good cause shown. The animal control board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing; such notice shall be made to the owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence. 
The animal control board shall also receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as it may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify, or overrule the classification of the dog by the animal control officer. Within ten days of the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the owner in writing, by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, of its determination on the matter. If the determination is made that the dog is a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to subsection (c) below, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. Unless the board determines that a later date is appropriate in a particular case, the effective date of the determination shall be the date of the animal control officer's classification. 
(c)  A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided in this section, to have caused serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012 shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-40. - Requirements for possession of dangerous or vicious dog. 
(a)  Any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of a dangerous or vicious dog shall be jointly and severally responsible with all other owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of such dog for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, be issued a certificate of registration for, or have custody or control of a dangerous dog or vicious dog except in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements for a proper enclosure set forth in subsection 14-9(b)(1), owners, possessors, guardians or custodians who maintain their dangerous or vicious dog out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a second perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter or area fence, the dangerous or vicious dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad. The gate to the kennel shall be inward-opening and shall be kept locked, except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or vicious dog to allow the dog to be outside of its proper enclosure as provided for in subsection 14-9(b)(l) and subsection (b)(1), above, unless the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dog is attended by the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian, and the dog is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape and under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be unattended with minors. 
(3)  The premises where a dangerous dog or vicious dog is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign, warning that there is a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. Such signs shall include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is a dog on the premises which presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall be conspicuously displayed at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides and on each side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two signs, as well as a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. The signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(4)  The owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall maintain at all times a policy of general or specific liability insurance in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog, which policy shall be issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state. 
(5)  The animal control officer, or his designee, shall have the right to inspect randomly and without notice a dangerous dog or vicious dog which is required to be confined pursuant to this section. 
(6)  The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog shall have a microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog. 
(7)  The owner of a classified dog shall have the dog spayed or neutered. 
(8)  No owner of a classified dog shall keep such dog within 200 yards of any structure or manmade improvement that is an aquatic center, church, convenience store, day care, grocery store, hospital, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, pediatric office, or walking trail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-41. - Registration of dangerous dogs and vicious dogs. 
(a)  No dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be permitted to remain within the county without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. In addition to the annual registration fees provided otherwise in this article, the owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall pay an annual registration fee and shall register such owner's dog as a dangerous dog or vicious dog according to the classification and determination previously made under this article. 
No dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be registered unless the owner can provide sufficient evidence that all of the applicable provisions of this article have been and are being met. 
(b)  Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. The registration shall be renewed annually or upon the earlier transfer of ownership or possession of a dangerous dog or a change in the location of the dangerous dog's primary habitat. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, the animal control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with the provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  The owner of a classified dog who moves from one jurisdiction within the State of Georgia to the county shall register the classified dog with the county within ten days of becoming a county resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into the county from another state shall register the dog as required by this article within 30 days of becoming a county resident. 
(d)  Issuance of a certificate of registration, or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the county, does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements of this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(e)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(f)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(g)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person (or to any person residing with such person) who has been convicted (from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence) of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstacy as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31.1. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-42. - Transfer of ownership or possession. 
(a)  Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog, the transferor shall provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone numbers of the new owner of the dog and of the effective date of the transfer. It shall be unlawful to transfer ownership or possession of any dangerous dog to any transferee residing in Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(b)  Any transferee of a dangerous dog shall be presumed to have notice of the dog's classification as such. 
(c)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-43. - Notice to animal control officer. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall notify the animal control officer, in person or by telephone, within 24 hours of the occurrence of any one of the following events: 
(1)  The dog has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such dog to be physically secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent adult. 
(2)  Such dog has attacked a human being or other animal. 
(3)  Such dog has been sold, given, or otherwise transferred to the ownership or possession of another person. 
(4)  The dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(5)  The dog is leaving Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-44. - Confiscation and disposition of dogs. 
(a)  A police officer or animal control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(b)  A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any animal control officer or by a police officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article. All fines and all charges for services performed by a police or animal control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(d)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall govern, as to classified dogs, over any contrary provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-45. - Report to district attorney and solicitor. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall report to the district attorney the conduct of any owner which the animal control officer believes may constitute a felony under the Act. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall report to the solicitor the conduct of any owner that the animal control officer reasonably believes may constitute a misdemeanor under the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-46. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision or requirement of this article, and any such violation or failure to comply shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions as permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For general occupational tax and regulation and taxation of miscellaneous businesses, see this chapter. For regulation and taxation of alcoholic beverage establishments, see chapter 6, for regulation and taxation of adult businesses, escort services, billiard rooms and other amusements, see chapter 10. For licensing and regulation of solid waste service provisions, see chapter 46. For regulation and taxation of taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, see chapter 62. For taxation of hotels and motels, financial institutions, and insurers, see chapter 54. 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to license self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1; certain persons required to provide proof of licensure state licensure before issuance of city or county business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; limitations regarding persons performing investigations related to city and county business licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; taxation of insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.; licensing and taxation of certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations in a county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6; taxes on businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7; prohibited practices in levying tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without being limited to, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" does not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business. 
Practitioner of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business that operates as a partnership, corporation or other business entity if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its municipal power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee does not include an administrative or registration fee. The term "regulatory fees" does not include required occupation taxes for businesses and professions located in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 54-200; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-200, 11-1-2007; Ord. No. 20101216-C, § 1, 12-16-2010) 
Editor's note— Amending Ord. No. 20101216-C refers to this section 18-19 by its former designation as section 54-200. 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 18-20. - Registration and occupation license tax certificate required. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies (including limited liability companies), corporations, (including professional corporations) and other business entities, now or hereafter operating a business in the city, are hereby required to register their business or office, obtain an occupation tax certificate for their business or office, and pay the amount now or hereafter fixed as taxes and fees thereon as authorized under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  The occupation tax certificate shall serve as a business license. Additional business licenses may be required as established by the city. 
(c)  Stock or manufacturing companies or other companies, subsidiaries, agencies, district offices, branch offices, corporations or individuals, having either their business proper or their general branch offices located within the city, and either represented by the officers of the company, or any agent, for the purpose of soliciting patronage for the same, or for the transaction of any business pertaining thereto, shall be required to obtain a occupation tax certificate. 
(Code 2002, § 54-201; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-201, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-21. - Fee; basis. 
(a)  Payment of gross receipts tax. Except as otherwise provided in this article, every business and practitioner subject to this article shall pay a tax based on the gross receipts of such business (the "occupation tax"). 
(b)  Fee class tables. The gross receipts tax shall include a base rate of $100.00. Gross revenues are taxed using a fee class table based on profitability. The fee class tables are based on gross revenue using the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Code of the business below: 
_____ 
(1)  Variable chart for tax class No. 1. The worksheet for gross receipts for tax class No. 1 are as follows: 

 
(2)  Variable chart for tax class No. 2. The worksheet for gross receipts for tax class No. 2 are as follows: 

 
(3)  Variable chart for tax class No. 3. The worksheet for gross receipts for tax class No. 3 are as follows: 

 
(4)  Variable chart for tax class No. 4. The worksheet for gross receipts for tax class No. 4 are as follows: 

 
(5)  Variable chart for tax class No. 5. The worksheet for gross receipts for tax class No. 5 are as follows: 

 
(6)  Variable chart for tax class No. 6. The worksheet for gross receipts for tax class No. 6 are as follows: 

 
(7)  Tax classification by SIC code. The following shall be the tax classification and descriptions for SIC codes: 

 
_____
(c)  Adoption and continuance of fees. The fees described in this section are adopted for the fiscal year 2007 and shall continue in full force and effect until modified by action of the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Nonrefundable administrative fee assessed. All businesses and occupations, other than those practitioners listed in section 18-51, shall be assessed a nonrefundable administrative fee as set by resolution of council for handling and processing business occupation tax registrations, which is a component of the occupation tax for new and existing businesses and is separately identified in the registration process. 
(Code 2002, § 54-202; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-202, 11-1-2007) 
Secs. 18-22—18-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 18-46. - Application for registration. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person, firm, company (including limited liability companies) corporation (including professional corporations) or other business entity subject to this article to file with the city tax collector's office on or before March 31 of each calendar year an application for registration under this article setting forth all activities of each business, its North American Industry Classification System and/or its revenue code, its estimated gross receipts for the calendar year of the registration, computation of the amount of tax due including the administrative fee, a copy of the profit-and-loss statement, a copy of its state income tax return, and such other information as may be required by the city tax collector's office to properly administer this article, including the information specified in section 18-48. For businesses or practitioners with more than one type of service or product, the entire gross receipts shall be classified according to the dominant service or product based upon the information provided under this subsection. 
(b)  Each business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction, including businesses or practitioners with one or more locations or offices in the state and one or more locations outside the state, the city shall allocate the gross receipts as follows for occupation tax purposes in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Where the business or practitioner: 
a.  Can reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts of the business or practitioner to one or more of the locations or offices on the basis of product manufactured in that location or office or the sales or other serviced provided in that location or office, the city shall tax the gross receipts generated by the location or office within the state; or 
b.  Cannot reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts among multiple locations or offices, the business or practitioner shall divide the gross receipts reported to all local governments in this state by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner which contributed to the gross receipts reported to any local government in this state, and shall allocate an equal percentage of such gross receipts of the business or practitioner to each location or office. 
(2)  In no instance shall the sum of the portions of the total gross receipts of a business or practitioner taxed by all local governments exceed 100 percent of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(3)  In the event of a dispute between the business or practitioner and the city as to the allocation under this section, the business or practitioner shall have the burden of proof as to the reasonableness of this allocation. 
(4)  Upon request, businesses or practitioners with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
a.  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; 
b.  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments; 
c.  When the city levies an occupation tax on a business or practitioner which has locations encompassed by other jurisdictions and the other jurisdictions use different criteria for taxation, the city shall not tax any greater proportion of the gross receipts than authorized by the law; and 
d.  For each business and practitioner with no location or office within the state, but which: 
1.  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
2.  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the city, gross receipts of such business or practitioner for purposes of this section shall include only those gross receipts reasonably attributable to sales or services in the state. 
If such business or practitioner provides to the city tax collector proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this section may be amended from time to time by ordinance by the mayor and city council for the purpose of providing for exceptions to business and occupation taxes as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f). 
(Code 2002, § 54-203; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-203, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-47. - Payment of fee; separate locations; refunds. 
(a)  Following the filing of the application as provided for in section 18-46, each business or professional practitioner subject to this Code shall remit payment in full for all taxes and fees due not later than March 31 of the year in which the application is filed. Each person, firm or corporation operating under various trade names must secure a separate occupation tax certificate for each trade name issued. In addition, a separate occupation tax certificate must be secured for each business location. 
(b)  Applicants for certificates for trade names and for separate business locations shall pay the nonrefundable administrative fee imposed hereby, in addition to the tax imposed by section 18-21. In the event a business ceases to operate after the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, no refund of the fee or tax shall be granted. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the refund of the occupation tax levied herein is governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Code 2002, § 54-204; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-204, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-48. - Inspection of records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all businesses subject to the tax and administrative fee imposed by section 18-21 with the exception of those businesses and practitioners electing to proceed under section 18-51, to maintain and to provide as a part of their business occupation tax registration such records as will establish gross receipts as herein defined, including, but not limited to, profit-and-loss statements prepared on a calendar-year basis, and method of allocation of revenue for businesses and practitioners maintaining locations in other counties and municipalities, if applicable. Such businesses and practitioners shall also make available for inspection by representatives of the city tax collector's office all reports submitted to the sales tax unit of the state department of revenue showing sales taking place in the state and other tax returns showing gross receipts. 
(b)  Lending institutions and any other organization engaged in the lending of money at interest and/or for a fee or commission and otherwise subject to the requirements of this article shall provide, for each lending transaction, a loan term sheet or other summary showing the amount of such loan, the interest rate thereon, and total fees, interest and/or commissions to be charged on such loan, assuming payment in the normal course of business. 
(Code 2002, § 54-205; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-205, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-49. - Termination of business. 
It shall be the duty of each business and practitioner subject to fees and occupation taxes under this article when it shall cease to do business or practice to return its current occupation tax certificate, together with a statement as to the date of termination of doing business or practice to the city tax collector. 
(Code 2002, § 54-206; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-206, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-50. - Commencement of business after January 1. 
Businesses and practitioners which do not commence operation by January 1 of any year shall pay the amount of administrative fees and occupation taxes set forth in this article based on anticipated revenue for the balance of the calendar year as provided in section 18-46. Such payments shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business. 
(Code 2002, § 54-207; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-207, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-51. - Professional occupation tax. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article there is hereby imposed upon practitioners of law, medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic, podiatry, dentistry, optometry, applied psychology, veterinary, landscape architecture, land surveying, massage therapy and physiotherapy, public accounting, embalming, funeral directing, civil mechanical, hydraulic and electrical engineering, architecture, marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors, as their entire occupation tax one of the following, at the practitioner's election: 
(a)  The occupation tax resulting from application of the other provisions of this article; or 
(b)  A fee of $300.00 per practitioner, but a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information relating to gross receipts. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person holding a license to practice any of the professions specified herein. 
(c)  Payment of the occupation tax may be made by a partnership, corporation or other business entity composed of practitioners subject to the election in this section. 
(d)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 2002, § 54-208; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-208, 11-1-2007; Ord. No. 20101216-C, § 2, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. 2014-21, § 1, 10-16-2014) 
Editor's note— Amending Ord. No. 20101216-C refers to this section 18-51 by its former designation as section 54-208. 
Sec. 18-52. - Transferability; denial; suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Transfer. No certificate issued hereunder may be transferred. Any new business or practitioner shall apply and register for a new certificate within 30 days after the commencement of business; provided, however, that such application shall confer no right to operate any business which would otherwise be prohibited by any state or federal law or city ordinance. 
(b)  Denial, suspension and revocation. Each application submitted or certificate granted hereunder shall be subject to denial, suspension or revocation for violation of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation now in force or hereafter adopted which governs or relates to the operation of the business in question. 
(c)  Procedure. Whenever the city tax collector determines there is cause to deny, suspend or revoke the occupation tax certificate, the tax collector must give the certificate holder ten days' written notice of intention to deny, suspend or revoke the occupation tax certificate. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the certificate holder may present a defense to the denial, suspension or revocation before the mayor or such board as the mayor and city council may designate. The ten days' written notice must include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. After the hearing, the mayor and city council may deny, suspend or revoke the occupation tax certificate issued hereunder if any of the grounds set forth in this subsection exist. An occupation tax certificate may be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraud in the operation of the business or occupation he practices or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
(2)  The applicant or certificate holder is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(3)  The applicant or certificate holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent he is unable to perform his duties under the business or occupation; 
(4)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(5)  The applicant or certificate holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If after having been granted a certificate, the applicant pleads guilty, is convicted of, or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses herein, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(6)  The original application or renewal thereof, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(7)  The business or establishment is not authorized to operate within the city, or within the zoning district within which it is located, or is otherwise not in conformity with locational requirements of any of the city's ordinances; 
(8)  The business or establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
(9)  Any other violation of this article. 
(d)  Hearing; rendering a decision for violation. After the tax collector makes a recommendation to the mayor and city council to deny an application for, or to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate issued hereunder, the mayor and city council, or such board as the mayor and city council may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. At the hearing, the tax collector proceeds first and presents all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to deny an application for, or to suspend or revoke, the occupation tax certificate issued hereunder. The mayor and city council members will have the right to ask questions at any time. After the tax collector makes his presentation, the applicant or certificate holder or its legal counsel, will present evidence and argument as to why the occupation tax certificate should be issued, or if issued, why it should not be suspended or revoked. The mayor and city council members will have the right to ask questions at any time. After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the mayor and city council will render a decision. The denial, suspension or revocation decision is final unless the applicant or certificate holder files an appeal by petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Code 2002, § 54-209; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-209, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-53. - Payment; penalty for late payment; issuance of executions against delinquent taxpayers. 
(a)  Any occupation tax with its associated administrative fees hereunder shall be due and payable by March 31 of each calendar year. If the business or practice was not in operation on January 1, the occupation tax with its associated administrative fees shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of business pursuant to section 18-50. The city shall assess a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the amount owed for each calendar year or portion thereof for failure to: 
(1)  Pay occupation taxes and administrative fees when due; 
(2)  File an application by March 31 of any calendar year, when the business or practitioner was in operation the preceding calendar year; and/or 
(3)  Register and obtain an occupation tax certificate within 30 days of the commencement of business. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees are subject to interest at a rate of one percent per month. Payments required by the article herein may be collected in any suit at law or in equity, or the city may cause executions to issue against the person, firm or corporation liable for the payment. Executions shall be levied and sold together with all costs thereof, by the city, or city's designee, as ex officio sheriff of the county. In addition, any person whose duty it is to register any business or practice and obtain any occupation tax certificate and fails to do so, or who fails to pay the occupation tax or administrative fee required by this article, or who makes any deliberate or substantial and material false statement on an application or provides materially false information in support of an application, shall be denied an occupation tax certificate, shall be required to surrender any existing such occupation tax certificate and be deemed to have no such occupation tax certificate for purposes hereof, and shall be subject to a civil fine according to the maximum amount allowable under state law. 
(c)  No business and/or practitioner subject to this article shall collect any gross receipts as defined herein unless such business and/or practitioner shall have applied for a business tax certificate and/or license as required hereunder. Upon application for a business tax certificate, any such business and/or practitioner may thereupon collect gross receipts, including those incurred but not collected during the period prior to the application, but such business and/or practitioner shall be subject to the penalties of subsection (a) of this section. If the taxes and fees remain unpaid after the due date, the business and/or practitioner shall not collect any gross receipts as defined herein. The provisions of this subsection may be enforced by appropriate injunctive or other relief upon the application of the city to the superior court of the county. 
(d)  Practitioners of law may collect gross receipts as defined herein without applying for and obtaining a business tax certificate. However, practitioners of law must pay the occupation tax levied herein. Delinquent taxes and fees are subject to interest at a rate of one percent per month. Any occupation tax with its associated administrative fees hereunder, shall be due and payable by March 31 of each fiscal year. If the business or practice was not in operation on January 1, the occupation tax with its associated administrative fees shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of business pursuant to section 18-50. The city shall assess a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the amount owed for each calendar year or portion thereof for failure to pay the occupation tax required by the article herein may be collected in any suit at law or in equity, or the city may cause executions to issue against the person, firm or corporation liable for the payment. Executions shall be levied and sold together with all costs thereof, by the city or its designee, as ex-officio sheriff of the county. In addition, failure to pay the occupation tax required by this article shall subject the person, firm, or corporation to a civil fine of $500.00 as provided by state law. 
(e)  A business registration application or certificate under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked if the applicant or licensee has failed to pay any fee to the city, has failed to make a return or pay a tax due to the tax clerk of the city, the city business license department, or any other agency of the government or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 2002, § 54-210; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-210, 11-1-2007; Ord. No. 20050303, 3-3-2005) 
Editor's note— Amending Ord. No. 20050303 incorrectly refers to this section 18-53 as section 19-53. 
Sec. 18-54. - Proration of fee. 
No license fee shall be prorated. 
(Code 2002, § 54-212; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-212, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-55. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of the article to impose the taxes set forth in this article upon all businesses and practitioners operating in the city consistent with the requirements of the constitution and laws of the state. In the event that the fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner or taxes and fees shall be in excess of the maximum amount authorized by law, such taxes and fees shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. 
(Code 2002, § 54-214; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-214, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-56. - Amendment of article. 
This article may be amended so as to increase the occupation tax on any business or practitioner only after the conduct of at least one public hearing pertaining thereto, but this provision shall not be applicable to the repeal of any resolution promulgated pursuant to section 18-46. 
(Code 2002, § 54-216; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-216, 11-1-2007) 
Secs. 18-57—18-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; municipal and county ordinances for issuance of permits to charitable organizations for solicitation of contributions on streets and highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person who engages in the business of selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services or who solicits orders for such goods, wares, merchandise or services by going from house to house or place to place and who does not have a permanent place of business in the city and who is not employed by any person having a permanent place of business in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-1; Code 2002, § 18-26) 
Sec. 18-87. - Exception. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to persons selling, distributing or soliciting orders for newspapers or selling, distributing or soliciting orders for milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce raised by the vendor or members of his family so far as the sale of such commodities is authorized by law. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their principal place of activity in the city. 
(Code 1985, §§ 9-4-1, 9-4-2; Code 2002, § 18-27) 
Sec. 18-88. - Refusing to leave. 
Any peddler of goods, wares or merchandise who enters upon any premises owned or leased by another and willfully refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or possessor of the premises to leave shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-12; Code 2002, § 18-28) 
Sec. 18-89. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m. the following morning or at any time on Sundays, unless such peddler shall have been specifically invited to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-13; Code 2002, § 18-29) 
Sec. 18-90. - Sales on streets or parking lots. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or peddle goods, wares or merchandise upon the public streets or public parking lots in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-14; Code 2002, § 18-30) 
Sec. 18-91. - Parking of vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either by himself or by and through any agent or employee, to park any wagon, truck, vehicle or other conveyance, whether the wagon, truck, vehicle or other conveyance is drawn by horsepower, gasoline or other motive power, for the purpose of peddling and from which is peddled, sold or offered for sale any wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or any other produce on any street within the city. However, this section shall not apply to or be enforced against any farmer who peddles or otherwise sells farm produce directly from his farm. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-15; Code 2002, § 18-31) 
Secs. 18-92—18-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 18-111. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-3; Code 2002, § 18-61) 
Sec. 18-112. - Application. 
The applicant for a peddler's permit shall file with the city clerk a sworn application giving the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Address, both legal and local. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with the license number or other means of identification. 
(6)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(7)  Evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-4; Code 2002, § 18-62) 
Sec. 18-113. - Bond. 
Peddlers shall furnish a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of $1,000.00. The bond shall be conditioned that if such peddler shall comply with this article and other ordinances relating to it, such obligation shall be void, otherwise the bond shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-3; Code 2002, § 18-63) 
Sec. 18-114. - Investigation of applicant; issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall fingerprint the applicant and cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made, as he deems necessary, for the protection of the public good. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the disapproval and return the application to the clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and shall execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for. The chief of police shall return such permit, along with the application, to the clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his permit and issue a license. 
(c)  Such permit shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of such permittee; the class of permit and license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder; the date of issuance and the length of time the permit and license shall be operative; as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such peddling. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-5; Code 2002, § 18-64) 
Sec. 18-115. - Transferability. 
No peddler's permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-6; Code 2002, § 18-65) 
Sec. 18-116. - Display. 
Every peddler permitted to engage in business under this article within the city shall display his permit upon the request of any person, and failure to so display such permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-7; Code 2002, § 18-66) 
Sec. 18-117. - Altering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or deface any permit issued under this division. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-8; Code 2002, § 18-67) 
Sec. 18-118. - Expiration. 
Unless otherwise provided, all peddlers' permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-9; Code 2002, § 18-68) 
Sec. 18-119. - Revocation. 
(a)  Peddlers' permits may be revoked by the mayor and city council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as a peddler; 
(3)  Any violation of any city ordinance; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime; or 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-10; Code 2002, § 18-69) 
Sec. 18-120. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the clerk in the denial of an application for a peddler's permit or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a peddler's permit as provided in this division shall have the right of appeal to the mayor and city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided for the notice of the hearing on revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-11; Code 2002, § 18-70) 
Secs. 18-121—18-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; municipal and county ordinances for issuance of permits to charitable organizations for solicitation of contributions on streets and highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

Sec. 18-139. - Registration—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money, subscriptions, pledges or anything of value for any cause at any residence, office or place of business within the city without first registering with the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-21; Code 2002, § 18-96) 
Sec. 18-140. - Same—Information required. 
Any person desiring to register under this article shall file the following information in writing under oath with the city clerk: 
(1)  Name and address of the person soliciting; 
(2)  Name and address of the organization for which the solicitation is made; 
(3)  What the proceeds of the solicitation are to be used for in detail; 
(4)  The amount of commission or remuneration which is to be retained by or paid to the solicitor; 
(5)  The percentage to be paid to the cause for which the solicitation is made; and 
(6)  How often the solicitor's report and remittance is made to such organization for which the funds are solicited. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-21; Code 2002, § 18-97) 
Sec. 18-141. - Permission required from manager of business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds from any customer in any place of business in the city at any time without permission from the manager of such business. 
(Code 1985, § 9-4-22; Code 2002, § 18-98) 
Secs. 18-142—18-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 18-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Yard sale means the sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined in this definition, by a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. The term "yard sale" includes garage sales, carport sales and similar types of sales or events. 
(Code 1985, § 9-6-1; Code 2002, § 18-126) 
Sec. 18-167. - Frequency. 
Yard sales shall be limited to three-consecutive-day periods. No more than one such sale shall be held at the same address within any three months. 
(Code 1985, § 9-6-2; Code 2002, § 18-127) 
Sec. 18-168. - Signs; advertising. 
No signs advertising or calling attention to or giving direction to or in any way advertising or concerning a yard sale shall be permitted, except one nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet, may be posted advertising the sale only on the property on which the sale is to be conducted. 
(Code 1985, § 9-6-3; Code 2002, § 18-128) 
Secs. 18-169—18-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Secs. 18-190—18-216. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ALARM USERS 

Sec. 18-217. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm activation report means a document issued by the enforcement official indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a valid incident, nuisance alarm or false alarm. 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the City of Canton to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
Alarm company means a person subject to the licensing requirements, and/or a company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems; this person shall be licensed in compliance with City of Canton ordinances and state laws. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the City of Canton allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visible, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Canton Police Department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response. 
Cancellation means the process whereby response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the Canton Police Department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
City means the City of Canton or its agent. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Canton Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, to test the system. 
Fee means the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the City of Canton authorized pursuant to the ordinance from which this article is derived and separate resolution, to defray the expenses of responding to a false alarm. 
Hold up alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Owner means any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy, or manage the premises. 
Premises means any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures which serve as dwelling units such as single-family, multi-family or any other area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose, wherein an alarm system is installed. 
Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The Canton Police Department may in its discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction." 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 1, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-218. - Alarm permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system in the city without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the city. A fee may be required for the initial registration and annual renewals as it will be set by the City of Canton on a separate resolution. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. 
(b)  Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the city. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an application from the city. 
(c)  Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the city within 30 days of the change. In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders will receive from the city a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the city within 30 days when any of the requested information has changed. Failure to comply will constitute a violation and may result in a civil penalty. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 2, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-219. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  Register and obtain an alarm permit. 
(b)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(c)  Provide the alarm company the permit number, (the number must be provided to the communications center by the alarm company to insure dispatch). 
(d)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes when notified by the Cherokee County 911 Center to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises. 
(e)  Refrain from manual activation of an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by alarm system provider. 
(f)  An alarm user must obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or residence. 
(g)  If present at the alarm system's location, the alarm user or designee shall provide assistance to police personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 3, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-220. - Duties of the alarm company. 
(a)  Any person engaged in the alarm business in the city, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain the required state and city license(s). 
(2)  Required to assist with the registration of the alarm customers by providing registration applications, assisting with the completion and submission of the applications to the City of Canton. 
(3)  Provide the owner with the existence of this article and a copy of the alarm system's operating instructions in accordance with adopted codes and the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  Be able to provide name, address, and telephone number of the license holder or a designee, who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a day; and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified, within two hours. 
(5)  Be able to provide the most current contact information for the alarm user including the user permit. 
(6)  Provide an electronic list quarterly of all monitored alarm systems in the City of Canton in a format designated by the alarm administrator. 
(b)  Ninety days after enactment of this article the alarm installation companies shall, on all new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
(c)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user. 
(d)  Provide written information of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system. 
(e)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
(2)  Provide alarm user registration number to the communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations. 
(3)  Communicate any available information about the alarm. 
(4)  Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 4, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-221. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than 15 minutes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the Canton Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 5, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-222. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms/failure to register. It is hereby found and determined that four or more false alarms within a calendar year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for false alarms within a calendar year may be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
(1)  Fourth false alarm ..... $50.00 
(2)  Fifth false alarm ..... 100.00 
(3)  Sixth and over false alarm ..... 150.00 
(4)  Failure to register ..... 100.00 
(5)  Violations of ordinance provisions ..... 100.00 
(b)  Other civil penalty(ies). Violations for failure to register; and violations for installing, maintaining, or using an audible system with a continual sound for more than 15 minutes may be enforced through the assessment of civil penalties in the amount of $100.00. 
(c)  Payment of civil penalty(ies). Civil penalty(ies) shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
(d)  Cause of verified response. The failure of an alarm user to make payment of any civil penalties assessed under this article within 30 days from the date of the invoice will be cause for the Canton Police Department to only respond to alarm calls at that location when the alarm has been verifiably set off due to an actual crime. The requirement of a verified response shall not apply to panic, fire, or hold up alarms. All 911 and other calls to that location will be responded to normally by the Canton Police Department. All alarms will be responded to normally once the alarm user's payment has been received. 
(e)  Civil non criminal violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a civil violation and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 6, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-223. - Alarm user awareness class. 
The city may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. The city may grant the option of attending a class in lieu of paying one assessed fine. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 7, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-224. - Appeals. 
(a)  Process to appeal penalties. Assessments of civil penalty(ies) and other enforcement decisions made under this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the chief of police within ten days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions. The chief of police shall designate a hearing officer from the police department to hear appeals related to the agency. The hearing officer shall render a decision within five business days and give written notification of his/her decision. The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the chief of police by filing written notice of appeal within ten days of the decision of the hearing officer. The chief of police shall have the final decision in this matter. The hearing officer's decision and the decision of the chief of police are subject to review by the courts having jurisdiction by proceedings in the nature of writ certiorari. 
(b)  Appeal standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalty(ies) or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 8, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-225. - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications, no response records, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 9, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-226. - Government immunity. 
Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Canton Police Department response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 2009041601, § 10, 4-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Secs. 18-227—18-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLE STORAGE YARDS 

Sec. 18-246. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inoperative motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is wrecked, junked, dismantled, scrapped, or a motor vehicle that does not have a current tag displayed upon the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle repair business means any corporation, business or individual engaged in the repair of motor vehicles within the city. 
Motor vehicle storage yard means any corporation, business or individual engaged in the storing, buying or selling of inoperative motor vehicles outdoors or outside a permanent structure or building within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 18-186; Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 18-247. - Screening method required. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle repair business or motor vehicle storage yard doing business within the city shall construct and maintain a screening fence or enclosure to conceal from public view such motor vehicles stored or accumulated on its place of business. 
(b)  The screening fence or enclosure shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be made of either wood, metal, shrubbery, trees or other appropriate means. 
(c)  The screening fence or enclosure shall not be within five feet of any public street or right-of-way unless approved by the city. 
(d)  A written plan including the design and installation of the screening fence or enclosure shall be subject to approval by the city prior to installation. 
(e)  The screening fence or enclosure shall be subject to inspection by the city for proper installation and maintenance to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 2002, § 18-187; Ord. of 8-3-1995, § 2) 
Secs. 18-248—18-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNSHOPS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20110616-01, § 1, adopted June 16, 2011, set out provisions amending Art. VIII. To preserve the existing articles of this chapter, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as amending Art. IX. Said ordinance repealed the former Art. IX, §§ 18-273—18-284, and enacted a new Art. IX, §§ 18-271—18-275, as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to pawnbrokers and pawnshops and derived from Code 2002, §§ 54-275—54-186; Ord. No. 2007110101, §§ 54-275—54-286, 11-1-2007. 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1; pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

Sec. 18-271. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Pawnbroker" means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
"Pledged goods" means tangible personal property (other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness), including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this article, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with the law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. 
(Ord. No. 20110616-01, § 1, 6-16-2011) 
Sec. 18-272. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall keep books in compliance with state law, wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material or which the article is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was deposited or sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so pledged or sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in business as a pawnbroker who shall fail or refuse to keep books so provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and the articles pledged or sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20110616-01, § 1, 6-16-2011) 
Sec. 18-273. - Pawn tickets and daily reports. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers will make daily reports to the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  Pawnbrokers shall capture an image, with a digital camera, of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the article. The image shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(c)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right had shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging or selling the article. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature must be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any article. 
(d)  A digital image shall be made, with a digital camera, at the time of the acquisition of any article and of the articles serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(e)  All persons who enter a pawnbroker business and attempt to sell or pawn an article mush provide proper photo identification. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a United States driver's license, a state I.D. card, or a government identification card (military I.D.). In the event one of the mentioned identifications cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(f)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, shall be made by the pawnbroker and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(g)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person pawning the article to the pawnbroker, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the pawnbroker's possession. 
(h)  To the extent that the pawnbroker utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintain for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
(Ord. No. 20110616-01, § 1, 6-16-2011) 
Sec. 18-274. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the Cherokee County Sheriff or his designee. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173(b), weapons shall not be regulated under this article. However, pawnbrokers must comply with all requirements, including but not limited to record-keeping requirements for weapons as specified in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 of Title 44, Article 3, Part 5, of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and shall be subject to all applicable criminal penalties under state law for any violation of same. 
(Ord. No. 20110616-01, § 1, 6-16-2011; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 3-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-275. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the pawnbroker or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the Municipal Court for the City of Canton and the violator shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as with a city ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 20110616-01, § 1, 6-16-2011) 
Secs. 18-276—18-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESMEN[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; municipal and county ordinances for issuance of permits to charitable organizations for solicitation of contributions on streets and highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

Sec. 18-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensed solicitor means and includes any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor, on his person, while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence means and includes every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(Code 2002, § 54-320; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-320, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-302. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 2002, § 54-326; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-326, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-303. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of soliciting, calling on residences door to door without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this article. 
(b)  The requirement of subsection (a) of this section is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. 
(1)  It is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political, or other nonprofit purposes provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
(2)  It does not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(c)  Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the city carry upon his person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(d)  Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the solicitor is employed by or represents, a photograph of the solicitor, and physical description. Such photograph shall be provided by the solicitor and shall be at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(e)  The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than six months. 
(Code 2002, § 54-321; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-321, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-304. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The city manager shall have applications available on request. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address, also business address, if other than present address; 
(2)  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
(3)  Age of applicant; 
(4)  Physical description of the applicant; 
(5)  Name and address of the person, firm, or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
(7)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
(9)  Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow; 
(10)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this article, if any; 
(11)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(12)  Names of magazines, books, or journals to be sold; 
(13)  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
(14)  Proposed method of operation; 
(15)  Description and license plate number of vehicles intended to be operated by applicant; 
(16)  Signature of applicant; and 
(17)  Social security number of applicant. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the city police department in connection with the application for the permit. 
(d)  The city manager shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article; nor to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
(f)  The fee for a permit shall be $75.00 for a six-month period for each solicitor. 
(Code 2002, § 54-322; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-322, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-305. - Permit denial or revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall be denied or revoked by the city manager if the applicant or holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this article. 
(b)  Immediately upon such denial or revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the applicant or holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. 
(c)  Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit, if issued, shall become null and void and must be turned in to the city manager's office. 
(d)  Appeal procedures for the denial or revocation of a permit shall follow those set out in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 54-323; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-323, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-306. - Routes. 
To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes which he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the city manager's office. 
(Code 2002, § 54-324; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-324, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-307. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Fraud. Any licensed solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating, or misrepresentation, whether himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article. 
(b)  Nuisance. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined if the occupant of said residence has made it clear, by written sign or otherwise, that solicitors are not invited. 
(c)  Request for departure. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(d)  Times allowed. 
(1)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 6:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, or on a state or national holiday. 
(2)  Solicitations for political purposes shall not occur prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time. 
(Code 2002, § 54-325; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-325, 11-1-2007) 
Secs. 18-308—18-334. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SPAS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.; county and municipal ordinances regulating massage therapists, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22; unlawful in certain structures and places, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17. 

Sec. 18-335. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Massage or massage therapy means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including, but not limited to, the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. The term "massage" or "massage therapy" does not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, massage therapy, podiatry, or medicine is required by the state. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage therapist for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs or contracts with one or more massage therapists or operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, or which for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages. The term "massage establishment" does not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Massage therapist/practitioner/masseur/masseuse means any person who for good or valuable consideration administers a massage or massage therapy. 
Spa establishment means any business established for profit that provides personal services such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak. 
(Code 2002, § 54-375; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-375, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-336. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the certificate or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: 
(1)  Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, massage therapist or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of said profession. 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state. 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(Code 2002, § 54-376; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-376, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-337. - License required; application. 
(a)  In addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate pursuant to article II of this chapter, all persons, firms or corporations operating or desiring to operate a massage establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business, profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this article. The application shall include the information required on all license returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  No license for a massage establishment shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(2)  A letter certifying as to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by three currently qualified and registered city voters of good moral character. Individuals signing such letter must provide their name, address and social security number. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit copies of all required state licenses with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited, associated with the operation of the massage therapy establishment. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in the county. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. 
(6)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver's license or a valid ID card as reliable proof thereof. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in the county, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notices under this article on behalf of the applicant. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation or its officers shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment unless it shall appear that such person, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, disorderly conduct, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual-related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. No person, partner or officer under the age of 18 years shall be granted a license for massage establishment or spa. 
(Code 2002, § 54-377; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-377, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-338. - Regulatory fee; expiration. 
(a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee, as established by a resolution of the mayor and city council, for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city. The regulatory fee shall be paid with the license application. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on March 31 of each year. Each subsequent application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(c)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the fiscal year and the full regulatory fee must be paid for a license application. 
(d)  Any person applying hereunder who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after April 1, shall, in addition to said annual fee and late charges of one percent per month. 
(Code 2002, § 54-378; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-378, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-339. - Work permits required. 
Prior to the issuance of a license any and all on-premises owners, managers and employees not possessing a state-issued massage therapist's license, who desire to engage in the business, trade or profession of massage therapy shall be required to obtain a work permit. 
(Code 2002, § 54-379; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-379, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-340. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all massage establishments holding a license under this article to file the name of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and place of employment. The holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and require supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the city manager or his designee within ten days from the date of such change. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any massage establishment granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment; the type of treatment administered; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city manager or his designee, or the chief of police or his designee. 
(c)  The establishment shall have an owner, manager, or supervisor on premise at all hours the establishment offers massage therapy. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager, or supervisor on premise the establishment must cease operations and close to the public until an owner, manager or supervisor is on premise. 
(d)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of a license. Records shall be made available to the city manager, during business hours, at the certificate holder's business location in the city, within ten business days of any such request. 
(e)  The establishment shall be subject to inspection at any time during business hours by the city manager or his designee and by the chief of police or his designee, to ensure compliance with this article. 
(f)  All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of the customers, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this article, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and means having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said paints or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely nontransparent. 
(g)  No massage establishment shall be engaged in and no place of business shall be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(h)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(i)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the uniform building code, and additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(j)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any establishment. 
(k)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of the license must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the massage establishment to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize a massage establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
(m)  No massage practitioner, or any of his employees, shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs or anus of any person. 
(Code 2002, § 54-380; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-380, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-341. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  When a license application for the operation of a massage or spa establishment is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the police department. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the police department, or its designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the licensing and revenue manager or his designee. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the city manager or his designee shall act on the application. The city manager or his designee shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified herein. 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in this section. 
(3)  Contains false, misleading or incomplete information in the application or attached documents. 
(Code 2002, § 54-381; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-381, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-342. - Grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
The license of a massage establishment or spa may be denied revoked or suspended upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the applicant or holder to meet or maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license. 
(2)  The applicant or holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in being issued the license for the massage or spa establishment. 
(3)  The applicant or holder is engaged in the operation of a massage or spa establishment under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another massage therapist of a like or different name. 
(4)  The applicant or holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, disorderly conduct, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony. 
(5)  None of the applicant's or holder's employees, independent contractors or agents shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment unless it shall appear that such persons have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, disorderly conduct, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. No person, partner or officer under the age of 18 shall be granted a license for massage establishment or spa. 
(6)  Failure of the applicant or holder to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article. 
(7)  Failure of the applicant or holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers, or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers. 
(8)  The applicant or holder, his employees, agents, or independent contractors associated with the establishment have allowed to occur, or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article. 
(9)  The applicant or holder has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 54-382; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-384, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 18-343. - Hearings. 
No license for a massage or spa establishment shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  The city manager shall provide written notice to the applicant or license holder of his decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or license holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any applicant or license holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city manager may have a review thereof by appeal to the mayor and city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition filed in the office of the city manager within 15 days after the final order or action of the city manager and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $500.00. The city manager, at his discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The mayor and city council may at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city manager unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city manager. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, each member of the mayor and city council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that he is not related to or personal friends with any appellant or any owner of the establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that he has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the mayor and city council. 
(3)  The findings and decision of the mayor and city council shall be forwarded to the city manager within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city manager to notify the appellant and the chief of police or his designee of the action of the mayor and city council. 
(4)  The findings and decision of the mayor and city council shall not be set aside unless they are found to be: 
a.  Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
b.  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole. 
(5)  The findings and decision of the mayor and city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 2002, § 54-383; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-383, 11-1-2007) 
ARTICLE XII. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 18-344. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Dealer means: 
(1)  A person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturer's representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remodeling, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk; 
(2)  A person engaged in any other business, if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturer's representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remodeling, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
"Dealer" is not intended to apply to any person engaged in the acceptance of precious metals or gems on a consignment basis where there is no payment for acceptance of the precious metal or gem until such time as an end-user purchases the item from the person engaged in the consignment. 
Gems means any precious or semi-precious stone which is cut and polished. 
Person means an individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
"Precious metals" means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-02, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 18-345. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All dealers shall keep books in compliance with state law, wherein there shall be entered an accurate description of all articles sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the article; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers on the article; and 
(3)  A statement of the kind of material or which the article is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person by whom the article was sold; and 
(2)  The time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made immediately upon the completion of each transaction. 
(d)  Such books, and the articles themselves so sold, shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person engaged in business as a dealer who shall fail or refuse to keep books so provided in this section, or who shall make false entries in such books, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and the articles pledged or sold to them shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-02, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 18-346. - Reporting. 
(a)  Dealers will make daily reports to the Cherokee County Sheriff's Department in the manner prescribed by the sheriff or his designee. 
(b)  The dealer shall obtain from each person selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right had shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person selling the article. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature must be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person sells any article. 
(c)  A digital image shall be made, with a digital camera, at the time of the acquisition of any article and of the articles serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(d)  All persons who enter a dealer's place of business and attempt to sell an article must provide proper photo identification. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a United States driver's license, a state I.D. card, or a government identification card (military I.D.). In the event one of the mentioned identifications cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(e)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, shall be made by the dealer and stored on premises for inspection by the sheriff or his designee. 
(f)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the dealer's possession. 
(g)  To the extent that the dealer utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintain for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the sheriff's office as requested. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-02, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 18-347. - Precious metals/gems not to be disposed of for 30 days. 
Dealers must hold all precious metals and gems for 30 days prior to sale, assignment, trading, or other disposal of same. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-02, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 18-348. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any dealer, or any agents or employees of the dealer, to receive any gems or precious metals from a minor. For the purposes of this section, a minor is any individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-02, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 18-349. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the Cherokee County Sheriff or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-02, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
Sec. 18-350. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the pawnbroker or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the Municipal Court for the City of Canton and the violator shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as with a city ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 20111020-02, § 1, 10-20-2011) 
ARTICLE XIII. - FIREWORKS SALES 

Sec. 18-351. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the terms consumer fireworks , consumer fireworks retail sales facility , consumer fireworks retail sales stand , distributor , fireworks , NFPA 1124 , nonprofit group , proximate audience , pyrotechnics , store . 
(b)  Fire chief , shall mean the City of Canton Fire Chief or his designees. 
(c)  As used in this article, the term consumer fireworks , or fireworks , shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term consumer fireworks , or fireworks , include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
(Ord. No. 2015-18, § 1, 11-19-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-352. - License required for temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(a)  A license shall be required for any person, firm, corporation, company, association, or partnership to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand within the city limits. 
(b)  Application shall be made to the fire chief. All statements made by the applicant in the application for a license shall be under oath. Any person who knowingly and willfully makes a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement of representation in an application for a license under this article shall be guilty of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks from any motor vehicle, from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle, or from a tent, canopy or membrane structure. 
(d)  A determination by the fire chief as to whether a distributor has met requirements for the issuance of a license pursuant to this subsection shall be made within 15 days of the submission of an application for any such license. Such application shall be in writing and upon such form as may be provided by the fire chief. If a determination has not been made within the time provided for by this paragraph, or for an appeal of a determination by such fire department, a distributor may seek review from the judge of the probate court of Cherokee County. The judge of the Probate Court of Cherokee County may provide for the issuance or nonissuance of a license and for the payment of license fees in such manner as is consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  A nonprofit group benefiting from the sale of consumer fireworks pursuant to this Code section shall directly participate in operating the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. It shall be unlawful for a nonprofit group or any agent or bona fide representative of a nonprofit group to knowingly lend the name of the nonprofit group or allow the identity of the nonprofit group to be used for the license under this subsection if such nonprofit group is not directly participating in operating such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(f)  The City of Canton will expend such fees collected pursuant to this article for fire for public safety purposes. 
(g)  In making determinations as provided for in this article the fire chief shall reference the list maintained by the safety fire commissioner as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(d)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2015-18, § 1, 11-19-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 2, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-353. - Location of permanent and temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(a)  Permanent and temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands must comply with the City of Canton Unified Development Code and may be located only as permitted therein. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of the unified development code, it shall be lawful to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand only if such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand is: 
(1)  In compliance with the requirements for such a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand in the selling of consumer fireworks as provided for in NFPA 1124; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of a fire hydrant of a county, municipality, or other political subdivision or a fire department connection of a building affiliated with such consumer fireworks retail sales stand, unless the fire chief provides in writing that such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand may operate in excess of 1,000 feet from such fire hydrant or fire department connection; and 
(3)  Selling consumer fireworks of a distributor licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A § 25-10-5.1(c). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks from any motor vehicle or from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2015-18, § 1, 11-19-2015) 
ARTICLE XIV. - PET SHOPS 

Sec. 18-354. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Animal care facility means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations. 
Animal rescue organization means any not for profit organization which has tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. 
Cat means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus. 
Dog means a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris. 
Pet shop means a retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 3-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-355. - Restrictions on the sale of animals. 
(a)  A pet shop may not sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, or otherwise dispose of dogs or cats, but may offer for adoption only those dogs and cats that the pet shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with: 
(1)  An animal care facility; or 
(2)  An animal rescue organization. 
(b)  A pet shop shall not offer for adoption a dog or cat that is younger than eight weeks old. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 3-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-356. - Recordkeeping and disclosures. 
(a)  A pet shop shall maintain records sufficient to document the source of each dog or cat the pet shop acquires, for at least one year following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available immediately upon request by the city manager, the chief of police, or any authorized designee of these city officials. 
(b)  A pet shop that offers space for the adoption of dogs or cats shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of each such animal, a sign listing the name of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization from which the pet shop acquired each dog or cat. 
(c)  Each dog or cat offered for adoption in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Each recordkeeping violation under this section regarding a particular dog or cat shall constitute a separate offense. Each failure to post a sign as required by this section regarding a particular dog or cat shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 3-16-2017) 
Chapter 19 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Burial space means and consists of enough land in which persons may be buried in single grave spaces, as defined in the plat of the cemetery and as described in the deed of the burial rights to the owner thereof. The term shall include those references to cemetery burial spaces. 
Superintendent means the city employee designated as such by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-2. - Burials; location restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any dead body except in a public or private cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-3. - Burial space subject to restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations; authority of superintendent. 
(a)  All burial spaces owned and purchased within the public cemeteries of the city, and all such spaces sold, shall be subject to the restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations in this chapter and shall be subject to such other rules, regulations, amendments or alterations and ordinances as shall be adopted and regularly passed by the city from time to time. A reference to such rules and regulations in the deed or certificate of ownership shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth therein. 
(b)  The superintendent, or his designee, is authorized to supervise the upkeep, care and operations of city cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-4. - Purchase price of burial spaces. 
The purchase price of burial spaces in the public cemeteries shall be as set out in the fee schedule as set by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-5. - Burial rights in public cemeteries; supervision of sale and conveyances, execution, form and conditions of deed. 
(a)  Sale of burial rights; deed. The city clerk shall generally supervise the sale and conveyance of burial rights purchased in the public cemeteries of the city. The city clerk shall execute to the purchaser of the burial rights a cemetery deed made in substantially the following form: 
"City of Canton, Cherokee County, Georgia: 
This indenture, Made this _____ day of _____/_____/_____, in the Year of Our Lord, one thousand nine hundred and ___, between the City of Canton, Georgia, of the first part, and _______ of the second part. 
Witnesseth: That the party of the first part, for and in consideration of the sum of _______ Dollars, to it in hand paid by the said party of the second part, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, has granted, bargained, sold and conveyed, and by these presents doth grant, bargain and sell unto said party of the second part, _______, heirs and assigns, the exclusive rights of interment in and to a certain burial place in _______ Cemetery, in said city which is known and distinguished in the plan of said cemetery as (description) the number and description of said space being made with reference to the surveys and plats on file at City Hall and by which the parties to this conveyance acknowledge themselves bound; to have and to hold said exclusive privilege to the said party of the second part and _______ heirs forever, subject to all the requirements of any ordinance of the City of Canton now in force or hereafter ordained, regulating said cemetery, upon this express condition, nevertheless, that no sale or transfer of the rights of burial and interment in said burial space _______ shall at any time by party of the second part or by any future owner be valid without the permission and approval of the City of Canton, and an entry of which shall be made on the books of the City of Canton, and upon the payment of the required transfer fee. And provided, that the party of the second part or any future owner of the burial and interment rights in said burial space _____/_____/_____ shall not at any time or times hereafter demand or receive any compensation for an interment in said burial space… 
And provided also that the rights and premises granted hereby shall be subject to the restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations made and to be made hereafter by said City of Canton for the government of its cemetery, burial space holders, visitors to the cemetery and burial of the dead. 
And the said party of the first part for itself and its successors, the said exclusive privilege, unto the said party of the second part against said party of the first part and its successors, and against all and every person, and persons whomsoever, will warrant and forever defend. 
In witness whereof, the said party of the first part hath hereunto signed its corporate name and affixed its corporate seal the day and year first above written. 
The City of Canton 
By: _____     Mayor of the City of Canton 
  
    _____     City Clerk of the City of Canton 
  
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
_____
_____
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-6. - Ownership construed; use and division; reversion to city. 
Ownership of a burial space consists only in the right of interment. The space can be used for no other purpose and cannot be divided into smaller portions than originally laid down in the burial space. Should a space holder die without devise of the space or any known descendants, title to such space shall revert to the city, for the protection of those who may be interred therein. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-7. - Deed to be issued. 
A deed or certificate of ownership shall be issued to each burial space holder on full payment of the purchase money of such burial space. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-8. - Right of purchaser; taking for debt or selling for secular use. 
When a right has once been purchased within the enclosure of a public cemetery for burial purposes, it becomes for all time the property of the purchaser and his transferees and cannot be taken for debt or sold for secular uses. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-9. - Owner's change of address, duty to notify city; sufficient and proper legal notification described. 
It shall be the duty of a burial space owner to notify the city of any change in his post office address. Notice sent to a burial space owner at the last address on file in the office of the city clerk shall be considered a sufficient and proper legal notification. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-10. - Certain rights and privileges reserved by city. 
The following rights and privileges are hereby expressly reserved by the city in its conveyance of any cemetery burial space: At any time and from time to time, the city may: 
(1)  Resurvey, enlarge, diminish, replat, alter in shape or size or otherwise change all or any part, portion or subdivision of the property mapped and platted. 
(2)  File amended maps or plats thereof and use the same for the erection of buildings or for any purposes or uses connected with, incident to, or convenient for the care, preservation or preparation, for the disposal or interment of dead human bodies, or other cemetery purposes, together with easements and rights-of-way over and through such premises for the privilege of, installing, maintaining and operating pipelines, conduits or drains for sprinklers, drainage, electric or communication lines, or for any other like purposes. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-11. - Easements or rights of interment in roads, drives, alleys or walks. 
No easement or right of interment is granted by the city to any burial space in any road, drive, alley or walk within a cemetery, but such road, drive, alley or walk may be used as long as the city devotes it to that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-12. - Transfer or assignment; prerequisite to validity. 
No transfer or assignment of any cemetery burial space or interest therein shall be valid until the consent of the city has been endorsed thereon and the same has been recorded on the books of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-13. - Charge for transfer of ownership. 
The city may fix a charge for all transfers of ownership of burial spaces. No transfer of ownership shall be complete or effective until all charges are paid. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-14. - Subdivision of burial spaces; interment of persons with no interest in burial space. 
The subdivision of cemetery burial spaces is not allowed by any person except the city, and no person not having an interest therein shall be interred in any space except by written consent of all persons interested in such space and the city; provided, however, a relative of any record owner may be buried in such space, as provided in this chapter or by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-15. - Family burial space inalienable. 
(a)  Reversion to city. Whenever an interment of the remains of a member or of a relative of a member of the family of the record owner, or of the remains of the record owner, is made in a burial space transferred by deed or certificate of ownership to an individual owner and the owner dies without making disposition of the space either in his will by a specific device, or by a written declaration filed and recorded in the office of the city clerk, the space thereby becomes inalienable and shall be held as the family burial space of the owner, with title to the same reverting to the city for protection of those who may be interred therein. 
(b)  Right to burial without consent. In a family burial space one grave, niche or crypt may be used for the owner's interment; one for the owner's surviving spouse, if any, who by law has a right of interment in it; and in those remaining, if any, the parents and children of the deceased owner, in order of death, may be interred without the consent of any person claiming any interest in the burial space. 
(c)  Order of right of interment. If no parent or child survives, the right of interment goes in the order of death, first, to the spouse of any child of the record owner, and second, in the order of death, to the next heir at law of the owner or the spouse of any heir at law. 
(d)  Interment right waived in favor of other relative. Any surviving spouse, parent, child or heir who has a right of interment in a family burial space may waive such right in favor of any other relative, or spouse of a relative, of either deceased owner or of his spouse, and upon such waiver the remains of the person in whose favor the waiver is made may be interred in the burial space. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-16. - Right of spouse of owner—Described. 
The spouse of any owner of any burial space which contains more than one interment space has a vested right of interment of his remains in the burial space, and any person thereafter becoming the spouse of the owner has a vested right of interment of his remains in the space if more than one interment space is unoccupied at the time the person becomes the spouse of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-17. - Same—Vested right of spouse; joinder prerequisite to divesting. 
No conveyance or other action of the owner without the written consent or joinder of the spouse of the owner divests the spouse of a vested right of interment, except that a final decree of divorce between them terminates the vested right of interment unless otherwise provided in the decree. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-18. - Burial spaces having several owners; representation by designated owner. 
When there are several owners of the rights of interment in a burial space, they may designate one or more persons to represent the burial space and file written notice of designation with the city clerk. In the absence of such notice or of written objection to its so doing, the city is not liable to any owner for interring or permitting an interment or refusing an interment in the burial space upon the request or direction of any co-owners of the burial space. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-19. - Waiver of vested right. 
A vested right of interment may be waived and is so waived and terminated upon the interment elsewhere of the remains of the person in whom those rights are vested. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-20. - Scope of vested right. 
No vested right of interment gives to any person the right to have his remains interred in any interment space in which the remains of any deceased having a prior vested right of interment have been interred, nor does it give any person the right to have the remains of more than one deceased person interred in a single interment space. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-21. - Authorization to open burial space. 
The city may inter or open a burial space for any purpose on proper written authorization by any burial space owner of record made out on forms approved by the city and duly filed in the office of the city clerk unless there are written instructions to the contrary on file in such office. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-22. - Owners shall not permit interments for remuneration. 
Cemetery owners shall not allow any interments to be made in their burial spaces for a remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-23. - Raising or depressing surface of burial spaces or graves prohibited. 
Except for temporary conditions caused by a burial, the owners of cemetery burial spaces are prohibited from raising or depressing the surface of any burial space or grave above or below the surrounding ground. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-24. - Authority for grading, landscaping, improvements, plantings, interments, disinterments and removals. 
In the cemetery, all grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind and all care on burial spaces shall be done, and all trees and shrubs and herbage of any kind shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed, and all openings and closing of burial spaces, and all interments, disinterments and removals shall be made only by the authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-25. - Improvements or alterations of individual property; direction and approval of city; removal when unsightly. 
All improvements or alterations of individual property in the cemetery shall be under the direction of and subject to the consent, satisfaction and approval of the city; and should they be made without its written consent, the city shall have the right to remove, alter or change such improvements or alterations at the expense of the burial space owner, or in any event at any time when, in its judgment, they become unsightly to the eye. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-26. - Right to remove detrimental trees and shrubs. 
If any tree or shrub, situated in any burial space, shall, by means of its roots or branches, become detrimental in any way to the adjoining space, avenue or walk, it shall be the duty and privilege of the city, and it hereby reserves the right, to enter upon the burial space and remove the trees or shrubs, or any part thereof. But no tree growing in any burial space or border shall be pruned or removed without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-27. - Flowers, trees, shrubs and herbage—Right to prevent removal. 
The city reserves the right to prevent the removal of any flowers, floral designs, trees, shrubs or plants or herbage of any kind from any cemetery. No flowers will be removed from any grave space without the permission of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-28. - Same—Authority to remove; liability for frames or baskets. 
The city shall have the authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind from the cemetery when, in the judgment of the superintendent, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased. The city shall not be liable for damage to floral pieces, baskets or frames in which or to which such floral pieces are attached. The superintendent is authorized to remove funeral flowers after seven days. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-29. - Same—Gathering or breaking; feeding or disturbing birds or animals. 
All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants or feeding or disturbing the birds or other animals life in the cemeteries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-30. - Control of floral arrangements; disposal of floral frames. 
(a)  Only one floral arrangement shall be placed on each grave and only at the base of the monument. Any flowers which are determined by the superintendent to be outside of the appropriate area may be removed by the city. 
(b)  The city requires that all permanent floral arrangements be placed in marble or granite containers. All other containers are prohibited, except as may be permitted by the superintendent. 
(c)  The superintendent is authorized to remove funeral flowers after seven days unless notified by the family or space owners. 
(d)  Floral frames, when removed from the burial space, unless called for within ten days by those lawfully entitled to them, shall be disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-31. - Signs, notices or advertisements prohibited. 
No signs, notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in any cemetery, except by the city. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-32. - Responsibility for damage. 
The city disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control, and especially from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, a common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or orders of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-33. - Interments, disinterments and removals; time, manner and charges for same; opening and closing graves; grave service; embalming. 
(a)  All interments, disinterments and removals shall be done by funeral homes licensed by the state. The funeral homes must notify the city before any work is done, as provided in this chapter. All work must be done in the manner provided in this chapter and any other regulation of the city, and subject to the payment of such charges as are fixed by the city. 
(b)  No grave service will be made ready for burial before one hour before sunrise or later than one hour before sunset. 
(c)  All state and local health laws must be complied with prior to any interment in any city cemetery. 
(d)  All interments must be inside containers of minimum standard as approved by the superintendent (minimum standard is pine construction or equal). These containers must be in vaults made of 12-gauge steel (minimum), or concrete, unless approved by the superintendent. All vaults shall be placed underground. 
(e)  No interment will be made in any city cemetery before payment of the fees specified in the regulations in the office of the city clerk, unless credit has been extended by the city clerk. 
(f)  No interment will be made in any city cemetery until the owner of the burial space shall execute an affidavit directing interment of the remains of the deceased in such burial space. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-34. - Charges for opening graves, interment and disinterment. 
The charges for opening graves, interment and disinterment in the public cemeteries shall be as set out in the fee schedule of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-35. - Delay of interment; liability and right of city. 
The city shall be in no way liable for any delay in the interment of a body where a protest to the interment has been made, or where this chapter has not been complied with. The city may require any protest to be in writing and to be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-36. - Reservation of right to require specified notice before interment. 
The right is reserved by the city to insist upon at least 24 hours' notice before any interment. Interment requests with less than 24 hours' notice may be refused. All requests with less than 12 hours' notice shall be refused. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-37. - Liability for interment permit and identify of person sought to be interred or cremated. 
The city shall not be liable in damages for an error in the interment permit nor for a mistake or error in the identity of a person sought to be interred or cremated. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-38. - Responsibility for telephone orders or mistakes caused by vague instructions. 
The city shall not be held responsible for any order given by telephone, or for any mistake occurring from the want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size and location in a space where interment is desired. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-39. - Procedure when instructions from burial space owner not available. 
When instructions from the burial space owner regarding the location of an interment space in a burial space cannot be obtained, or are indefinite, or when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened when specified, the city may, in its discretion, open it in such location in the burial space as it deems best and proper so as not to delay the funeral; and the city shall not be liable in damages for any error so made. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-40. - Disinterment—Permission prerequisite; liability of city. 
No disinterment from any space shall be made except with the express permission of the city clerk first obtained. The city clerk may insist that an order from a proper court of law first be secured by those seeking the disinterment. The city shall have no liability for damage to any casket, burial case, vault or urn, incurred in the disinterment or removal. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-41. - Removal of body for specified reasons repugnant to sense of decency prohibited. 
Removal of a body or cremated remains by the heirs of the deceased so that the burial space may be sold for profit to themselves, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the original burial space owner, or if repugnant to the ordinary sense of decency, is absolutely forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-42. - Limitation on number of bodies interred in same grave, vault, crypt or niche. 
Not more than one body, nor the remains of more than one body, shall be interred in any one grave, vault, crypt or niche. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-43. - Visitation hours; loitering in cemeteries. 
(a)  City cemeteries shall be open for visitation during the following hours, unless otherwise posted: Between one-half hour after sunup and one-half hour before sundown. 
(b)  Loitering in city cemeteries is prohibited. The presence of any person in any of such cemeteries during prohibited hours shall be prima facie evidence of loitering. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-44. - Refreshments prohibited within cemeteries; exception. 
No person shall have refreshments within any cemetery except as authorized by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-45. - Markers; temporary markers. 
(a)  All graves shall have a permanent slab or marker made of either bronze, marble, or granite. No grave may contain both a slab and a marker unless the marker is a family marker. No slab or marker may be more than six inches in height above the level ground of the burial space. 
(b)  The marker shall contain identification information for the person buried in the grave. 
(c)  A temporary marker may be placed on the grave for 120 days, at which time a permanent marker shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-46. - Persons within grounds to use only avenues, walks, alleys and roads. 
Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the avenues, walks, alleys and roads and shall not walk, drive or ride upon the burial spaces. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-47. - Motor vehicles regulated. 
Motor vehicles shall not be driven through the cemetery grounds at a greater speed than ten miles per hour, and must always be kept on the right-hand side of the cemetery roadway. Motor vehicles are not allowed to park or to come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such motor vehicles are in attendance at the funeral. No off-road recreational vehicles shall be allowed in city cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-48. - Interpretation, application and enforcement of provisions. 
This chapter shall be interpreted, applied and enforced by the public works committee. In cases of hardship, necessity or unreasonableness in the application or enforcement of any of the rules and regulations in this chapter, the majority of the public works committee shall have the right to alter the application and enforcement of these rules and regulations so as to relieve the hardship or unreasonableness, and the same shall not constitute forfeiture nor shall it have the effect of changing or abridging any rule, covenant or regulation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 19-49. - Violation of chapter. 
Any person performing any act forbidden by this chapter or failing to perform any act required by this chapter shall have breached this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 20111215-02, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Chapter 22 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1; elections and primaries generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.; November election, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-9; registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq.; selection and qualification of candidates, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-130; subversive persons not to be nominated or elected, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-7; persons convicted of certain crimes not to be eligible for nomination or election to public office or to serve as primary or election official, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-8; qualifications and oath of election officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-214. 

Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of state rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board which pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code contained in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq., are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 26-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and time to time when required. 
(Code 2002, § 26-2) 
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-19; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; war on terrorism local assistance, O.C.G.A. § 36-75-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this chapter from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Doing business means any building contractor shall be deemed to be doing business subject to the requirements of this section if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the incorporated areas of the city, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the incorporated areas of the city expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the incorporated areas of the city expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Exempt individuals , unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, includes those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, or utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the city, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors properly registered according to this Code, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include those fees collected by the city on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the city pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
State of emergency , pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), means, as a condition declared by the governor when in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the mayor and city council. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Code 1985, § 4-3-1; Code 2002, § 22-1; Min. of 10-5-1995; Ord. of 4-18-2002(2), § 1; Ord. of 4-18-2002(3), § 1; Ord. of 4-18-2002(4), § 1; Ord. of 4-18-2002(5), § 1; Ord. of 2008(1), § I) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this chapter or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 4-3-6; Code 2002, § 22-3; Ord. of 2008(1), § VI) 
Sec. 26-3. - Construction of chapter. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 4-3-7; Code 2002, § 22-4) 
Sec. 26-4. - Powers during emergency or disaster. 
Upon an actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other disaster which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city and county, the chairperson of the county commission and/or mayor of the city or, in his absence, his legally appointed successor may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues the emergency powers provided in this section, in addition to other specific authority provided in this chapter: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Ord. of 2008(1), § IV) 
Secs. 26-5—26-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OFFICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-27. - Established. 
There is hereby established the Canton/Cherokee County Emergency Management Office as established in an agreement with the governing officials of the county and the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-3-2; Code 2002, § 22-31) 
Sec. 26-28. - Duties of director. 
Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the county sheriff and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. The director of the county emergency management agency shall also serve as the single point of contact for the NIMS/ICS program. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county and city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist county and city officials in organizing county and, where required, city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Maintain the emergency management office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the city/county emergency management and disaster program, including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management office. 
(4)  Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county plan for the emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonant with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the mayor and city council and county commission for approval and thence to the state director for approval. 
(5)  Render reports to local governing officials as required. 
(6)  During periods of declared emergency and under the supervision of the city and county governing officials, coordinate the activities of the city/county emergency operating center staff. 
(Code 1985, § 4-3-2; Code 2002, § 22-32; Ord. of 2008(1), § II) 
Sec. 26-29. - Organization; functions. 
(a)  The city/county emergency management organization shall be established around existing city/county departments and agencies, and the emergency management functions listed in section 26-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of the departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function, assisted by the emergency management office. Such plans will be submitted through the emergency management director to the city council and county commissioners for approval. 
(Code 1985, § 4-3-3; Code 2002, § 22-33; Ord. of 2008(1), § III) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of emergency management personnel, oath, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-34. 
Sec. 26-30. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city and county performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as city and county officers and employees. 
(Code 1985, § 4-3-5; Code 2002, § 22-34; Ord. of 2008(1), § V) 
Secs. 26-31—26-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-49. - Registration of building and repair services during a state of emergency. 
(a)  Building contractor registration required. No person, firm, partnership corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the incorporated areas of the city consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the business license clerk and having paid fees as provided by this section. 
(b)  Registration; certification. All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the incorporated areas of the city during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the business license clerk, or such other person designated by the mayor and city council at the city hall or such other place or places designated by the city. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the city with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the city. 
(c)  Registration fees. Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(d)  Penalties. Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the city as required shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable as defined in section 1-12. Each day a building contractor does business in the incorporated areas of the city without complying with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Transferability. Each certification issued under this section is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the city or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(f)  Display of registration certification. Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(g)  Revocation; suspension. Each certification granted under this section is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The city hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor or the building contractor's agent or employee, acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other city, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the city desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time, and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Code 2002, § 22-5; Ord. of 4-18-2002(5), §§ 2—8) 
Sec. 26-50. - Imposition of curfews during times of emergency or disaster. 
(a)  Institution of curfew. 
(1)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the mayor and city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the mayor and city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the city. 
(2)  All of the territory of the incorporated city shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution instituting the curfew. 
(3)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings, or any other public places in all or a delineated part of incorporated city limits during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(c)  Penalties. Any individual violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable as stated in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 22-6; Ord. of 4-18-2002(4), §§ 2—4) 
Sec. 26-51. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the mayor and city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the mayor and city council or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the mayor and city council, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(c)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the mayor and city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the mayor and city council, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency, but proper permits still must be obtained. 
(d)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the mayor and city council or their designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the mayor and city council, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the city building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the mayor and city council or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Code 2002, § 22-7; Ord. of 4-18-2002(3), § 2) 
Sec. 26-52. - Overcharging for goods, materials, services and housing during a state of emergency prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the city has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the city. 
(b)  Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this division upon conviction shall be punishable as defined in section 1-12. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 22-8; Ord. of 4-18-2002(2), §§ 2, 3) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 32 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General municipal authority for health and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-4; state health care and planning, O.C.G.A. § 31-6-1 et seq.; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.; smoke free air, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.; smoking prohibited in local government buildings, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKE-FREE AIR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Smoke-free air, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.; smoking prohibited in local government buildings, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2. 

Sec. 32-19. - Findings and purpose. 
The mayor and city council hereby find the following: 
(1)  Tobacco smoking has long been recognized as a leading cause of death in the United States: It is responsible for almost half a million deaths each year, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Tobacco smoking causes cancer in the lungs, larynx, and throat. Additionally, smoking can cause respiratory illnesses and places smokers at greater risk for developing heart disease. As the evidence is overwhelming that smoking causes cancer, there is also concern that nonsmokers exposed to others' tobacco smoke may also be at risk. The smoke that filters into these environments has been labeled as passive smoke or secondhand smoke. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency estimates that secondhand smoke is deadly. It causes 3,000 lung cancer deaths and 35,000 heart disease deaths in nonsmokers each year. 
(2)  The technical term for passive or secondhand smoke is environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), which has been labeled one of the most widespread and harmful of all indoor pollutants by the EPA in its June 1989 publication Indoor Air Facts No. 5: Environmental Tobacco Smoke. ETS is contrasted with mainstream smoke (MS) which is the smoke that is inhaled by the smoker through the mouthpiece, filter, or end of a lit tobacco product. MS and ETS possess the same chemical makeup and potential toxicity, although MS is the more direct means of inhaling the carcinogenic and toxic agents found in tobacco products. ETS is defined by the EPA to include both the secondhand smoke which is exhaled by smokers and the side stream smoke which is emitted from the burning end of cigarettes, cigars and pipes. The EPA estimates that one-half of the smoke emitted from a burning tobacco product is side stream smoke. The same carcinogens and toxins exist in both ETS and MS, regardless of the type of tobacco product being smoked. 
(3)  In January 1993, the EPA designated ETS as a Class A known human carcinogen and concluded that it was responsible for approximately 3,000 deaths a year due to lung cancer. At that time, the EPA also summarized the health risks from exposure to ETS, which contains over 4,000 compounds, many of which are known or suspected human carcinogens themselves and other toxic agents. The EPA concluded that exposure to ETS had a significant public health impact including risk of lung cancer, increased risk of lower respiratory tract infections, especially to infants and children, increased prevalence of fluid in the middle ear, symptoms of upper respiratory tract irritation, a small but significant decrease in lung function, especially in children, increased severity of symptoms of asthma and increased risk of asthma in people who had not previously displayed symptoms. An EPA research report, Respiratory Health Effects of Passive Smoking: Lung Cancer and Other Disorders, Environmental protection Agency, December 1992, (EPA study), concluded that nearly all Americans are exposed to ETS in the home, at work, or in public places. 
(4)  The mayor and city council have a duty in promulgating effective laws to protect the health, safety and welfare of it citizens as well as visitors to the city. It is the city council's intention to prohibit smoking in public places and the workplace, including particular prohibitions which will help protect children and nonsmoking adults from the health hazards presented by exposure to ETS. 
(5)  Accordingly, the mayor and city council find and declare that the purposes of this article are: 
a.  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and 
b.  To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Code 2002, § 34-16; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-16, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 32-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attached bar means the bar area of a restaurant or anywhere in a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are served. 
Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
Children's day care facility means a structure where care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day is provided on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article, the term "children's day care facility" includes, but not be limited to, the term "nursery school," "early learning center," "prekindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "preschool." 
Dining area means an interior or exterior area (such as porch, patio, or courtyard) containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
E-cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, that provides a vapor of nicotine and/or other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, or e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his services for a nonprofit entity. 
Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity, who employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed means all space between a floor and ceiling that is bordered on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling. The term "enclosed" includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies. 
Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term "establishment" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; 
(2)  Grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; 
(3)  Service stations, stores or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; 
(4)  Barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; 
(5)  Video arcade, pool hall, and other amusement centers; 
(6)  Offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, and architectural services; 
(7)  Banks, savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; 
(8)  Hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public; and 
(9)  Restaurants and cafeterias. 
Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center, or diagnostic and treatment center as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1, as amended. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of senior citizens. 
Personal care home means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, nonrelated persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. The term "personal care homes" also means residential care facilities for the elderly. The term "personal care homes" includes those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication and provision of transient medical care. The term "personal care home" does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
Private function means a gathering of persons for the purpose of deliberation, education, instruction, entertainment, amusement, or dining, where membership or specific invitation is a prerequisite to entry and where the event is not intended to be open to the public. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care facility, an adult day care facility or a health care facility. 
Restaurant means any part of a coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeteria, including restrooms or employee lounges, and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, tobacco, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes the use of an e-cigarette that creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this article. 
Specialty retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller skates and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
(Code 2002, § 34-17; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-17, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 21-12A-2. 
Sec. 32-21. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with any of its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding: 
(1)  Fifty dollars for a first violation. 
(2)  One hundred dollars for a second violation of this article within one year. 
(3)  Two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of this article within one year. 
(d)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(e)  Violations of this article by one who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to that person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(Code 2002, § 34-26; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-26, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 32-22. - Application of article to city-owned facilities. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in and on all property owned, leased or operated by the city, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles; 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds, or other outdoor areas; 
(3)  Sidewalks; 
(4)  Parking lots; and 
(5)  Streets within the Central Business District, as defined by the Unified Development Code and the Zoning Map. 
(Code 2002, § 34-18; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-18, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
State Law reference— Smoking prohibited in local government buildings, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2. 
Sec. 32-23. - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Elevators. 
(2)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and any other common-use areas. 
(3)  Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit under the authority of the city, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(4)  Service lines. 
(5)  Retail stores. 
(6)  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, attorneys' offices and other offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels. 
(7)  Restaurants. 
(8)  Public areas of aquariums, zoos, galleries, libraries and museums, when open to the public. 
(9)  Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except performers when smoking is part of a stage production. 
(10)  Sports arenas and convention halls, including bowling facilities. 
(11)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(12)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices, and dentists' offices. 
(13)  Any child care service facility, playground, and children's institution. 
(14)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(15)  Polling places. 
(16)  Bingo games or other gaming rooms. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Code 2002, § 34-19; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-19, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 32-24. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance of 15 feet from the main entrance of an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(Code 2002, § 34-20; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-20, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
State Law reference— Smoking prohibited in enclosed public places, O.C.G.A. § 21-12A-4. 
Sec. 32-25. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy which shall contain the following requirements: Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employees' lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(c)  The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption. 
(d)  All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective employee. 
(Code 2002, § 34-21; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-21, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
State Law reference— Smoking prohibited in enclosed area within places of employment, O.C.G.A. § 21-12A-5. 
Sec. 32-26. - Where smoking not regulated. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restriction of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. 
(4)  Outside dining areas of restaurants. 
(5)  In work areas designated as smoking areas that are separated from smoke-free areas by floor to ceiling walls and which are ventilated separately from the smoke-free areas. 
(6)  All bars and restaurants to which access is denied to any person under the age of 18 years and that do not employ any individual under the age of 18 years; or private rooms in restaurants and bars if such rooms are enclosed and have an air handling system independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the private room is exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Code 2002, § 34-22; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-22, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 20080103, 1-3-2008; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
State Law reference— Areas exempt from smoking regulations, O.C.G.A. § 21-12A-6. 
Sec. 32-27. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other area where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other area. 
(b)  Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such area. 
(Code 2002, § 34-23; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-23, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
State Law reference— No smoking signs and removal of ashtrays, O.C.G.A. § 21-12A-8. 
Sec. 32-28. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be implemented by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  The building and safety services department, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, shall obtain a self-certification from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(e)  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this article may inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 34-24; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-24, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 32-29. - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant or customer exercises any right to a smokefree environment as afforded by this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-25; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-25, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 32-30. - Liberal construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purpose. 
(Code 2002, § 34-27; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-27, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 32-31. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Code 2002, § 34-28; Ord. No. 2004-0415, § 34-28, 4-15-2004; Ord. No. 2018-0517-04, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Chapter 33 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal and magistrate courts regarding nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-12-5; misdemeanor nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6; placement of posters, signs, and advertisements on public or private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.; dogs as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7; unlawful junkyards as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-246. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 33-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 30-71) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 33-2. - Nuisances delineated. 
(a)  General regulation. The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)  Certain acts or conditions deemed offensive. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)  Obnoxious and offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind into any street, alley or public place or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Stagnant water. Standing and stagnant water on the premises. 
(6)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading, and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(7)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(9)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
a.  Each such enclosure shall be maintained in a sanitary condition subject to the approval of the city. Each place used for feeding, stabling, pasturing or keeping any livestock or domestic fowl shall be kept free from offensive odors, flies, rodents, and other pests. 
b.  Any building, pen, storage bin, or other structure used or constructed for the feeding, stabling, maintaining or keeping of any livestock or domestic fowl shall conform to the applicable provisions of the building, electrical and plumbing codes of the city. 
c.  It shall be unlawful to keep, feed, breed, stable, pasture, herd or maintain livestock or domestic fowl on or in any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable, or other enclosure in the city, any part of which enclosure is nearer than 76 feet to the property line. 
d.  It shall be unlawful for any livestock to be tied or staked upon any open or unfenced lot or land within the city limits. 
(10)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(11)  Depositing trash, garbage, and refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
a.  Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and furnishings stored on the property and visible from a public street. 
b.  Trash, garbage or refuse cans, bins, boxes or other such containers stored in front or side yards visible from a public street except for normal solid waste pickups. Garbage containers used in normal solid waste pickups shall be removed from the curb as soon as possible, but in any event not later than noon on the day following collection. 
c.  Vehicle parts or other articles of personal property which are abandoned or left in a state of partial construction or repair in front yards, side yards, driveways, sidewalks or walkways and are visible from a public street. 
d.  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children including abandoned, broken or neglected equipment and appliances, machinery, refrigerators, freezers, and hazardous pools, ponds and excavations including abandoned wells. 
(12)  Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleaned. 
(13)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery, etc. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more, except in licensed junkyards. The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(14)  Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any city street, lane or alley. 
(15)  Statutory nuisances. Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(16)  Graffiti, etc. Graffiti or other words, letters or drawings which remain on the exterior of any building, fence, property or object and are visible from a public street. 
(17)  LED lighting on commercial properties. Any LED light affixed to the exterior of any commercial building or affixed to the interior as a means of outlining any window of a commercial building, where the lighting is visible from the exterior of the building. This section shall not apply to non-decorative lighting that is part of a fixture necessary for security, safety, or illumination of parking areas or entrances to the building. This section shall further not apply to any LED lighting existing as of April 16, 2015, which lighting shall may remain in place until such time as the name of the person or entity who holds the occupational tax certificate for the business utilizing the LED lighting changes. 
(Code 1985, §§ 11-1-11(a), 11-2-1; Code 2002, § 30-72; Ord. of 6-7-1990, § 1; Ord. No. 2002-06-27, § 30-72, 6-27-2002; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 4-16-2015; Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 33-3. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(Code 1985, §§ 11-1-11(a), 11-2-6; Code 2002, § 30-73) 
Sec. 33-4. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, and junked automobiles. 
(a)  Enclosed storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more, except in licensed junkyards, within the corporate city limits is a nuisance. 
(b)  The owner, tenant, lessee and/or occupant of any lot within the corporate city limits upon which the storage of property is made and also the owner and/or lessee of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate city limits, or otherwise by removing it to a location without the corporate limits. 
(Code 2002, § 30-76) 
Sec. 33-5. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 33-6 and 33-7. 
(Code 1985, § 11-2-5; Code 2002, § 30-77) 
Sec. 33-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, adopted March 19, 2015, repealed § 33-6, which pertained to issuance of summons for abatement and derived from the Code of 1985, §§ 11-1-11(b), 11-2-3 and the Code of 2002, § 30-74. 
Sec. 33-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, adopted March 19, 2015, repealed § 33-7, which pertained to order for abatement and derived from the Code of 1985, §§ 11-1-11(c), 11-2-2, 11-2-4; the Code of 2002, § 30-75 and ordinance of June 7, 1990. 
Secs. 33-8—33-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, adopted March 19, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 33-33—33-39. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 33-11—33-17. 

Sec. 33-11. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the city limits of the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life, safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, building, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this section shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 33-12. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 33-13. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law; and 
(4)  Building and construction codes adopted as part of the City of Canton Unified Development Code. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 33-14. - Duties of owner; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The city council appoint or designate the city manager, code enforcement officers, the fire chief, the police chief, and their designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city of charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated, provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 41, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, or improved; or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in subsection (g) above shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Cherokee County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Cherokee County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection of real property ad valorem tax, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-539.1. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the City of Canton. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of Cherokee County. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this Code section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this Code section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(3)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life, safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 33-15. - Determinations by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities. 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Dilapidation. 
(4)  Disrepair. 
(5)  Structural defects. 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing circumstances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 33-16. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officers designated in this article shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions this article, including the following powers in addition to any other granted in this article: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes. 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence. 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 33-17. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the public officer shall be served as follows: At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all parties of interest whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For parties of interest whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-19-2015) 
Secs. 33-18—33-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCE VEGETATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly article II, was renumbered as article III as a result of a new article II added by Ord. No. 2015-03, adopted March 19, 2015. 

Sec. 33-33. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city and any weeds, grasses or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement, as provided in this division. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  This division shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county and to the original city lots. It shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 30-106; Ord. No. 2002-06-27, § 30-106, 6-27-2002) 
Sec. 33-34. - Height restriction. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of eight inches above the ground. 
(Code 2002, § 30-107; Ord. No. 2002-06-27, § 30-107, 6-27-2002) 
Sec. 33-35. - Abatement notice—Procedure. 
(a)  For a violation of this division, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally or may be served by registered or certified mail or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(Code 2002, § 30-108) 
Sec. 33-36. - Same—Failure to comply; city abatement procedure. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to section 33-35, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property, and the contractor is authorized to enter the property and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work and, if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the city treasurer for payment. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)  If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required of section 33-35 was given, that the work was performed and the cost thereof paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, signed by the treasurer and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply, but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern" and shall: 
(1)  Describe with reasonable particularity the property involved; 
(2)  Contain a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation; and 
(3)  Notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. 
In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Code 2002, § 30-109) 
Sec. 33-37. - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code and all city ordinances, laws or regulations or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 2002, § 30-110) 
Secs. 33-38—33-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOSQUITO CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly article III, was renumbered as article IV as a result of a new article II added by Ord. No. 2015-03, adopted March 19, 2015. 

Sec. 33-63. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any section of this article is a nuisance. 
(Code 2002, § 30-141) 
Sec. 33-64. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs except horse troughs in frequent use, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
(Code 1985, §§ 11-4-1, 11-4-4; Code 2002, § 30-142) 
Sec. 33-65. - Methods of treatment to prevent collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 33-64 directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
(7)  Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Code 1985, § 11-4-6; Code 2002, § 30-143) 
Sec. 33-66. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-4-2; Code 2002, § 30-144) 
Sec. 33-67. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the conditions, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Code 1985, § 11-4-3; Code 2002, § 30-145) 
Sec. 33-68. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing this article, the health officer may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction. 
(Code 1985, § 11-4-5; Code 2002, § 30-146) 
Secs. 33-69—33-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly article IV, was renumbered as article V as a result of a new article II added by Ord. No. 2015-03, adopted March 19, 2015. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 33-95. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)  Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Is left unattended on a public street, road, or highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim thereto; 
(4)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim thereto; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim thereto. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
(Code 2002, § 30-176) 
Sec. 33-96. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant, or otherwise to store or deposit or cause or permit to be stored or deposited any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate city limits. 
(Code 2002, § 30-177) 
Sec. 33-97. - Removal required. 
Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the police department shall remove the motor vehicle or cause the removal at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. 
(Code 2002, § 30-178) 
Sec. 33-98. - Notice of removal to owner and state. 
(a)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the state bureau of investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(Code 2002, § 30-179) 
Sec. 33-99. - Lien. 
Any person who removes or stores any motor vehicle which is or becomes an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a lien on such vehicle for the reasonable fees connected with such removal or storage plus the cost of any notification or advertisement. Such lien shall be enforced as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-11-4 and 40-11-5. 
(Code 2002, § 30-180) 
Secs. 33-100—33-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly article V, was renumbered as article VI as a result of a new article II added by Ord. No. 2015-03, adopted March 19, 2015. 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler that causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 33-127. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-8; Code 2002, § 30-26) 
Sec. 33-128. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to or be enforced against the following: 
(1)  Any city vehicle while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
(4)  Areas located outside of platted subdivisions or more than 1,720 feet from a platted subdivision. 
(5)  Consumer fireworks, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1, provided that the use of the consumer fireworks is in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2 and § 25-10-2.1. Consumer fireworks may be used from 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on any day, except that they may be used up to 11:59 on January 1, July 3, July 4 and December 31, and from 12:00 midnight to 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(Code 2002, § 30-27; Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 33-129. - Scope. 
The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(Code 2002, § 30-28) 
Sec. 33-130. - Horns; signaling devices. 
The following shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city except as a danger warning. 
(2)  The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(3)  The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity. 
(4)  The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust. 
(5)  The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(1); Code 2002, § 30-29) 
Sec. 33-131. - Radios, phonographs and other sound-producing machines or devices. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto shall be a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(2); Code 2002, § 30-30) 
Sec. 33-132. - Loudspeakers, amplifiers and other advertising devices. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the city clerk or mayor and city council shall be a violation of this article. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(Code 1985, §§ 11-1-9(13), 11-1-10; Code 2002, § 30-31) 
Sec. 33-133. - Yelling; shouting; hooting; whistling; singing. 
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 30-32) 
Sec. 33-134. - Animals and birds. 
The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-3-28; Code 2002, § 30-33) 
Sec. 33-135. - Construction, land construction and/or repair of buildings. 
Construction work shall include: (1) pouring concrete and idling of concrete mixing trucks, (2) operating construction-related equipment, (3) performing outside construction work for the purposes of erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, structure or project, (4) operating a pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist or other construction-type device, and (5) loading and unloading of construction materials or idling of delivery trucks. For the purposes of this section, "occupied" shall mean a habitable residential dwelling receiving electrical service. The distance to an occupied residence shall be measured from the exterior walls of the building or portions thereof. 
(1)  Start/stop times. 
a.  Construction work (residential): All construction work within 500 feet of residential zones and within 1,500 feet of an occupied residence shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. Construction work associated with the installation of infrastructure associated with a new residential subdivision shall notify all property owners within 500 feet of the project that construction work is beginning. This notification shall be sent to those property owners a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the commencement of construction work. A sample notification letter is available at the Canton Community Development Department. 
b.  Construction work (non-residential): All construction work within 500 feet of residential zones and within 1,500 feet of an occupied residence shall not begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. Non-residential construction work shall notify all property owners within 500 feet of the project that construction work is beginning. This notification shall be sent to those property owners a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the commencement of construction work. A sample notification letter is available at the Canton Community Development Department. 
c.  Weekends: Construction work is not allowed on Sundays. Construction work is allowed on Saturdays. Saturday construction work shall not begin prior to 9:00 a.m. and must stop by 6:00 pm. 
(2)  Permit. All construction work is subject to a permit to be obtained from the canton community development department (LDP, building, clearing, clearing/grubbing, etc.). 
(3)  After hours work permit. There are times when work must occur outside of the permissible hours. The requirements of this section do not apply for emergency work "...necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger." For non-emergency work outside of the permitted hours, you may apply for an after hours work permit. The after hours work permit shall go before the Canton City Council and the above notification standards shall be complied with for the after hours work permit. Construction work after hours work permits may be approved if the need is valid and livability impacts are minimal. A fee for the after hours work permit as established by city county [the city] and as amended from time to time by city council shall be paid upon the issuance of the after hours work permit. The after hours work permit application is available at canton community development department. 
(4)  Exemptions. 
a.  Emergency work which is required due to natural disasters or substantial accidents (e.g. — water pipe break and causes flooding, electrical short causes substantial damage). 
b.  Work done inside of buildings. 
c.  Landscaping, sod work and termite pre-treatment exempted: Landscaping and sod work, including delivery vehicles, and termite pre-treatment for pouring of concrete is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07, 5-19-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-07, adopted May 19, 2016, repealed the former § 33-135, and enacted a new § 33-135 as set out herein. The former § 33-135 pertained to construction or repair of buildings and derived from the Code of 1985, § 11-1-9(7) and the Code of 2002, § 30-34. 
Sec. 33-136. - Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 30-35) 
Sec. 33-137. - Piledrivers, hammers, other such appliances. 
The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, without a special permit from the mayor and city council shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 30-36) 
Sec. 33-138. - Blowers. 
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases of fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 30-37) 
Sec. 33-139. - Sound trucks. 
The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes and the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 30-38) 
Sec. 33-140. - Steam whistles. 
The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(4); Code 2002, § 30-39) 
Sec. 33-141. - Exhausts. 
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(5); Code 2002, § 30-40) 
Sec. 33-142. - Defect in vehicle or load. 
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(3); Code 2002, § 30-41) 
Sec. 33-143. - Loading; unloading; opening boxes. 
The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(9); Code 2002, § 30-42) 
Sec. 33-144. - Schools; courts; churches; hospitals. 
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while in session or adjacent to any hospital and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(8); Code 2002, § 30-43) 
Sec. 33-145. - Instruments to attract attention. 
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-9(12); Code 2002, § 30-44) 
Sec. 33-146. - Operation of motor vehicles. 
The operation of motor vehicles, including cars, trucks, motorcycles, upon any parking facility, public or private, so as to create unreasonable noise and to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighborhood shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 30-45) 
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Schedule of municipal court fines. 
The municipal court maintains a schedule of municipal court fines, as amended from time to time, that is adopted by the city council as though fully set forth in this chapter. A copy of the current version of the fine schedule is available in the office of the municipal court clerk. 
Sec. 34-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-1; Code 2002, § 34-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 34-3. - Discharge of weapons in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including pistol, rifle and shotgun, or to shoot an air gun, including BB gun and pellet gun, within the city, except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty and the military when on drill or parade or at a funeral in honor of the dead. However, it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB gun upon private property if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-2; Code 2002, § 34-2) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-103, 16-11-104; regulations of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 34-4. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be or appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness or by indecent condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-3; Code 2002, § 34-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 34-5. - Public drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  Except as may be permitted pursuant to section 6-379(h) (Special Event permit) or as permitted in the restaurant district as provided in section 6-9(b), it shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages while on or in any public way or upon any way that the public has the right of access to, including private parking areas open to the general public. 
(b)  Except as may be permitted pursuant to section 6-379(h) (Special Event permit) or as permitted in the restaurant district as provided in section 6-9(b), it shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages upon any city-owned property. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-4; Code 2002, § 34-4; Ord. No. 2018-0920-03, § 3, 9-20-2018) 
Sec. 34-6. - Alcoholic beverage possession prohibited at school events. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or carry into any enclosure, field or stadium where events sponsored or participated in by any public school are being held any intoxicating beverage or to have any intoxicating beverage in his possession while in or on such enclosure, field or stadium. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-5; Code 2002, § 34-5) 
Sec. 34-7. - Interfering with work carried on by city. 
No person shall interfere with any work being done by the city or anyone else doing any such work for the city by changing or obstructing the work, nor shall anyone change, break, remove or carry away any portion of any machinery, tool, implement or device while the machinery, tool, implement or device is being used for carrying on any work for the city. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-6l; Code 2002, § 34-6) 
Sec. 34-8. - Posting advertisements on poles, trees, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste or in any other manner fasten any bills, advertisements, or any other notices to any electric light or telephone pole or any tree within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-7; Code 2002, § 34-7) 
Sec. 34-9. - Outdoor burning in violation of order. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in outdoor burning in violation of a no burn order issued by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-14; Code 2002, § 34-9) 
Sec. 34-10. - Boating regulations. 
Under the authority provided in O.C.G.A. § 52-7-21, the City of Canton hereby adopts Code §§ 52-7-1 through 52-7-26, Official Code of Georgia Annotated (Title 52, Chapter 7, Article 1), known as the Georgia Boat Safety Act, as and for the City of Canton boating regulations as if recited verbatim in this section. 
(Ord. No. 20110616-03, § 1, 6-16-2011) 
Sec. 34-11. - Use of fireworks on public property. 
It shall be unlawful to use fireworks or consumer fireworks in any public right-of-way, in any public park, or on any public property. 
(Ord. 2016-09, § 2, 6-16-2016) 
Secs. 34-12—34-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOITERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 

Sec. 34-36. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-12. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-12; Code 2002, § 34-8(g); Ord. of 11-15-2001) 
Sec. 34-37. - Purpose. 
The provisions of this article are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and the general welfare of the city. 
(2)  To lessen congestion in the streets, street corners, public roadways, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks, intersections, or other public ways open for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  To improve and protect the aesthetic appearance of the city. 
(4)  To improve and protect the quality of life. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-12; Code 2002, § 34-8(a); Ord. of 11-15-2001) 
Sec. 34-38. - Loitering defined; circumstances warranting alarm. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances shall make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this article, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this article if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with such procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  A person may also commit the offense of loitering if he relocates from one position to another and regroups or generally hangs around after having been instructed by a law enforcement officer to disperse. This shall be prima facie evidence of intent to continue an unlawful act under this article and shall constitute a new offense after having been dispersed or cited for an offense under these provisions. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-12; Code 2002, § 34-8(b); Ord. of 11-15-2001) 
Sec. 34-39. - Public property. 
No person shall loiter, congregate or assemble on or near a public street, street corner, public roadway, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk, intersection or other public way open for pedestrian or vehicular traffic which: 
(1)  Unreasonably obstructs any person or vehicle. 
(2)  Creates an unreasonable disturbance. 
(3)  Solicits any unlawful activity. 
(4)  Harms or engages in conduct threatening harm to person or property. 
(5)  Causes any damage to any structure, plant or tree. 
(6)  Interferes with, moves, damages or alters in any way the operation of any barrier or fence, warning sign, signal or light placed on or near a public way for purposes of closing the public way or part thereof, or for purposes of ensuring the safety of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(7)  Breaches the peace through shouting, swearing, using provocative, obscene, hateful or profane language or gestures, or causing or enticing other persons to fight. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-12; Code 2002, § 34-8(c); Ord. of 11-15-2001) 
Sec. 34-40. - Private property open to the public. 
No person having entered private property open to the public shall refuse or fail to leave the premises immediately upon being requested to do so by the owner, the owner's lawful agent, or a person in lawful possession of such property. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-12; Code 2002, § 34-8(d); Ord. of 11-15-2001) 
Sec. 34-41. - Loitering by minors; curfew. 
No minor shall loiter in or at any public place or any private place open to the public between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and daylight immediately following, except where: 
(1)  The minor is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person having authority for the custody and control of such minor; 
(2)  The presence of the minor in such place is connected with or required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation, by reason of employment, inclusive of the time necessary for the minor to travel to and from the place of business at which he is employed; 
(3)  The minor is on an emergency errand directed by a parent, legal guardian or other person having authority for the custody and control of such minor; or 
(4)  The minor is returning directly from home from a meeting, entertainment or recreational activity. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-12; Code 2002, § 34-8(e); Ord. of 11-15-2001) 
Sec. 34-42. - Exceptions. 
Sections 34-39 and 34-40 shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  Where its application results with or is coupled with an act prohibited by any provision of any law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin. 
(2)  Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by any law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers. 
(3)  Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities. 
(4)  Where its application would result in an interference with or any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious opinions. 
(5)  Where there is a facility specifically equipped and designated to locate day or casual laborers for employment. 
(Code 1985, § 11-1-12; Code 2002, § 34-8(f); Ord. of 11-15-2001) 
Secs. 34-43—34-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PANHANDLING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal and county ordinances for issuance of permits to charitable organizations for solicitation of contributions on streets and highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-75. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive panhandling means and includes: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to sections 18-111 and 18-112 shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or words intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(Code 2002, § 54-340; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-340, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 34-76. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to aggressively panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor: 
(1)  Within any public area in the city in any public transportation vehicle, or at a bus stop; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(3)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
(4)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(b)  Unauthorized solicitation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Aggressive panhandling shall constitute an aggravated misdemeanor. 
(Code 2002, § 54-341; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-341, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 34-77. - Applicability. 
This article regulates the time, place and manner of solicitations and shall not prevent persons from exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Code 2002, § 54-342; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-342, 11-1-2007) 
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City and county recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; gifts of public parks or pleasure grounds to municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; park and recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; establishment of city and county supervised recreation, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3; political subdivisions to have environmental testing on property acquired for park or recreational area, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-18. - Penalty and enforcement provisions. 
A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-12, general penalty, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-24, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-19. - Enforcement officials. 
The public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee, or department personnel thereunder, shall: 
(1)  Establish, conduct and maintain a recreation system for the city in such a way as to employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner; 
(2)  Provide for, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other facilities owned or controlled by the city; 
(3)  Provide and conduct activities on properties under the control of the city, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners; 
(4)  Establish goals, procedures and programs to meet the city's recreational needs; these are on file at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-1, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-20. - Governing conduct. 
(a)  These rules and regulations are developed to set standards of conduct in the parks owned and operated by the city. These rules are designed to ensure the safety and enjoyment of park participants. 
(b)  Any person engaging in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of a park by citizens or who shall violate any ordinance of the city, park rules or regulations or law of the state shall leave the park upon notification by any authorized city employee or any law enforcement officer and shall not return to such park for a period of 24 hours. Refusal to leave such park when ordered or return to the park within the specified 24-hour period shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Create or maintain a nuisance as defined by state law or by this Code or pose a danger or threat to the health of another. 
(2)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove, any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving, paving material, water line or other public utility or parts or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post, or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility or park property or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(3)  Sell, possess or consume, by any person alcoholic beverages in any city park, except at a special event, as approved by mayor and city council. 
(4)  Smoke outside of designated smoking areas pursuant to section 32-22. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-2, 4-2-2009; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 38-21. - Hours of operation. 
No person shall be in a city park or upon any park land or park drive therein between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless there is an organized sporting, civic or cultural event which has the approval of the mayor and city council to extend beyond the designated hours of operation. No other person other than city personnel conducting city business shall occupy or be present in such parks during these hours. 
(Code 2002, § 38-31; Ord. of 4-1-1999, § 7-2-1(a); Ord. of 2-20-2003; Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-3, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-22. - Closing of parks. 
All parks shall be opened daily to the public, but may be declared closed to the public by the mayor and city council at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. In the event of an emergency or conditions not suitable for the public, the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee with the approval of the city manager may temporarily close parks. 
(Code 2002, § 38-32; Ord. of 4-1-1999, § 7-2-1(b); Ord. of 2-20-2003; Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-4, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-23. - Overnight sleeping or camping prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in a city park after closing hours or to otherwise set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight sleeping or camping. No person shall leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for that purpose. Any person found to be violating this section shall be ordered and/or escorted off the park grounds by the city police. 
(Code 2002, § 38-33; Ord. of 4-1-1999, § 7-2-1(c); Ord. of 2-20-2003) 
Sec. 38-24. - Recreational vehicle operation restricted. 
No person shall operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or nature in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes; provided that this section shall not apply to vehicles used for maintenance purposes or golf carts being operated on prescribed paths or vehicles using marked roadways, marked driveways, and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-5, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-25. - Driving vehicles on roadways; speed of vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon or across any part of any public park of the city except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. This section shall not apply to park employees whose duties require them to drive park maintenance equipment over such park areas. The public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee shall coordinate with the proper city departments or authorities to ensure proper, appropriate and adequate signage is in place to aid the implementation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any road in any city park at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee to cause signs specifying such limits to be placed at the entrance of each such park and at appropriate places within such parks so as to afford notice to the public of such limit. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-6, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-26. - Vehicle parking restricted. 
The parking of vehicles shall be permitted in approved parking areas as long as such parking is in accordance with traffic laws, rules and regulations of the parks department. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon any of the drives, roadways, avenues, or parking lots or at any other place within any city park when such person is not a user of the park or any of its related facilities. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-7, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-27. - Motor vehicles in Cecil Boling Park. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "motor vehicle" means any vehicle which is self-propelled and includes, but not be limited to, any moped, motorized cart, motorcycle, or off-road vehicle as defined by O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1 and 40-7-3. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within Cecil Boling Park in any area that is designated by posted signs as being off limits to motor vehicles. 
(Code 1985, § 7-1-1; Code 2002, § 38-1) 
Sec. 38-28. - Animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, possess or be in charge of a restrained or unrestrained animal, with the exception of service animals for disabled persons, in prohibited designated areas, which are posted in any city park, without first obtaining approval of the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, possess or be in charge of any unrestrained animal on walking trails of any city park property or any green space walking trails. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to walk dogs except at the facility designated as the dog park. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-8, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-29. - Bicycles, skateboards, scooters, in-line skates; restriction. 
No person shall ride a bicycle or other nonmotorized vehicle, including, but not limited to, skateboards, scooters or in-line skates in or on any athletic field, sidewalk or spectator area owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. To ensure public safety, authorized employees or public safety personnel shall prohibit nonmotorized vehicles in other areas of the park when necessary. Nonmotorized vehicles are allowed in Heritage Park but must be operated in a safe and responsible manner. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-9, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-30. - Group use of parks. 
Whenever any group desires to use a park for a particular purpose, such as a picnic, party, sports event or theatrical or other entertainment performance, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from city hall for such purpose, unless, the group is sponsored by the department as one of the department's scheduled programs. City hall shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department in this article, and in department regulations not contrary to this article. The permit will include the time, date, location and activity to be conducted by the group. A fee schedule for use of city parks is available at city hall. Such application shall contain a requirement for an indemnity bond, and/or onsite security to protect the city from liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-10, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-31. - Use of picnic areas. 
(a)  Park employees shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(b)  No person shall leave a picnic area before all fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, paper, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-11, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-32. - Youth sports associations. 
The use regulations of city parks by youth sports associations shall be the following: 
(1)  Contract with the city for use of park facilities. 
(2)  Adhere to all rules, regulations and ordinances related to their use of park facilities. 
(3)  Be incorporated, tax-exempt, nonprofit associations. 
(4)  Coordinate and get approvals from the parks and recreation department when scheduling park facilities for games and practices. 
(5)  Provide and conduct youth sports programs that are in the best interest of city residents and the community as determined by the parks and recreation department. 
(6)  Be allowed to erect sponsor signs on ball field fences and sponsor banners as determined by the parks and recreation department. 
(7)  Be allowed to conduct fundraising activity and events upon approval of the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee. 
(8)  Gain approval from the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee before making any minor improvements, alterations or work of any nature on any ball field, ball field fences or park facility. Major capital improvements, proposed to be funded or made by the sports association to facilities shall be approved by mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-12, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-33. - Parks and recreation facilities regulations governing use. 
Listed as follows is the order of priority and category in which recreational facilities will be scheduled on an ongoing basis: 
(1)  Groups. 
a.  Any city-organized or -sponsored recreational activity; 
b.  Organizations that the city has agreements with for use of facilities; 
c.  Civic groups. Civic groups are defined as nonprofit organizations/clubs, which serve the citizens the city; 
d.  All other organizations and groups. 
(2)  The scheduling of the parks and recreation facilities will be at the sole discretion of the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee. The general rules and policies applicable to usage of parks and recreation facilities are listed as follows, and failure to abide by these rules could result in future usage of facilities being suspended: 
a.  Scheduling of facilities will be coordinated and approved by the parks and recreation department. 
b.  Facilities cannot be used for commercial purposes. 
c.  Facilities used for fundraising purposes must be approved by the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee. 
d.  Full payment and deposit is due at the time of reservation. If facilities are not used during the reserved time for any reason and no prior cancellation was given, no refunds will be made, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section for reimbursement of a cleaning/security deposit. 
e.  A member of the organization must sign an affidavit of responsibility and fill out a facility reservation form provided by the parks and recreation department. 
f.  No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed under any circumstance unless granted a permit by mayor and city council. 
g.  Animals are not permitted in facilities without approval of the recreation department except at the dog park, with the exception of service animals. 
h.  Areas shall be left clean. If it becomes necessary for city employees to do an extensive amount of cleaning, there will be a corresponding deduction as determined by the public works director/parks and recreation director or his designee in the cleaning and security deposit. 
i.  The user must report any damages to the police or parks employee on duty at once. All groups will be held liable for any damages to any city facility or equipment used by members of their organization. Facility damages could lead to losing privileges to use facilities. 
j.  All scheduled meeting times are subject to change. Prior notice will be given by the parks and recreation department if at all possible. 
k.  The city is not responsible for any valuables or property left on the premises. 
l.  Smoking is prohibited outside of designated smoking areas pursuant to section 32-22. 
m.  No decorations shall be displayed, installed or permitted which may damage or deface the structure. Existing decorations may not be removed. The user of the facility is responsible for removing all of their own decorations and trash at the end of the reservation. 
n.  No facilities can be reserved more than one year in advance. 
o.  When facilities are not in use for scheduled activities and are available to the public for rent, the use of facilities is available on a first-come, first-served basis. 
p.  Facility users will be required to have not less than one adult chaperone for each ten minors present during use of facilities. 
q.  No facility will be used past 11:00 p.m. without permission from the parks and recreation department. 
r.  There will be a cancellation fee of $35.00 if the facility rented and reserved is not cancelled at least 15 days prior to an event. 
(3)  The mayor and city council may, by resolution, establish rental fees for any public property and shall provide by appropriate regulations for the use of any public facility. Violation of any regulation established by the mayor and city council and posted on the property or acknowledged by the user shall be deemed a violation of this Code and shall subject the offender to the penalty by law. 
(4)  There is hereby created a cleaning/security deposit for rental of all city facilities. The cleaning/security deposit shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per facility. It is refundable if and only when the facility is left in a clean state, and in the condition in which it was found. The decision of whether the deposit shall be refunded is solely up to the parks and recreation department and will not be refunded until the rented facility has been inspected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-13, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-34. - Boats. 
Boat launching must be done within those boat launching areas specifically built and designed for those purposes. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-14, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-35. - Fireworks. 
It is unlawful for any individual to shoot, explode, or launch any fireworks in any park in the city, or into any park in the city from outside the park confines, unless such fireworks are part of a commercial fireworks display sponsored by the city and conducted by a licensed and bonded fireworks specialist. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-15, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-36. - Meetings and assemblies. 
Persons, corporations, or organizations conducting public meetings, assemblies, worship services, entertainment, demonstrations, or political rallies, within the general confines of a park or municipal area without a permit is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-16, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-37. - Noise. 
(a)  Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to: 
(1)  Make any loud noises that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(2)  Engage in noisy disputes or conversation that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(3)  Engage in any loud acts of behavior that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities; or 
(4)  In any other manner, disturb the public peace, quiet, and order in any of the city parks. 
(b)  Public address system. The operation or use of public address systems, whether fixed, portable or vehicle-mounted, is prohibited except when such use or operation is in connection with public gatherings or special events which have been approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-17, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-38. - Pollution of water in parks. 
It is unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any spring, branch, pond, fountain, or other water owned by or leased to the city. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-18, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-39. - Posting signs; disposal of trash and refuse. 
It is unlawful for any person to affix any bill, sign, or notice on any tree, building, or fixture in any of the parks. It is unlawful for any person to place any paper, books, refuse, or trash of any kind in any of the public parks, except in containers provided for such. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-19, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-40. - Urban camping. 
It is unlawful to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. Furthermore, it is unlawful to use any public place, including city parks, for living accommodation purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-20, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-41. - Games. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to endanger the general public in a park by taking part in or abetting the playing of any games involving throwing or otherwise propelling objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or other facilities provided therefor. No person shall use any park or other area owned and operated by the city for recreation purposes as a field for golf practice, putting green or driving range except for those areas specifically so designated. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-21, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-42. - Disobeying orders. 
No person shall disobey the lawful and reasonable order of a park employee or other city employee in the discharge of his duties for the purpose of safeguarding the park system, or disobey or disregard the notices, prohibitions, instructions, rules or regulations on any park sign. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-22, 4-2-2009) 
Sec. 38-43. - Closing of park for special events. 
The requirements for obtaining a permit for a special event that closes the park to the general public are as follows: 
(1)  The organization sponsoring any special event which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages must first apply for and obtain a special permit from the city manager or his designee in order to serve alcoholic beverages at the special event. This permit must be posted in a conspicuous location at the special event at all times during the event. The special event permit shall specify the hours in which alcoholic beverages are permitted to be served. 
(2)  The organization sponsoring any special event which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages shall provide, at his expense, at least one security officer, approved by the chief of police or his designee, at each delineated boundary area approved for the consumption of beer and/or wine. 
(Ord. No. 20090402-A, § 38-23, 4-2-2009) 
Chapter 42 - PUBLIC SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; minimum requirements for local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-20 et seq.; authority of local government units to enact fire prevention regulations, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1; regulation of blasting generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; volunteer firefighters for counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-23; law enforcement generally, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-1 et seq.; compensation of law enforcement officers on commission basis prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-26-19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire protection district, ch. 47, art. I. 

Sec. 42-19. - Fire chief and members. 
The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief and shall be composed of such other paid and volunteer members and employees as may be determined necessary by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-1; Code 2002, § 42-26) 
Sec. 42-20. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the city fire trucks at any time or use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment or attempt to use the equipment at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-2; Code 2002, § 42-27) 
Sec. 42-21. - Enforcement. 
Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency, every enrolled member of the department is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all sections of this article and any other section of this Code, the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-3; Code 2002, § 42-28) 
Sec. 42-22. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-4; Code 2002, § 42-29) 
Sec. 42-23. - Key lockboxes. 
(a)  When required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the city fire marshal is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an accessible location. The key lockbox shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain access as required by the city fire marshal. 
(b)  Structures affected. The following types of buildings or structures within the city shall be equipped with a key lockbox to be located at or near the recognized public entrance, such location to be approved by the fire marshal's office. 
(1)  All commercial buildings; 
(2)  All industrial buildings; 
(3)  All multifamily buildings; 
(4)  All gated communities with restricted vehicle access, including apartments, condominiums, and residential developments; 
(5)  All hotels and motels. 
(c)  Key lockbox contents. The key lockbox shall contain keys for the following and shall be labeled so as to be easily identifiable in the field: 
(1)  Keys to the locked points of egress, whether on the interior or exterior of such structure; 
(2)  Keys to the locked mechanical rooms; 
(3)  Keys to the locked elevator rooms; 
(4)  Keys to the elevator controls; 
(5)  Keys to any fence or secured area; 
(6)  Keys to any other area as directed by the fire marshal. 
(d)  Key lockbox for affected residential structures. 
(1)  All apartment and condominium complexes, and all gated communities with restricted vehicle traffic shall be required to install a key lockbox at a location to be determined by a field inspector from the fire department. 
(2)  The key lockbox shall be located at a height of not less than four feet and not more than 12 feet above final grade. 
(3)  The key lockbox shall contain the following keys that shall be labeled so as to be easily identified in the field: 
a.  Alarm room area where alarm panel is installed; 
b.  Alarm panel; 
c.  Any special keys or tools to reset pull stations; 
d.  All other areas as specified by the fire marshal's office. 
(4)  Lockboxes need not be supervised. 
(5)  Only apartment or condominium owners, residential management companies, or managers may purchase key lockboxes. 
(e)  Further requirements. 
(1)  No steps, displays, signs or other fixtures, or structure protrusions, shall be located under the lockbox which would allow intruders to access the lockbox without assistance. 
(2)  The fire marshal shall designate the type of key lockbox system to be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system. 
(3)  The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lockbox shall, at all times, keep a key in the lockbox that will allow for access to the structure. 
(4)  Any change in occupancy or ownership of any affected structure shall require a new lockbox. 
(5)  The city shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the key lockbox system. 
(Code 2002, § 42-30; Ord. of 5-2-2002(3)) 
Sec. 42-24. - Sprinkler systems. 
(a)  The city fire department (authority having jurisdiction) reserves the right to waive modified sprinkler system installation in temporary use structures. 
(b)  Temporary use shall be defined as occupying a structure for any time one year or less from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the authority having jurisdiction. The waiver becomes invalid after such time, and the certificate of occupancy is suspended pending the installation of the approved sprinkler system. 
(c)  No waiver will be granted without authorization from mayor and city council on any assembly classification. 
(d)  The city fire department shall reserve the right to deny the waiver and warrant the installation of the approved sprinkler system pending any negative life safety or property conservation circumstances that may arise during initial plan review or the one-year temporary use period. 
(e)  The city manager and fire chief shall approve waiver of a temporary building. 
(Code 2002, § 42-31; Ord. of 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 42-25. - Outdoor burning. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to promote and safeguard the public health, safety, comfort, air quality, and living conditions of the citizens of the city relative to outdoor burning. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This section applies to all outdoor burning within the city. 
(2)  The requirements of this section are supplemental to state laws and regulations governing outdoor burning restrictions and restrictions governing the disposal of construction waste. To the extent any state law, environmental protection division rules, or other adopted codes is more stringent than the requirements contained in this section, such other law, rule, and/or code shall be controlling. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Bonfire means an outdoor fire larger than a recreational fire in which only logs are being burned for ceremonial purposes. 
(2)  Fire chief means the chief of the City of Canton Fire Department or his/her designee. 
(3)  Garbage means any waste material other than charcoal or logs that includes, but is not limited to, plastic products, Styrofoam, fiberglass, recycling wire (burned to access metal), tires, painted/varnished wood, clothing, furniture, mattresses, boxes, papers, and kudzu vines. 
(4)  Logs mean pieces of wood cut from trees that are dried and clean of soil so as not to produce large amounts of smoke when burning. 
(5)  Outdoor burning means kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or a chimney. 
(6)  Recreational fire means an outdoor fire in which only logs are being burned where the fuel is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes, and which is not used to dispose of garbage or yard waste. 
(7)  Yard waste means limited yard debris: Leaves, pine straw, and dry brush/limbs no more than six inches in diameter that have fallen or been cut from growth on one's own property. 
(d)  Exceptions to outdoor burning restrictions. Restrictions on outdoor burning do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas. 
(2)  Burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal habitation, unless garbage is being burned. 
(3)  Burning in a chimney, fire bowl or other similar device or outdoor fireplace, unless garbage is being burned. 
(4)  The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction, or maintenance activities (asphalt kettles, road flares, smudge pots, etc.). 
(5)  Incinerators installed in accordance with all state and local codes. 
(6)  Fire department practice burns that comply with all state and local codes. 
(e)  Burning prohibitions. 
(1)  Burning of petroleum-based products, such as tires, plastics, and roof shingles, which produce black smoke, is prohibited. 
(2)  Burning of garbage of any kind is prohibited. 
(3)  Burning of any material in a barrel is prohibited. 
(4)  No burning is allowed when the fire danger or fire danger forecast is class 3 or higher as per the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(5)  No burning is allowed on windy days (ten mph sustained or higher) or on days when the atmospheric conditions (cloudy, overcast, or raining) would cause the smoke to remain low to the ground. 
(6)  No commercial burning is allowed in the city. The term "commercial burning" means any burning by any party other than a person who resides in a residential dwelling located on the property on which the burning is taking place. 
(7)  The fire chief shall be authorized to ban any or all forms of outdoor burning when atmospheric or local conditions make outdoor fires hazardous. 
(8)  The fire chief shall be authorized to require the extinguishment of any fire if it adversely interferes with the enjoyment of life or use of property. 
(9)  The fire chief shall be authorized to ban outdoor burning in a limited geographical area upon receipt of medical documentation from a resident that the resident has a medical condition(s) adversely affected by smoke. 
(10)  No burning on Sunday. 
(11)  No burning on any of the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or parks of the city. 
(f)  Exceptions to burning prohibitions. The fire chief may issue an outdoor burning permit when special circumstances warrant exceptions to prohibitions against burning. Special circumstances would include: 
(1)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops; 
(2)  Disposal of vegetative debris from storm damage; or 
(3)  Any other special circumstances as determined by the fire chief. 
(g)  Safeguards and limitations for outdoor burning. 
(1)  Recreational fires shall not be located within 25 feet of a structure or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Burning is allowed between 10:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. 
(2)  Any type of outdoor burning referenced in this section must be attended by an adult who must be watching the fire at all times. A water hose that can reach the fire or fire extinguisher must be on hand and ready for use if needed to limit or extinguish the fire. 
(3)  When extinguishing an outdoor fire, no smoldering or hot coals shall remain. 
(h)  Outdoor burning requiring a permit. No person shall start or maintain any outdoor burning listed in this section without first obtaining a permit issued by the City of Canton Fire Department. Permits are only good for the date issued: 
(1)  A bonfire shall not be located within a minimum of 100 feet of a structure or other combustible material, and shall be a minimum of 300 feet from property lines. The bonfire shall not be located on any asphalt or concrete. There shall be a 100-foot clear area around the fire area, clear of combustible materials, debris or material that could cause fire to spread. Distances may be increased by the fire chief depending on the size of the bonfire. Burning is allowed between 10:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. The permit will be valid for specified dates and times. 
(2)  For burning yard waste, permits will only be issued to parcels of two or more acres, subject to the following regulations: The fire pile shall not be larger than four feet wide by four feet deep by two feet high (only one fire pile at a time shall be burning per address/permit) and shall not be not located within 50 feet of a structure or other combustible material and/or within 25 feet of a public roadway. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Burning is allowed between 10:00 a.m. and one hour before sunset, October 1 through April 30. No permits will be issued after 12:00 p.m. 
(3)  Any type of outdoor burning referenced in this article must be attended by an adult who must be watching the fire at all times. An appropriate means for containing and/or extinguishing the fire shall be provided. 
(4)  When extinguishing an outdoor fire, no smoldering or hot coals shall remain unless otherwise permitted in this code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 1, 8-18-2016) 
State Law reference— "The Georgia Air Quality Act of 1978," O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; "Rules for Air Quality Control," Chapter 391-3-1, § 391-3-1.02(5). 
Sec. 42-26. - Codes adopted. 
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copies here fully: 
(1)  NFPA 13 Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
(2)  NFPA 13R Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height. 
(3)  Standard for the Installation of sprinkler systems in small commercial buildings not requiring NFPA 13 fire sprinkler systems by other codes. 
(Ord. No. 20030502, § 1, 5-1-2003) 
Secs. 42-27—42-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-52. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-1; Code 2002, § 42-56) 
Sec. 42-53. - Responsibilities. 
The police department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments, and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-2; Code 2002, § 42-57) 
Secs. 42-54—42-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 16, 2017, repealed the former division 2, §§ 42-80—42-83, and enacted a new division 2 as set out herein. The former division pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1985, §§ 4-1-3—4-1-3(2) and the Code of 2002, §§ 42-86—42-88 and 42-92. 

Sec. 42-80. - Dispositions of personal property. 
Disposition of all personal property seized or abandoned in the custody of the police department shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 17, ch. 5, art. 3. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 3-16-2017) 
Chapter 46 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1; hazardous waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-79; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings and disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization for local government units to enforce collection of taxes, fees, or assessments for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3; authority of local governments to adopt and enforce local regulations for the handling and disposal of solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-18. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment dwelling, roominghouse, business, and industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a one-family or two-family dwelling unit or condominium. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into stable, odor-free humus. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building material and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. The term "construction/demolition waste" includes, but is not limited to, asbestos, asbestos containing waste, wood, brick, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to landfill and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Dispose means to get rid of, deal conclusively with or transfer to the control of another. 
Garbage means food waste, including the waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the state Hazardous Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-60 through 12-8-83). The term "industrial waste" includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: 
(1)  Electric power generation; 
(2)  Fertilizers and agriculture chemicals; 
(3)  Food-related products and byproducts; 
(4)  Inorganic chemicals; 
(5)  Iron and steel products; 
(6)  Leather and leather products; 
(7)  Nonferrous metal and foundry products; 
(8)  Organic chemicals, plastics and resins; 
(9)  Pulp and paper; 
(10)  Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; 
(11)  Stone, glass, clay and concrete products; 
(12)  Textiles; 
(13)  Transportation equipment; and 
(14)  Water treatment. 
The term "industrial waste" does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid waste, other than putrescible waste or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Municipal solid waste means all types of solid waste including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks from hotels, motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include construction and demolition waste and solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Open dump means a disposal facility of which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, to burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Owner means any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises in the city's jurisdiction. 
Person means the state or any other state agency or institution thereof and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in this or any other state. The term "person" also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in this state or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least 1.5 mills and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist ties. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible waste include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing materials from solid wastes for future use. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known uses, reuses or recycling potential such as the following: 
(1)  Newspaper; 
(2)  Glass, cardboard, aluminum cans, metal cans and plastics; 
(3)  Those items that can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and 
(4)  Those items that have been diverted or removed from the solid wastestream for sale, use, reuse or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial solid waste. 
Rubbish means discarded wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass crockery, dunnage and/or similar materials. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of by means of placing an earth cover thereon and which is approved by the state department of natural resources for such purpose. 
Service provider means a person granted an authorization to provide service by the city that, under written agreements for compensation by those receiving services, does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste from industry, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and similar locations. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 USC 2011 et seq. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal or any combination thereof of solid waste. 
Wastestream means the total flow of solid waste from commercial establishments, institutions and the like to its ultimate disposal site or facility. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree plantings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 2002, § 46-31; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2001) 
Sec. 46-19. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or any employee or agent of any firm or entity violating any section of this article may be fined as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  Any service provider who is found to have violated any of the sections of this article by a court of law shall be subject to the same penalty and may also be restrained from operating as a service provider, and a civil action may be filed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2002, § 46-39; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2010) 
Sec. 46-20. - Applicability. 
(a)  No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will: 
(1)  Be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; 
(2)  Impair the air quality; 
(3)  Impair the quality of the groundwater or surface water; 
(4)  Impair the quality of the environment; or 
(5)  Likely create other hazards to the public health, safety or well-being as may be determined by the city manager. 
(b)  This article applies to all persons engaged in solid waste handling, as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(Code 2002, § 46-32; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002A) 
Sec. 46-21. - Compliance with law. 
No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in solid waste handling except in such a manner as to conform to and comply with this article and all applicable state and federal legislation, rules, regulations and orders. 
(Code 2002, § 46-33; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002C(a)) 
Sec. 46-22. - Exemptions. 
The regulations of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any person disposing of household solid waste originating from his primary residence onto land or facilities, owned by him, when disposal of such waste does not thereby adversely affect the public health; or 
(2)  Any other entity not collecting and disposing of municipal solid waste, commercial solid waste, construction/demolition waste, or industrial waste for a fee, but who is a holder of a valid solid waste handling permit from the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources pursuant to rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division as provided in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. §§ 391-3-4-.02 and 391-3-4-.06 for disposal or on-site burial. Such disposal shall be governed by state environmental protection regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 46-34; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002B(a), (b)) 
Sec. 46-23. - Composting permitted. 
Composting is expressly allowed or permitted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 2002, § 46-35; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002B(c)) 
Sec. 46-24. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Dead animals shall be disposed of pursuant to state law. 
(Code 2002, § 46-36; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002B(d)) 
Sec. 46-25. - Responsibility of owner and occupant. 
The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry or similar facility shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste and shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all recovered materials accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution or similar facility to a solid waste handling recycling facility operating in compliance with the state environmental protection division rules and regulations unless arrangements have been made for such services with a collector operating in compliance with this article. 
(Code 2002, § 46-38; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002C(d)) 
Sec. 46-26. - Hazardous accumulations. 
No owner or occupant shall allow the accumulation on premises under his control or on or about his commercial establishment of solid waste where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens or is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this article. Each day the solid waste remains on the premises may constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 46-41; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002C(e)) 
Sec. 46-27. - Yard trimmings. 
No person may dispose of yard trimmings in the city or dispose of yard trimmings generated in the city unless such disposal is carried out in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of in municipal solid waste disposal facilities that have liners and leachate collection systems or that require vertical expansion. 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in a manner that facilitates collection, composting or other lawful handling. 
(4)  Upon collection, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled until their ultimate disposal by chipping, mulching or other beneficial use. 
(Code 2002, § 46-42; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002C(f)) 
Sec. 46-28. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be reported initially to the city manager, which office is charged with administration of all sections in this article. The city manager shall designate and publicize a special telephone number to be called to report violations of this article. 
(b)  The sections of this article regarding applications for and termination of authorization to provide services shall be enforced by the city through the city manager. 
(c)  The sections of this article regarding collection and removal of solid waste shall be enforced by the police department. 
(d)  The sections of this article regarding the disposal or burial on site of solid waste shall be enforced by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(Code 2002, § 46-40; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2011) 
Secs. 46-29—46-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE PROVIDERS 

Sec. 46-47. - License required. 
No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall collect and dispose of municipal solid waste for a fee without obtaining a business license to provide service from the city. 
(Code 2002, § 46-71; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002C(b)) 
Sec. 46-48. - Application. 
Nonexclusive authorization to provide services for commercial solid waste collection and disposal shall be granted upon application to the city manager provided the authorization to provide services shall meet at least the minimum requirements set out in this article. The right to provide service authorized in the collection and disposal of solid waste shall be granted for a period of no more than four calendar years from January 1 to December 31. 
(Code 2002, § 46-72; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2003(b)) 
Sec. 46-49. - Revocation or rescission. 
The city manager reserves the discretionary authority to revoke or rescind any authorization granted to a solid waste service provider to provide service in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 46-73; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2003(c)) 
Sec. 46-50. - Permit required. 
Prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the city, a service provider must have obtained a solid waste handling permit from the director of environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources or any successor agency authorized to issue permits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. 
(Code 2002, § 46-74; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2004(a)) 
Sec. 46-51. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The city manager may grant exceptions to this division provided service providers make written application showing the following: 
(1)  The method proposed utilizes a new experimental, cost effective or innovative technology concept or theory of solid waste storage, collection, transportation or disposal; 
(2)  The method proposed has been certified by the county board of health not to create a health hazard to the public; 
(3)  The method proposed is to be utilized by at least ten customers; and 
(4)  Any exception granted does not violate the requirements of sections 46-50 and 46-52 through 46-56. 
(b)  Any exception granted by the city manager shall be for a one-year term and shall be nonrenewable. At the end of six months of operation of the excepted method, the service provider shall submit data to the city manager sufficient to enable a determination of success of the method. If found to be acceptable to the city, this division may be amended to allow such method without exception. 
(Code 2002, § 46-75; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2012) 
Sec. 46-52. - Insurance. 
(a)  At the time of submission of a signed authorized service agreement and prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the city and annually thereafter, each service provider shall provide to the city manager proof of insurance as follows: 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $500,000.00. 
(2)  Vehicle liability as follows: 
a.  A limit of $500,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
b.  Comprehensive covering all owned, nonowned, and hired vehicles. 
c.  All insurance contracts must specify vehicles for solid waste collection. 
(3)  Umbrella liability insurance coverage at least as broad primary coverage in an amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(b)  All comprehensive general liability, vehicle liability, and umbrella liability policies shall show the city as an additional insured and shall provide for 30 days' notice of cancellation to the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 46-76; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2004(b)) 
Sec. 46-53. - Indemnification. 
The solid waste service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments from third parties for damages which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortious conduct or operations arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, whether or not the action or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article. 
(Code 2002, § 46-77; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2004(c)) 
Sec. 46-54. - Vehicles. 
(a)  All vehicles and containers used for solid waste collection operations shall comply with the requirements of Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. § 391-3-4-.06, a portion of Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 391-3-4 (solid waste management) of the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, and must be compactor-type trucks, covered or enclosed vehicles. All vehicles must be constructed to be substantially leakproof, constructed of durable metal, easily cleanable and able to prevent litter from escaping during movement of the vehicle. 
(b)  Vehicles and containers shall meet all requirements of the state department of transportation for highway safety and local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets which must be traveled for pickup. All vehicles shall be subject to unannounced inspection by city officials for compliance with environmental and highway safety standards. 
(c)  All vehicles shall have, in letters at least six inches high and conspicuously placed in three places on the vehicle, the name and telephone number of the service provider. 
(d)  Service providers shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. Nothing in this division shall prohibit service providers from sharing backup vehicles with other service providers, provided that such sharing is adequately covered by insurance. 
(e)  Vehicles used exclusively for collecting and transporting recovered materials shall be exempt from this entire article, except that an adequate cover shall be used to prevent litter from escaping during movement. 
(Code 2002, § 46-78; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2004(d)) 
Sec. 46-55. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Within 30 days following the close of each calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year of operation, the solid waste service provider shall submit to the city manager reports of operation showing the following: 
(1)  Gross collection revenues and average number of customers during the quarter by service type. 
(2)  Tonnage figures showing the total waste tonnage collected by service type. 
(3)  Tonnage figures showing total recovered materials collected by type and proof of recycling in the form of manifests, bills of sale or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the material to a recycling facility as provided in this article. 
(4)  Proof of disposal of unrecovered materials at state-approved disposal facilities and the name of each such facility. 
(b)  The service provider shall maintain at its place of business books and records showing the names and addresses of all owners and tenants with whom the service provider contracted for solid waste handling services, including the street address for the property served. The service provider shall submit upon reasonable request of the city manager to a financial audit by a certified public accountant or auditor employed by the city. Except for the operating reports described in subsections (a)(1) through (4) of this section, the information provided in accordance with this subsection shall be confidential. 
(Code 2002, § 46-79; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2004(e)) 
Sec. 46-56. - Disposal assurance. 
(a)  As a precondition of the authorization to provide solid waste services and/or authorization renewal, all applicants shall obtain a letter of solid waste disposal assurance governing the next ten years from the landfill owner or operator where its solid waste is delivered. The letter of solid waste disposal must be on the letterhead of the company owning the landfill and signed by the chief executive operating officer or other appropriate official of the company. The letter must contain the following information: 
(1)  The telephone number and title of the company official signing the assurance letter; 
(2)  Address of the landfill; 
(3)  Remaining permitted capacity of the landfill in cubic yards; 
(4)  Estimated life of permitted capacity remaining at current and projected rates of waste disposal in tons or cubic yards; 
(5)  A statement that sufficient landfill capacity exists to accommodate the applicant requesting the letter over the expected remaining life of the landfill based on remaining landfill capacity and the amount of waste received at the landfill; and 
(6)  A statement that appropriate arrangements are in place such that the landfill will reserve a portion of its capacity on behalf of the applicant over the remaining life of the landfill. 
(b)  If the landfill operator currently lacks capacity for the next ten years, the landfill operator shall provide a statement containing the following, if applicable: 
(1)  Expected future additions or expansions of the landfill; 
(2)  Additional capacity in cubic yards from such expected expansion; 
(3)  When such future additions or expansions will be begun or completed; 
(4)  Where such additions or expansions would take place; and 
(5)  A statement that sufficient capacity will exist in the future addition or expansion of the landfill to accommodate the applicant over the designated time period. 
Otherwise, the landfill operator should indicate that no plans exist to continue landfill operations after the closing of the current landfill. In addition to initial letter requirements for obtaining an authorization to provide service, all letters of solid waste disposal assurance must be filed annually with the city manager by July 30 as a precondition for obtaining or continuing an authorization to provide service in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 46-80; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2004(f)) 
Sec. 46-57. - Regulatory fees. 
(a)  A regulatory fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be charged to the service provider for each commercial customer to whom solid waste collection service was provided and billed during any portion of the quarter for which an authorization to provide service was granted. Such fees shall be due and payable to the office of the city clerk at the time for quarterly reporting under section 46-55. Proceeds from regulatory fees shall be used to defray the cost to the city of monitoring and enforcing compliance with this article and for meeting requirements dictated by state law including studying and implementing plans and methods for the handling of solid waste and reduction of solid waste generated within the city. Such fees shall be paid into a special fund for such purposes. 
(b)  A franchise fee of ten percent of the service provider's monthly gross revenue from commercial collections within the city shall be charged. Such fees shall be due and payable to the office of the city clerk at the time for quarterly reporting under section 46-55. 
(c)  A surcharge fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges is hereby imposed upon the operator of any private landfill or other private disposal facility presently located within the city in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39(d). 
(Code 2002, § 46-81; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2005) 
Sec. 46-58. - Commercial services. 
Applicants for commercial authorization to provide solid waste services are subject to the requirements for a solid waste handling permit under sections 46-50 and 46-52 through 46-56. 
(Code 2002, § 46-82; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2006) 
Sec. 46-59. - General conditions of commercial collection. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution or industry or similar commercial establishment, other than those located in the downtown area, shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at such premises, establishment or facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with state regulation and must arrange for service with an approved service provider. 
(b)  The holder of a valid solid waste handling permit from the state department of natural resources shall be exempt from such contracting, but shall comply with the requirements of sections 46-54 through 46-56. 
(c)  No business license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the owner or occupant of such premises provides the city business license office with the name of the service provider which provides collection for the business, or an exception has been granted by the city manager. 
(d)  Yard trimmings from commercial premises or collected or disposed under commercial accounts shall be managed as provided in section 46-58. Yard trimmings must be bundled or placed in a suitable container for collection. Yard trimmings may not be placed in plastic bags. 
(e)  The city reserves the right at all times to direct and control the time, place and manner of commercial solid waste handling. Nothing in this article is intended to abridge the city's right to ownership and control of the wastestream. 
(f)  Each service provider shall be responsible for all billing and invoicing to and collecting of service fees from its customers. 
(Code 2002, § 46-83; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2007) 
Sec. 46-60. - Recycling requirements. 
(a)  Each solid waste service provider shall by written agreement with the city arrange for recovered materials to be properly disposed of at an approved recycling facility. 
(b)  If recovered materials are not properly disposed of at an approved recycling facility, the business license of the service provider shall be suspended until the city manager is satisfied with proof of compliance according to this section. Lacking compliance, the city shall be permitted to initiate termination of the authorization to provide services as set forth in section 46-61. 
(Code 2002, § 46-84; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2008) 
Sec. 46-61. - Termination of authorization to provide services. 
(a)  Authorization to provide solid waste services may be terminated by mutual agreement of the city and service provider at any time. Service providers may terminate authorization to provide services by giving 60 days' notice to the city manager and furnishing proof to the city manager that all advance payments have been used by providing a service or have been refunded. 
(b)  The city manager shall notify any service provider of its violations of this article. Upon notification of the alleged violation, a service provider shall have seven calendar days to comply with any directive of the city manager to correct any such violation. If the service provider shall fail to comply within seven days of notification or shall have received notices of unresolved violations in any one quarter in excess of: 
(1)  25 or 0.25 percent, whichever is fewer, for service providers with fewer than 10,001 customers; 
(2)  50 or 0.20 percent, whichever is fewer, for service providers with 10,001 to 25,000 customers; 
(3)  75 or 0.15 percent, whichever is fewer, for service providers with 25,001 to 50,000 customers; or 
(4)  100 or 0.15 percent, whichever is fewer, for service providers with more than 50,000 customers; or 
at the discretion of the city manager, a hearing shall be held before the mayor and city council with the service provider being notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing and the violations of this article which have not been corrected. The service provider will be given the opportunity to appear by representative or counsel to answer any such charge. Should the mayor and city council determine that any of the sections of this article have been violated by the service provider, the mayor and city council shall have, in its discretion, the absolute right to suspend or revoke the authorization to provide service or provide for probation for the service provider. 
(c)  Authorization to provide services is nontransferable. 
(Code 2002, § 46-85; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2009) 
Secs. 46-62—46-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 46-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Code 2002, § 46-112; Ord. No. 2005040705, § 2, 4-7-2005) 
Sec. 46-82. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public private property within the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Code 2002, § 46-111; Ord. No. 2005040705, § 1, 4-7-2005) 
Sec. 46-83. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Code 2002, § 46-113; Ord. No. 2005040705, § 3, 4-7-2005) 
Sec. 46-84. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Code 2002, § 46-114; Ord. No. 2005040705, § 4, 4-7-2005) 
Sec. 46-85. - Illegal dumping. 
(a)  No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property as defined by the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. § 391-3-4-04. 
(b)  A person shall be presumed to have violated this section if, upon written notification by the city manager that litter or solid waste has been dumped on that person's property, not otherwise subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-51 through 16-7-54, the person fails to provide the chief of police within 15 days of notification with written assurance that the accumulation of litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within 30 days from the original date of notification. 
(c)  No person who first informs the city manager in writing that illegal dumping has occurred on a particular parcel of that person's property shall be deemed to have violated this section if such person provides written assurance that all accumulated litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of by a collection service provider who meets the requirements of this article within 45 days of the date of such written notification and subsequently provides proof of such disposal. 
(Code 2002, § 46-37; Ord. of 2-19-1998, § 4-2002C(c)) 
Sec. 46-86. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove: 
a.  From any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  Any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter; 
pickup and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 2002, § 46-115; Ord. No. 2005040705, § 5, 4-7-2005) 
Chapter 47 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 47-1—47-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION—HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 47-21. - Purpose 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the City of Canton is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the people. 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to residents, visitors and tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business. 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law. 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation, and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
The Canton City Council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and environmental features having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § I, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 47-22. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Building means any structure attached to the ground having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure, or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the forgoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property, including but not limited to walls, fences, walkways, steps, paving materials, specimen trees, historic markers, art, monuments, statuary, pergolas and gazebos. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the Canton City Council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 47-24(b) of this article. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the Canton City Council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 47-24(c) of this article. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or environmental feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or façade of a property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a building, structure, site, or object; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other construction within a historic property or district, including exterior environmental features or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object means an object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair means work that corrects deterioration, decay or damage of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in a historic district or on a historic property or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof and does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
Site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Specimen tree means a tree that is judged to be 50 years old or older. A specimen tree shall further mean a tree that is unique due to age, size, species or historic relevance in accordance with criteria established by tree protection and landscaping regulations in the City of Canton Unified Development Code. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires attachment to the ground, attachment to something located on the ground, or placement on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § II, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 47-23. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be the "Canton Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Canton and shall be administered by the staff of the City of Canton Community Development Department. 
(c)  Commission members: Number, appointment, terms and compensation. The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the City of Canton, and a majority of the members shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. 
Furthermore, historic preservation commission members shall attend training in accordance with the requirements process and procedures for certified local government as administered by Georgia Historic Preservation Division. 
Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: Two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. City council shall provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members in accordance with article III of the Canton City Charter. 
(d)  Statement of commission's powers. 
(1)  The commission shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Canton having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the Canton City Council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny the same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
d.  Recommend to the Canton City Council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure, or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Canton; 
f.  Promote the acquisition by the City of Canton of façade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A., § 44-10.1—44-10.5); 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the City of Canton and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the Canton City Council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal, or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the Canton City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the City of Canton historic preservation program; 
l.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the Commission; 
m.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the City of Canton without prior consent; 
n.  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
o.  Participate in private, state, and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the Canton City Council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designation and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall elect such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statues and in the City of Canton Charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § III, 5-21-2015; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Sec. 47-24. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historic resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Canton. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the Canton City Council for designation. The commission shall present to the Canton City Council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the Canton City Council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural, and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and exterior environmental features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Is listed on the Georgia Register or National Register of Historic Places; 
b.  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
c.  Represents one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of Canton, Cherokee County, the State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors listed in this subsection, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the City of Canton or Cherokee County. 
(2)  Boundaries of historic districts. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); or 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in section 47-24(b)(1)). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, the State of Georgia, or the City of Canton for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is listed on the Georgia Register or the National Register of Historic Places; 
b.  It is an outstanding example and representative of its era; 
c.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style or type; 
d.  It is associated with an event or person(s) of historic or cultural significance to Canton, Cherokee County, the State of Georgia, or the region; or 
e.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the City of Canton, Cherokee County, the State of Georgia, or the region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or properties. Designations may be proposed by the Canton City Council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association, or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the Official Zoning Maps of the City of Canton and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings. The commission and the Canton City Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the City of Canton tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report for nomination, required in section 47-24(a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Canton City Council. 
(6)  Canton City Council's action on the commission's recommendation. The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the commission at the first work session following the commission recommendation, shall take appropriate action not later than the second regularly scheduled city council meeting subsequent to the receipt thereof. Such action by the city council shall be: 
a.  Adoption of the ordinance as proposed; 
b.  Adoption of the ordinance with any amendments deemed necessary; or 
c.  Rejection of the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the Canton City Council, the owner(s) and occupant(s) of each designated historic property and each individual property located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Canton City Council. This notice shall inform said owner(s) and occupant(s) of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the City of Canton tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Canton of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending: If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § IV, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 47-25. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. 
(1)  After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site, object or exterior environmental feature within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. The Canton Historic District and historic properties shall be utilized for commercial properties or residential properties being converted to commercial uses. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  The following is a list of common, but not all inclusive, work items that cause a material change in appearance: 
a.  The construction, reconstruction, alteration, renovation, restoration, or removal of: 
1.  Accessory structures (carports, gazebos, sheds, etc.); 
2.  Awnings/canopies; 
3.  Buildings/building additions; 
4.  Balconies; 
5.  Cornices; 
6.  Doors; 
7.  Driveways; 
8.  Façades/exterior walls; 
9.  Fences/gates/walls; 
10.  Fire escapes; 
11.  Fountains (decorative); 
12.  Gutters/downspouts; 
13.  Landscaping; 
14.  Lighting; 
15.  Parking areas; 
16.  Porches/patios (including enclosures); 
17.  Railings; 
18.  Ramps; 
19.  Roofs; 
20.  Shutters; 
21.  Signs; 
22.  Sky lights; 
23.  Stairs; 
24.  Storefronts (entrances, bulkheads, transoms); 
25.  Utilities (mechanical systems, satellite dishes, HVAC, etc.); 
26.  Walkways; 
27.  Windows. 
b.  Intensive cleaning (pressure washing, sandblasting, chemical, etc.). 
c.  Addition of paint on previously unpainted surfaces. 
d.  Relocation of a building, structure or object. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans, and documentation required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. Prior to reviewing an application, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application and shall give the application and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
Commission action. The commission may approve the application for a certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the application with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(1)  In making a decision, the commission shall consider tube Canton Historic District Design Guidelines, including any attachments, future additions, appendices, indexes, and amendments, which are hereby adopted by reference. The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following actions: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, along with any published guidelines accompanying the standards, and to local design guidelines adopted by the commission. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure, or object contributes to its present setting; 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
3.  Whether the building, structure, or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historic and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, specimen trees, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic, architectural, or archaeological significance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object; 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the historic district or in the City of Canton; 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse; and 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Exemptions. The department of transportation and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from this article. Local governments are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that local governments shall notify the commission 45 days prior to beginning any undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
Single-family detached residential units, two-family residential units, townhouse residential units with two-hour separation walls, townhouse residential units not more than three stories above grade plane, live/work residential units complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code, and owner-occupied lodging residential units with five or fewer guestrooms are exempt. 
(h)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(i)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(j)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in appearance which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(k)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Canton City Council. Any such appeal must be filed with the Canton City Council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to section 47-25(i)(1) of this article or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, section 47-25(i)(2) of this article. The Canton City Council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if it finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the Canton City Council may be taken to the Superior Court of Cherokee County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for City of Canton ordinance violations. 
(l)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the Canton City Council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(m)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(n)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said applications. 
(o)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the Canton City Council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a significant historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § V, 5-21-2015; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 4-21-2016) 
Sec. 47-26. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The commission and the community development department shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors, and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission and the community development department determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the City of Canton Codes Official shall notify the owner of the property in accordance with the notice of violation, order, or citation provisions for violations of property maintenance code in the City of Canton Unified Development Code, and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property shall have 60 days in which to implement these steps. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 60 days, the property owner may request an extension to complete the necessary maintenance or repair. The City of Canton Codes Official in conjunction with the community development department shall review such requests, and if approved, identify a new timeframe within which the maintenance or repairs shall be made by the property owner. 
(4)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 60 days and an extension was not requested by the property owner, or the condition is not remedied within the extended timeframe granted by the codes official and the community development department in accordance with the terms of this section, the property owner shall be punished as provided in section 47-27 of this article and, at the direction of the Canton City Council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing City of Canton building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § VI, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 47-27. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly enacted ordinances of the City of Canton. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § VII, 5-21-2015) 
Chapter 50 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; municipal authority to grant right to erect obstructions in streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; enclosures of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Street specifications. 
The specifications and standards for the construction and repair of the public streets of the city shall be as adopted by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-1; Code 2002, § 50-1) 
Secs. 50-2—50-16. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-17. - Skating on sidewalks and streets. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle or propel roller skates, skateboards, or other similar devices upon a public street, highway or sidewalk in a manner which would constitute an unreasonable danger to the public or which would disrupt the public's ordinary and customary use of such street, highway or sidewalk. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle or propel roller skates, skateboards, or other similar devices on sidewalks which are properly designated for pedestrians only. The chief of police and department of transportation, after approval of the mayor and city council, are authorized to erect or have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles or propelling of roller skates, skateboards, or other similar devices. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the signs. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skating upon a sidewalk, that person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-12. Provided, however, that any offender under 17 years of age shall be treated as provided by state law as contained in the O.C.G.A. § 15-1-1 et seq. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit that child or ward to violate any provision of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-2; Code 2002, § 50-2; Ord. of 6-1-1995(1); Ord. No. 2004-11-18, 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 50-18. - Obstructions upon streets and sidewalks. 
No person shall erect any steps, porticos or other obstructions encroaching upon the city streets, sidewalks or other public areas. Such obstructions shall be removed, after a reasonable notice, at the expense of the builder. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-3; Code 2002, § 50-3) 
Sec. 50-19. - Obstruction with building materials. 
No person shall put any lumber, wood, boxes, bricks or other such obstructions in any street, alley or sidewalk without permission of the building inspector. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-5; Code 2002, § 50-4) 
Sec. 50-20. - Warning signals at obstructions. 
Any person who shall cause any obstruction to be placed in any city street, alley or sidewalk shall display at such obstruction a sufficient danger signal or light to warn the traveling public of such obstruction and enable them to avoid injury from the obstruction. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-6; Code 2002, § 50-5) 
Sec. 50-21. - Damages to streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved city street or sidewalk which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-8; Code 2002, § 50-6) 
Sec. 50-22. - Use of gravel near streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No person conducting a business adjacent to a highway or sidewalk shall maintain a yard or lot pavement or covering of stones, pebbles or like substances in such manner that the stones, pebbles or other substances are movable upon being walked upon or driven over by vehicles going to and from the place of business and to and from the street or sidewalk, unless so placed and maintained that the stones, pebbles or substances will not get into or upon the adjacent sidewalk or street. 
(b)  Whenever a condition such as is mentioned in subsection (a) of this section is found to exist, either the owner or his agent in charge shall be notified. If the condition is not corrected within the time directed by the city manager, it shall be sufficient cause for revoking the permit and/or license under which the business is conducted, after notice and hearing before the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-9; Code 2002, § 50-7) 
Sec. 50-23. - Hauling refuse; tracking mud. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled over the city streets any dirt, shingles, laths or trash in a wagon or other vehicle, unless the wagon or vehicle is constructed to prevent and does prevent the spilling of dirt, shingles, laths or trash upon the streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a truck or other vehicle under his control to track mud, in appreciable quantity, on the city streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-10; Code 2002, § 50-8) 
Secs. 50-24—50-34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 50-35. - Due compensation for companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights of way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. of 2008(2)) 
Sec. 50-36. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this division. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this division. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexation and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. of 2008(2)) 
Secs. 50-37—50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREETLIGHT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lot means any single tract or land which falls within any of the zoning classifications, as defined by the zoning and planning ordinance of city as amended; provided, however, that in areas zoned for purposes other than single-family residential, different criteria may be adopted by the city water and sewer department for the payment of energy costs and retirement of construction costs. 
Lot owner means only that individual or corporation registered with the city water and sewer department as a customer shall be considered as an owner although the customer may not be vested with exclusive title. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(c); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-62. - Lighting cost declared a service. 
The governing authority of the city does hereby declare that the cost and service for creation of streetlight district or street lighting hereafter created shall be a service and not a tax, as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(a); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-63. - Responsibility for cost; retirement of existing contracts. 
(a)  The cost of providing and maintaining streetlight service in streetlight districts, and in streetlight districts hereafter created, shall be borne by the residents, lot owners and property located within the boundaries of a particular subdivision. The charge therefor shall be determined by the water and sewer director and approved by the city council and shall be posted and open for public inspection in the offices of the water and sewer director. The charge in the proposed streetlight district to be created petition shall be included on the petition circulated through the proposed district. In the event of excessive vandalism to streetlights within a district which results in the city being billed for repairs, the city may prorate those repair bills and add a pro rata share to those bills to the charge. 
(b)  In those districts now in existence, or which may hereafter be created in which there is construction cost, the same shall be retired as per agreement or contract, with the public utility or other person to whom the indebtedness is owed, and shall be billed accordingly per lot. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(b); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
_____
Sec. 50-64. - Payment date; delinquencies. 
The due date for the payment of the service and the sums herein provided for shall be the same date of each month as water bills. As amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the service area of the city water and sewer department with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with the standards set forth in this subsection. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 

 
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth of this average. 
_____ 
(2)  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the water and sewer director for approval showing that the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the water and sewer director disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public rights-of-way, he shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the water and sewer director may be appealed to the city council. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the water and sewer director, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the water and sewer director within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval. It shall be the responsibility of the water and sewer director to transmit forthwith to the city council all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, and to ensure that the appeal is promptly placed upon the agenda of the city council for its determination. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
(3)  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets, shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from the objectionable glare. The city water and sewer department is subject to the same penalties for late payment and for failure to pay. Any service provided by the city water and sewer department may be discontinued for late payment or nonpayment, as herein provided. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(d); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-65. - City responsible for collections. 
The billing, accounting, collecting and receiving of the monies herein provided for is hereby declared to be the responsibility of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(e); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-66. - Conformance by subdivision developer; acceptance of public ways. 
(a)  The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision is required to provide streetlight services and shall be required to conform to all of the standards herein provided for and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the city prior to commencing any construction of any streetlight facilities. 
(b)  The owner, developer or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park or like development, shall install streetlights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property in conformance with the standards herein provided for; and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the city prior to commencing any construction of any streetlight facilities. 
(c)  The city shall not accept any facilities of the city proposed to be dedicated until such time as the provisions hereof have been complied with. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(f); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-67. - Lighting in areas other than single-family residential. 
Street lighting in districts other than single-family residential shall be permitted only: 
(1)  With the approval of the city subject to the safety, economic and other factors involved; 
(2)  Upon final approval by the city; and 
(3)  Upon compliance with the standards herein provided for. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(g); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-68. - Installation and operation standards adopted; exceptions. 
(a)  In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1983), approval of the city shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
(b)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(h); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-69. - Petition for creation of district. 
(a)  Any lot owner within the service area of the city may present a request for the creation of a streetlight district to the city. Upon receipt of the request, the city shall determine the appropriate boundaries for a streetlight district, which will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The city shall then prepare a plat showing this proposed streetlight district and a petition for the creation of the proposed streetlight district shall then be circulated among the lot owners in the proposed district. That petition shall provide space for the lot owners in the proposed district to sign showing whether it is their reference that the proposed district be created. Once a petition has been returned to the city, there shall be no changes in the preferences recorded thereon, and the petition shall clearly state the same. If 75 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition for the creation of a streetlight district, the city shall determine whether or not to create the proposed streetlight district. Safety and economic factors shall be the prime consideration in making such determination. 
(b)  The petition for creation of the proposed streetlight district must be returned to the city within 90 days after it is obtained from their office; provided, however, that the city may, in their discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time for the return of the petition an additional 30 days for a total of 120 days, when a request for such extension is made to the city before expiration of the original 90 days. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(i); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-70. - Creation of districts under special conditions. 
In areas where special conditions as to safety, security, land topography, economic and other factors may be involved, the city may create special streetlight districts and provide for special street lighting under such terms and conditions as may be determined by the city, and other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(j); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-71. - City to contract with public utilities. 
The city may contract with the public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(k); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-72. - Exceptions to terms of article. 
The city may grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article where special conditions or hardships exist. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(l); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-73. - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the city that the state or federal law or rule regulation or order, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be in full force and effect. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(m); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-74. - Right of appeal. 
Any person or agency dissatisfied with any decision or action of the city shall have the right to appeal in writing from said decision to the city manager or his designee within 30 days from the date of such decision or action. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(n); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-75. - Copies, availability of provisions. 
A copy of this section shall be documented in the official minutes of the city is hereby required to post a copy of the same in the offices of the city and to provide copies thereof for persons desiring the same. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(o); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-76. - Availability of adopted standards. 
The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standard Institute (1983), as amended, shall be made available by the city for public reference. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(p); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-77. - Procedure to be followed by subdivision developers. 
Streetlights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions except, however, subdivisions containing only lots which are five acres or larger are exempted from the requirement of the submission of the final plat, the developer shall: 
(1)  Submit a final streetlight layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of streetlights within the subdivision. This drawing must be approved by the city prior to obtaining any building permit within that subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities and by the city. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 25 feet above the ground, and shall have appropriate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than 2½ feet long. One light shall be located at each street intersection within the subdivision. 
(2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures, and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
(3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the city. 
(4)  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(q); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Sec. 50-78. - Subdivisions with underground electric. 
In subdivisions utilizing underground cable for electrical service, the developers shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in the preceding section hereof. 
(Code 2002, § 50-9(r); Ord. of 8-7-2003(1)) 
Secs. 50-79—50-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-100. - Placement of obstruction. 
Except as provided for outdoor dining for restaurants, no person shall be allowed or permitted to obstruct any sidewalk in this city by putting any box, table, steps, merchandise or any other thing thereon at a greater distance from the inside wall than two and one-half feet, except by special permission from the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-4; Code 2002, § 50-36; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 8-20-2015) 
Sec. 50-101. - Permit for outdoor dining on sidewalk. 
The owner of a currently licensed restaurant, with no open violations, within the City of Canton may utilize public sidewalk rights of way for outdoor dining for restaurant sales only after obtaining a permit. Outdoor dining on private property within these districts is also allowed subject to compliance with these regulations except as noted herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 8-20-2015) 
Sec. 50-102. - Application requirements; criteria for granting of permit. 
The application for a permit to utilize the public sidewalk for outdoor dining shall include the following: 
(1)  A drawing of the proposed sidewalk utilization identifying placement of all tables, chairs and any other item to be placed on the sidewalk must accompany the application. The outdoor dining seating area must adhere to International Fire Codes and must not interfere with the circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the adjoining streets or on the sidewalk. The outdoor dining seating area shall leave open an unobstructed area of the sidewalk for pedestrian travel, with a minimum width of three feet or the minimum distance specified by ADA for pedestrian traffic, whichever is greater. The unobstructed pedestrian area shall be located between the outdoor dining area and the curb or nearest obstacle. There shall be a divider between the seating area and the pedestrian area of the sidewalk, and the outdoor dining seating area shall be completely enclosed by the divider. The application shall include a statement as to the type of divider to be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 8-20-2015) 
Sec. 50-103. - Regulations of use of sidewalk for outdoor dining. 
(a)  All kitchen equipment and refuse containers used to service the sidewalk cafe shall be located inside the primary restaurant. The restaurant owner/operator shall be responsible for maintaining the sidewalk café in a clean, neat, orderly and safe condition. No plastic chairs or tables may be used. All materials must be made from sturdy materials, like metal or wood. All debris and litter shall be removed daily. Private trash containers in the sidewalk café dining area are prohibited. Public sidewalk trash containers shall not be used as a means of disposing of table waste generated by restaurant consumers. 
(b)  The hours of operation for the sidewalk café shall be no greater than that of the principal restaurant and may be less as determined in the review process. 
(c)  The applicant must acknowledge by signature his awareness that food and alcoholic beverages may be sold outdoors only under the provisions of the permit granted under this article, and only within the arrangement as defined and under the following conditions: 
(1)  Sales shall occur only within an area of the zoned premises approved by the City of Canton and that limits access to the outdoor dining area. 
(2)  Approved signage must be displayed within said area to advise patrons that alcoholic beverages cannot be removed from the outdoor dining area under any circumstances. 
(3)  Any alcohol sold by the permitee cannot be served in bottles, cans, plastic cups, or any other disposable containers, but only in approved glass containers, except during special events as approved by the Main Street director. 
(d)  The use of the space by the permitee must conform to the drawing which was approved as part of the application process. 
(e)  All tables and furniture shall be kept in good state of repair and maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition and in accordance with Cherokee County Health Department Regulations. 
(f)  The use of umbrellas must be approved by the fire marshall and satisfy all fire codes. Umbrellas may not contain any writing. In the Historic Downtown Canton, as defined in section 6-211(4), umbrellas may only be black, burgundy, or off-white, and the color shall be approved by the Main Street director. 
(g)  Smoking shall not be permitted in the outdoor dining area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 8-20-2015) 
Sec. 50-104. - Indemnification of the city. 
(a)  As a condition of issuance, the approved applicant and any person acting under or pursuant to said approval, agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, release and defend (even if the allegations are false, fraudulent, or groundless) to the maximum extent allowed by law, the city manager, Main Street director, the City of Canton, its city council, and each member thereof, and its officers, employees, advisory board members and representatives, from and against any and all liability, loss, suits, claims, damages, costs, judgments and expenses (including attorney's fees and costs of litigation) which in whole or in part result from, arise out of, or are claimed to result from or to arise out of any acts, negligence, errors, or omissions of approved applicant, its employees, representatives, contractors, subcontractors, or agents by reason of or arising out of, or in any matter connected with, any and all acts, operations, privileges authorized, allowed or undertaken pursuant to the use approval under their ordinance including, without limitation, any condition or property used in operations. 
(b)  This agreement of indemnity includes, but is not limited to, personal injury, (including death at any time) and property or other damage sustained by any person or persons (including, but not limited to, companies, corporations, approved applicant and its employees or agents, and members of the general public). 
(c)  As a further condition of issuance of the approval, the approved applicant covenants not to sue the city manager or designee, city, its city council and each member thereof, and its employees, agents and representatives and shall cause its insurers to waive subrogation against the same with respect to any action, claim or demand in any way resulting from or connected with any or all undertakings and operations conducted pursuant to the use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 8-20-2015) 
Secs. 50-105—50-128. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENT OF FEES 

Sec. 50-129. - Purpose. 
(a)  The various properties designated in and created by this division are adopted for the purpose, among others, to: 
(1)  Promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and the general welfare of the city; 
(2)  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
(3)  Improve and protect the aesthetic appearance of the city; 
(4)  Improve and protect the quality of life. 
(b)  The various properties designated in and created by this division shall all be in accordance with the city comprehensive land use plan. 
(Code 2002, § 50-66; Ord. of 11-2-2000(1)) 
_____
Sec. 50-130. - Designation of assessment districts. 
The following fees shall be assessed for the construction of sidewalks in the following locations: 

 
*The medical district streets include Hospital Road, Hospital Drive and Medical Lane. 
(Code 2002, § 50-67; Ord. of 11-2-2000(1)) 
_____
Sec. 50-131. - Administration. 
(a)  All new construction and all new development projects within any of the designated districts enumerated in this division shall, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit, be required to pay a sidewalk assessment fee which shall be calculated by the director of planning and zoning, based upon the linear footage of the project as identified on the development site plan. 
(b)  The director of planning and zoning shall have the authority to verify any linear footage measurement submitted by the applicant. 
(Code 2002, § 50-68; Ord. of 11-2-2000(1)) 
Secs. 50-132—50-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 50-161. - Permit required. 
Any person desiring to make any excavation or other opening in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way in the city shall first obtain a permit therefor from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-21; Code 2002, § 50-96) 
Sec. 50-162. - Bond. 
Before any permit shall issue under this article, the applicant therefor shall deposit with the city a cash bond in an amount equal to the cost of filling and resurfacing the street, alley, sidewalk or other public way in which the excavation is desired to be made. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-22; Code 2002, § 50-97) 
Sec. 50-163. - Work by city. 
In lieu of making an excavation as provided in this article, the person desiring to have an excavation or other opening made in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way may request the city to perform the work. In such event, such person shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the city in performing the work. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-23; Code 2002, § 50-98) 
Sec. 50-164. - Protection of public. 
Every excavation or other opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way in the city shall be protected by barricades, lights or lanterns and other devices which shall give notice of such work to the public. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2-24; Code 2002, § 50-99) 
Secs. 50-165—50-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST 
DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 50-176. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Canton (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this ordinance for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-177. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-178. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized: 
City means the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Codified Ordinances means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the public works director of the City of Canton, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 50-179. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-180. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-181. - Incomplete registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-182. - Acceptance of the registration. 
Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-183. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 50-184. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the department of public works in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-185. - Permit procedure. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the department of public works. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-186. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-187. - Issuance of permit. 
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit: 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-188. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-189. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)  The permit shall remain in place construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-190. - Cancellation for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-191. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 50-192. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Canton municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-193. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-194. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-195. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-196. - Blasting or excavating. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 5. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 50-197. - Responsibility for the cost of repairing any facilities. 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-198. - Liability. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 50-199. - Construction site availability. 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-200. - Cessation of any work which poses a serious threat. 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-201. - Completion; notification. 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 7. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 50-202. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 50-188. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 50-203. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 50-204. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-205. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's Codified Ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city; shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulations and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-206. - Compliance. 
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-207. - Appeal of administrative decisions. 
All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 50-208. - Headings. 
Headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-15-2016) 
Chapter 54 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For general occupational tax and regulation and taxation of miscellaneous businesses, see chapter 18. For regulation and taxation of alcoholic beverage establishments, see chapter 6, for regulation and taxation of adult businesses, escort services, billiard rooms and other amusements, see chapter 10. For regulation and taxation of taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, see chapter 62. 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county tax officials and administration, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-100 et seq.; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; miscellaneous local administration provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380; sales and use taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.; taxes on tobacco products, O.C.G.A. § 48-11-1 et seq.; levy of occupation taxes by counties and municipalities on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq.; authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 54-19. - Ad valorem tax rate. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor and city council to fix, by resolution placed upon their minutes, the rate of taxation for all purposes for that fiscal year at a regular meeting of the mayor and city council on or before the first Thursday of September of each year, setting forth separately the tax rate upon all property for the separate purposes of paying bonded indebtedness and for general purposes, but nothing in this section shall prevent the use of money collected from special, business or other taxes or sources for any purpose for which such funds may be lawfully used. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-1; Code 2002, § 54-26) 
Sec. 54-20. - Due date; lien. 
All taxes due the city shall be and become a lien against the taxpayer as of January 1 in the year when the tax is due and payable, but all ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable as soon as the amount is ascertained by the chief finance officer. No execution for such taxes shall be issued, however, until after December 20 of the year in which the tax is assessed. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by state law. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-2; Code 2002, § 54-27) 
Sec. 54-21. - Collection. 
The treasurer shall open his books to collect all taxes upon receipt of the tax digest from the county each year, or as soon thereafter as possible, and shall close his books 90 days after issuance of bills each year. He shall issue his receipt for all taxes paid to any taxpayer. He may give notice in the local papers when the taxes are due. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-3; Code 2002, § 54-28) 
Sec. 54-22. - Issuance of executions. 
The chief finance officer shall issue an execution against anyone who has not paid his tax after the close of the books and shall turn the execution over to the chief of police for collection. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-4; Code 2002, § 54-29) 
Sec. 54-23. - Exemptions. 
House Bill 836 (COMMITTEE SUBSTITUTE) 
By: Representatives Stancil of the 16th, Pinholster of the 15th and Scheid of the 17th 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED  AN ACT 
To provide for a homestead exemption from all City of Canton ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $112,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for certain residents of that city who are 62 years of age or older or disabled; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL  ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
SECTION 1. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Canton including, but not limited to, taxes to pay interest on and to retire bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 62 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this Act is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Canton who is a senior citizen or who is disabled is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Canton ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $112,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of the property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  (1)  In order to qualify for the disability exemption provided for in subsection (b) of this section, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A., relative to medical practitioners, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(2)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit and application with the governing authority of the City of Canton, or the designee thereof, giving: 
(A)  The person's age; 
(B)  If disabled, the certificate or certificates required by paragraph (1) of this subsection; and 
(C)  Such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Canton, or the designee thereof, to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. 
(d)  The governing authority of the City of Canton, or the designee thereof, shall provide affidavit and application forms for the exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section which shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(e)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, affidavit, and certificate, if required, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Canton, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county school district ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(g)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2002. 
SECTION 2. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the municipal election superintendent of City of Canton shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Canton for approval or rejection. The municipal election superintendent shall conduct that election on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2001, and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The municipal superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Cherokee County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
 "( ) YES Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from all City of Canton ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of 
  ( ) NO  $112,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for certain residents of that city who are 62 years of age or older or disabled?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2002. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Canton. It shall be the municipal election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
SECTION 3. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
SECTION 4. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(H.B. 836, §§ 1—4, 3-19-2001) 
Secs. 54-24—54-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

Sec. 54-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. The term "hotel" does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any parson operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in the hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date, provided that state or local government officers and employees when traveling on official business shall be considered permanent occupants after five days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative trustee, syndicate of any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 2002, § 54-56; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-41) 
Sec. 54-49. - Imposition and rate. 
There shall be paid a tax of eight percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel/motel in the city for the purpose of funding tourism, marketing and to promote economic development. 
(Code 2002, § 54-57; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-42; Ord. No. 20090115, 1-15-2009; Ord. No. 20090820, 8-20-2009) 
State Law reference— Authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 54-50. - Collection by operator. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city as provided in this article and renting guestrooms in this city, not exempted under this article, shall collect the tax imposed by this article on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(Code 2002, § 54-58; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-43) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 54-51. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident. 
(Code 2002, § 54-59; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-44) 
Sec. 54-52. - Registration of operator. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city, on a form provided by the finance department. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; if ownership is by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; if ownership is by a corporation, by an officer. The finance department shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certification of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Code 2002, § 54-60; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-45) 
Sec. 54-53. - Determination, report and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of taxes levied under this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Report. Failure to submit timely reports will result in the imposition of a ten percent penalty. After 30 days, interest will accrue at the maximum rate permitted by state law, from the due date of the taxes. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
(Code 2002, § 54-61; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-46; Ord. of 10-18-2001(2), § 3-2-46(b); Ord. No. 2016-15, § 1, 8-18-2016) 
State Law reference— Filing of returns and payment of taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.2. 
Sec. 54-54. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation. If the city is not satisfied with the return of the tax levied under this article or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the city's possession or that may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by state law. 
(c)  Notice of determination. The chief finance officer shall give to the operator written notice of this determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the city records. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time limits for mailing. Except for failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 2002, § 54-62; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-47; Ord. of 10-18-2001(2), § 3-2-47(b); Ord. No. 2016-18, § 1, 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 54-55. - Determination when no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return as required in this article, the chief finance officer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city. Written notices shall be given in the manner described in this article. 
(b)  Interest. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by state law from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Code 2002, § 54-63; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-48; Ord. of 10-18-2001(2), § 3-2-48(b); Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1, 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 54-56. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of chief finance officer. The chief finance officer shall administer and enforce the sections of this article for the collection of tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required. Every operator renting a guestroom in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the chief finance officer may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The chief finance officer or any person authorized in writing by the chief finance officer may examine the books, papers, records, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to persons and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of this article, the city may require the filing of reports by any person having in such person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the chief finance officer and shall set forth the rental charge for each occupancy; the dates of occupancy; and such other information as the city may require. 
(Code 2002, § 54-64; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-49) 
Sec. 54-57. - Penalty for violation; failure to register or furnish return. 
Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation of this article committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required in this article or to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the chief finance officer or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(Code 2002, § 54-65; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-50) 
State Law reference— Failure, neglect or refusal to collect tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-59; making false or fraudulent return, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-60; failure or refusal to furnish return or supplemental return, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-61; failure to keep records or open records to inspection, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-62. 
Sec. 54-58. - Collection. 
(a)  Authority to bring action. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the chief finance officer may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the chief finance officer showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability of purchaser. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold tax as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Erroneous or illegal collection. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the chief finance officer. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the chief finance officer, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the chief finance officer, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or his administrators or executors. 
(Code 2002, § 54-66; Ord. of 11-2-2000(2), § 3-2-51) 
Sec. 54-59. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4.4). 
(Code 2002, § 54-67; Ord. No. 2007111501, 11-15-2007) 
Secs. 54-60—54-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— License fees of insurance companies generally, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-3; county and municipal corporation tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 54-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 2002, § 54-251; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-251, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-78. - Intent. 
The mayor and city council hereby expresses its intent to impose license fees on insurers conducting business in the city, to impose a gross premium tax on insurers operating within the state, to provide an effective date, and for other purposes related to this article. 
(Code 2002, §§ 54-96, 54-250; Ord. of 11-7-1996(2), §§ 1, 3, 4; Ord. No. 2007110101, §§ 54-96, 54-250, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-79. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Canton, Georgia, in the amount of $75.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 54-80, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Canton, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $75.00. 
(Code 2002, §§ 54-97, 54-252; Ord. of 11-7-1996(2), § 1; Ord. of 4-18-2002(1), §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 2003-11-06, §§ 1—7, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 2007110101, §§ 54-97, 54-252, 11-1-2007; Ord. No. 2012-11, § 1, 8-16-2012) 
Sec. 54-80. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
There is hereby levied an additional annual license fee in the maximum amount permitted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2) for each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee in the maximum amount permitted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2) on each insurance company. 
(Code 2002, §§ 54-97, 54-253; Ord. of 11-7-1996(2), § 1; Ord. of 4-18-2002(1), §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 2003-11-06, §§ 1—7, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 2007110101, §§ 54-97, 54-253, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-81. - Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 2007 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 54-79. 
(Code 2002, §§ 54-97, 54-99, 54-254; Ord. of 11-7-1996(2), §§ 1, 3; Ord. of 4-18-2002(1), §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 2003-11-06, §§ 1—7, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 2007110101, §§ 54-97, 54-99, 54-254, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-82. - Same—Levied upon all other insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 2007 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premium received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 54-79. 
(Code 2002, §§ 54-97, 54-100, 54-255; Ord. of 11-7-1996(2), §§ 1, 4; Ord. of 4-18-2002(1), §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 2003-11-06, §§ 1—7, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 2007110101, §§ 54-97, 54-100, 54-255, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-83. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed by sections 54-79 and 54-80 shall be due and payable on January 1 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Code 2002, §§ 54-97, 54-101, 54-256; Ord. of 11-7-1996(2), §§ 1, 5; Ord. of 4-18-2002(1), §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 2003-11-06, §§ 1—7, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. 2007110101, §§ 54-97, 54-101, 54-256, 11-1-2007) 
Secs. 54-84—54-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SECONDARY ELECTRIC SUPPLIERS TAX 

Sec. 54-110. - Gross receipts business tax established; verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
Each secondary electric supplier (including specifically electric membership corporations whether or not operated for profit), within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., distributing and selling electric power within the city which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not said secondary electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the city shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent on any and all gross revenue derived from the distribution and sale of electric power to their customers, members, or purchasers within the city, according to the verified statement of said gross revenues which shall be submitted by said secondary electric supplier at the time said taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the city. 
(Code 2002, § 54-186; Ord. of 8-7-2003(2)) 
Sec. 54-111. - Taxes payable annually; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
The taxes hereinto before set out in this article shall be due and payable to the city on March 1 annually, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding calendar year; also, the percentage of said gross revenues hereinbefore prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other licenses and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of said secondary electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(Code 2002, § 54-187; Ord. of 8-7-2003(2)) 
Sec. 54-112. - Electric service within the city. 
Secondary electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the city, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the city, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax herein levied under this article other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act, O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(Code 2002, § 54-188; Ord. of 8-7-2003(2)) 
Sec. 54-113. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  The chief financial officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article, and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(b)  The chief financial officer shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Code 2002, § 54-189; Ord. of 8-7-2003(2)) 
Secs. 54-114—54-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 54-140. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bank means any financial institution chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a corporate structure authorizing the issuance of capital stock. 
Depository financial institution means a bank or a savings and loan association. 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Savings and loan association means any financial institution, other than a credit union, chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a mutual corporate form. 
(Code 2002, § 54-300; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-300, 11-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Similar definition, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95. 
Sec. 54-141. - Tax levied; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 2007 and for each year thereafter an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
(Code 2002, § 54-301; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-301, 11-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Municipal and county business license tax on financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 54-142. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a) shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 2002, § 54-302; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-302, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-143. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a), each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of the gross receipts with the city tax collector's office on or before March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue, based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The return shall provide the information necessary to determine the portion of the taxpayer's state gross receipts to be allocated to each taxing jurisdiction in which such institution has an office. The city tax collector's office shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in said return. 
(Code 2002, § 54-303; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-303, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-144. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the tax collector at the time of filing the return. 
(Code 2002, § 54-304; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-303, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-145. - Administrative provisions. 
The city's tax collector is hereby authorized and directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution located in the city and to the home office of each such depository financial institution that does business in the city if located outside the county. 
(Code 2002, § 54-305; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-305, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 54-146. - Relation of tax to other business licenses. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be in lieu of any other business license upon depository financial institutions. 
(Code 2002, § 54-306; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-306, 11-1-2007) 
ARTICLE VII. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 54-147. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Month or monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease of 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leased five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-148. - Excise tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. on any motor vehicle rental charge made in the city. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recover for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the city and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges, actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever, is greater. 
(c)  The proceeds of the excise tax levied by this article are to be expended for the following projects: 
(1)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce and tourism; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention trade, sports and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with subsection (2) of this section. 
(d)  Amounts collected pursuant to this article may be expended pursuant to a contract or contracts with a county, municipality, development authority, downtown development authority, urban development authority, recreation authority, or any combination of two or more of such entities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-149. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the state and returns it within the state; 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the state and returns it outside the state. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-150. - Authority and records. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or designee may require. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-151. - Reimbursement for collecting monies. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-152. - Statement required; penalty for failure to comply. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month, the motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the city, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the motor vehicle concern shall submit the net taxes due for each particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the maximum rate permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 54-153. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by the city manager or designee, during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-154. - Deficiency determination. 
(a)  If it appears that a return for excise tax or the amount of tax remitted is inaccurate or incomplete, the city manager or designee may compute and determine the amount required to be paid based upon any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the city manager or designee shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by state law from the due date of the taxes found due. 
(c)  The city manager or designee shall give to the rental vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be made personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the city as provided by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service shall be complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return was filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 54-155. - Audit authority. 
The city manager or designee upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of the tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-156. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city manager or designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-157. - Additional penalty. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall continue until such time as it expires as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 3-20-2014, eff. 10-1-2014) 
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT TAX INCENTIVE PROGRAM 

Sec. 54-158. - Authority and findings. 
(a)  In 2002 a majority of the state's electorate, voting in a referendum called for the purpose of ratifying a Constitutional Amendment to the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, now article IX, section II, paragraph VII(d), confirmed that the existence in a community of real property that is maintained in a blighted condition increases the city budget by increasing the need for governmental services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services; and rehabilitation of blighted improved property decreases the need for such governmental services and allows local governments to better utilize limited revenues available from ad valorem taxation of real property. 
(b)  The city council has determined the existence of properties within the city that are maintained in blighted condition and have enacted various ordinances intended to combat the existence of slum and blight and prevent its spread to properties in other areas of the city, https://www.municode.com/library/ however, the cost of current and previous efforts has outpaced the ability of the city to fund blight from current revenue sources. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-159. - Establishment and purpose of the community redevelopment tax incentive program. 
The city council hereby establishes a community redevelopment tax incentive program, in accordance with the authority found at article IX, section II, paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, as follows: 
(1)  The existence of real property that is maintained in a blighted condition increases the costs to city budgets by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
(2)  In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by article IX, section II, paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-160. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be used in the application and enforcement of this chapter: Blighted property, blighted or blight means any improved or developed property that: 
(1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; 
b.  Is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; 
c.  Poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; or used in the commission of drug crimes; 
d.  There is repeated illegal activity on the property which the property owner knew or should have known; 
e.  Is abandoned—Meaning a cessation of the use of the property, by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights to the property to another owner or of resuming the use of the property in a timely fashion; 
f.  Otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; or 
g.  Has graffiti on the structure which the property owner fails to remove after 60 days' notice. 
(2)  Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
Building official shall mean the city's building official, zoning director, code enforcement official, law enforcement official or any other city official who is authorized by law and this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this section. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit of human habitation. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Improved property means any real property containing manmade structures intended to be permanent and fixed in place. Provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, that is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons named as the owner in the tax records for Cherokee County and persons having of record in the county in which the blighted property is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon the blighted property; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations that own real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-161. - Levy of increased ad valorem tax on blighted real property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city that has been officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven times the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or other provided by general law. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the next tax bill cycle which begins October 1 following official designation of a real property as blighted, provided, however, that if the designation of blight is made after June 30th, then the tax shall be applied and reflected in the tax bill cycle of the subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-162. - Use of revenues from increased tax. 
Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and the finance director and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit buildings and structures. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-163. - Official designation of property maintained in blighted condition. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property by the building official. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
a.  A request for inspection of a parcel of property may be made by the building official, or by the public officer, or by at least ten residents of the city. Said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in this article; or 
b.  The building official may cause a survey of existing housing/building conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels that may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(b)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be prepared by the building official and submitted to the public officer. The inspection report shall indicate whether the building official finds the property to be maintained in a blighted condition, and, if so, which conditions from the definition of "blighted property," "blighted," or "blight" in section 54-160 contributed to the finding. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspections shall be made and will supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-164. - Notice to be served. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the submission by the building official of the inspection report indicating that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition, the public officer shall cause written notice of a hearing to be served upon the parties of interest; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. 
(b)  The written notice served by the public officer shall set forth the finding of the building official indicating that the property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. 
(c)  Service shall be made by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the parties of interest whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the notice shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property. For parties of interest whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-165. - Hearing; designation of property as maintained in blighted condition. 
(a)  The hearing before the public officer shall take place no later than 30 days after service of the hearing notice, but not sooner than ten days after notice is served. The hearing before the public officer may be continued upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(b)  At the hearing before the public officer, the building official shall bear the burden of proving, by the preponderance of the evidence that the property is being maintained in a blighted condition due to one or more of the conditions set forth in definition of "blighted property," "blighted," or "blight." The property owner shall be given the opportunity to present evidence and testimony to dispute the findings of the building official. 
(c)  If, after hearing the evidence presented at the hearing, the public officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is being maintained in a blighted condition, the public officer shall issue a written notice designating such property as maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this chapter, and is subject to increased taxation. The written designation of blight shall also enumerate the conditions which must be remedied in order for the declaration of blight to be removed. The declaration shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  The property owner shall have 30 days from the receipt of the public officer's written designation of blight in which to request an appeals hearing before the city council. If no request for appeal is received by the public officer, a copy of the designation of blight shall be served upon the City of Canton tax official who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. Provided, however, that if the designation of blight is made after June 30th, then the tax shall be applied and reflected in the tax bill cycle of the subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-166. - Appeal of designation of property maintained in blighted condition. 
(a)  To request an appeal before the city council a written request for a hearing shall be filed with the public officer stating the reason for the appeal. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the public officer shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled appeal hearings shall be published prior to the hearing. Appeal hearings may be continued upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(c)  At the hearing, the building official shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this chapter. 
(d)  Upon hearing from the building official and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the city council shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the designation of the public officer. The determination of the city council shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the city council shall be deemed final. 
(e)  If the city council affirms the designation of the public officer, a copy of such designation shall be served upon the city tax official who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. Provided, however, that if the city council's determination is made after June 30th, then the tax shall be applied and reflected in the tax bill cycle of the subsequent year. 
(f)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the city council affirming the designation of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Cherokee County for a writ of certiorari, within 30 days of issuance of the city council's written determination. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-167. - Remediation or redevelopment to remove designation of blighted condition. 
(a)  In order for a property have the blighted designation removed the property owner or person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property must submit to the building official a plan of corrective action or redevelopment. 
(b)  All corrective action or redevelopment plans shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and contain the following: 
(1)  The corrective action or redevelopment plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property. 
(2)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements. 
(3)  The corrective action or redevelopment plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for that area. 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources that will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof. 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-168. - Lifting of blight designation. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property that has been officially designated pursuant to this chapter as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the blight designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a corrective action or redevelopment plan as set forth in section 54-167 and as approved by the city's building official and zoning administrator that addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property. 
(2)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(b)  Before taking any action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected within 30 days of the receipt of the petition by the building official, who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work under the corrective action or redevelopment plan has been performed to applicable codes in a workmanlike manner. 
(c)  Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax official for the city. Provided, however, that if the determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition is made after June 30th, then the tax shall be applied and reflected in the tax bill cycle of the subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Sec. 54-169. - Decreased rate of taxation after removal of blight designation. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer as provided in this chapter, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.75 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law. 
(b)  Such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted and shall continue for three successive years, at which time the millage rate shall return to same rate generally applied in the city. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the city tax official in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, land lot and tax parcel number, as assigned by the Cherokee County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the city tax official to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increase or reduced ad valorem taxation under the ordinance from which this article is derived. All ordinances and Code sections, or parts thereof, in conflict with the foregoing are expressly repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-19-2015) 
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; cities and counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are hereby adopted as and for the city traffic regulations with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-1; Code 2002, § 58-1; Ord. No. 2004-0520, 5-20-2004) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 58-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
When traffic upon the roads in the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the chief of police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts. Any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-2; Code 2002, § 58-2) 
Sec. 58-3. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any manner controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any city street or sidewalk so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the city streets or sidewalks after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-5; Code 2002, § 58-3) 
Sec. 58-4. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval of the mayor and city council, the chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain the following by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(3)  Traffic lanes. 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones. 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices. 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the city roads and streets. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter, for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by the mayor and city council, and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the city. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk, shall be available to the public, and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1985, §§ 10-1-4, 10-2-3; Code 2002, § 58-34; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of official traffic control devices preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(2); traffic signs, signals, etc., O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20 et seq. 
Secs. 58-5—58-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-27. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the city streets, alleyways and other public ways. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle, except at a stop signal or stop sign or to honor another driver's right-of-way or in an emergency situation, in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle the block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-1; Code 2002, § 58-31) 
Sec. 58-28. - Towing. 
No vehicle shall tow more than one vehicle within the city. The connection between such vehicles shall not be longer than 16 feet. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-5; Code 2002, § 58-36) 
Sec. 58-29. - Cutting corners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle upon or across any driveway, sidewalk, filling station or other commercial driveway or other similar surface located at the corner of any intersection protected by a traffic control signal or sign for the purpose of evading the regulations governing the turning of motor vehicles at an intersection. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-9; Code 2002, § 58-37) 
Sec. 58-30. - Vehicle cover. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads in this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads. 
(Code 1985, § 10-1-3; Code 2002, § 58-38) 
Secs. 58-31—58-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED 

Sec. 58-49. - General speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limit is posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
(Code 1985, § 10-2-2; Code 2002, § 58-32) 
State Law reference— Maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; power of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 58-50. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The mayor and city council may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 58-49 on any street or portion thereof within the city in accordance with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
(Code 2002, § 58-33; Ord. No. 2005-03-03-02, 2-17-2005; Ord. No. 20050823, 8-23-2005) 
State Law reference— Maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; power of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 58-51. - On-system. 
The following shall be the on-system maximum speed limits: 

 
Signs to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation 
***School zone hours effective*** 
a.m. from 30 minutes prior to commencement times to 30 minutes after commencement time; school days only 
p.m. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time; school days only 
(Ord. No. 01-04-10, 5-15-2008; Ord. No. 2014-15, § 1, 7-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-52. - Off-system. 
The following shall be the maximum off-system speed limits: 

 
***SCHOOL ZONE*** 
School zone speed limit on all "off system" roads shall be 25 MPH from 30 minutes prior to commencement to 30 minutes after commencement a.m. and from 30 minutes prior to dismissal to 30 minutes after dismissal p.m. on school days only. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-10, 5-15-2008; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1, 10-17-2013; Ord. No. 2014-15, § 1, 7-17-2014) 
_____
Sec. 58-53. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the city. 
(b)  Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
(Code 2002, § 58-35) 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; authority for use or speed detection devices by local law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2; requirements that local government obtain state permit, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Secs. 58-54—58-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING 

Sec. 58-80. - General prohibitions. 
In addition to the violation of posted signs upon the city streets and public parking areas, the following shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Parking of a vehicle in a designated space with the front of the vehicle facing the opposite direction from the flow of traffic in the adjacent travel lane. 
(2)  Double parking or parking in traffic lanes. 
(3)  Parking so as to obstruct or intrude into any portion of a crosswalk or driveway. 
(4)  Parking within or obstructing any portion of a designated fire lane. 
(5)  Parking in such a manner that a vehicle is not completely within a parking space designated by painted lines, whether upon city streets or city parking lots. 
(6)  Parking for any time in excess of the posted time limitation for a parking space. A vehicle shall be construed to have remained stationary (continuously parked in a space) if said vehicle has not been moved for a distance of more than one block, or 300 feet, whichever is less, from the space and shall be subject to a ticket for violation of the parking time restriction as if still parked in the original parking space. 
(7)  Physical removal of or tampering with any device or mark placed upon a vehicle's tire or wheel by personnel of the police department for the purpose of circumventing the time limitations of a particular parking classification or to circumvent the parking privileges of this division. 
(8)  Parking upon sidewalks intended for pedestrian travel. 
(9)  Parking within spaces designated as health services parking or loading zones by unauthorized vehicles and for purposes not intended by this division. 
(10)  Parking adjacent to yellow curbs. 
(Code 2002, § 58-66; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-3; Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 6-19-2014) 
Sec. 58-81. - Prohibited where posted and marked. 
No person shall park a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, on any sidewalk or street within the city in any zone or area posted by a sign as prohibited parking, on any yellow curb, or in violation of any sign posted within the city that sets forth parking prohibitions or restrictions. 
(Code 2002, § 58-67; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-1) 
Sec. 58-82. - Parking classifications. 
There shall be the following parking prohibitions or restrictions within the city: 
(1)  Parking prohibited. 
(2)  No parking any time. 
(3)  Eight-hour parking. 
(4)  Two-hour parking. 
(5)  20-minute parking. 
(6)  Handicapped parking. 
(7)  Health services parking. 
(8)  Loading zone. 
(Code 2002, § 58-68; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 58-83. - Posted time limitations. 
Any parking classification shall be posted with signs containing a time limitation as to permitted parking with regard to all parking areas for which a time limitation is established. For all posted time limitations greater than 20 minutes, it shall be deemed a separate violation for each one-hour period for which any vehicle remains parked in excess of the posted time limit. For all posted time limitations of 20 minutes, separate violations shall not commence until the vehicle has remained parked in excess of one hour past the initial 20-minute time period, with separate violations being added in one-hour increments thereafter. 
(Code 2002, § 58-69; Ord. of 6-5-1997(2), § 10-3-5) 
Sec. 58-84. - Handicapped parking spaces. 
Parking within handicapped spaces shall be governed by the provisions of state law as to authorized vehicles, limitations as to use, if any, and penalties for unauthorized parking within handicapped spaces. Handicapped spaces may be marked by the recognized symbol for such spaces, blue painted lines or posted signs. 
(Code 2002, § 58-70; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-4) 
Sec. 58-85. - Health services parking. 
For purposes of this division, health services parking shall be parking spaces intended for use by physicians, hospitals, clinics, health providers, pharmacies or drugstores with delivery services, nursing homes, intermediate care facilities and residences requiring home health care visits by health professionals. Requests for parking spaces designated as health services parking shall be made in writing to the mayor and city council, who shall have authority to designate the spaces. 
(Code 2002, § 58-71; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-2(1)) 
Sec. 58-86. - Loading zones. 
Requests for parking spaces designated as a loading zone shall be made in writing to the Historic Downtown Canton Association or other association organized to represent the business and professional community downtown. Upon consideration of a request, the association shall submit a written recommendation as to action on the request together with the request to the city clerk, who shall forward the request and recommendation to the appropriate council committee for study and recommendation to the mayor and city council. If an organization representing the business/professional community does not exist, requests under this section shall be submitted to the clerk to be forwarded to the appropriate council committee together with written recommendations by the businesses located within the same block and fronting the same street as the requestor and the street upon which the space at issue is located. For purposes of this division, loading zones shall be available only upon the showing of a need for the furtherance of a business purpose. 
(Code 2002, § 58-72; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-2(2), (3)) 
Sec. 58-87. - Other classifications. 
For purposes of this division, the prior classifications authorized by this division shall be posted by signs applicable to each area or individual space bearing such limitations as to time or location as approved by the mayor and city council not inconsistent with this division or any map or plan so adopted. 
(Code 2002, § 58-73; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-2(4)) 
Sec. 58-88. - Requests for waivers. 
Requests for waivers of any section or special consideration not specifically addressed in this division shall be submitted in writing to the mayor and city council by presentation of the request to the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 58-74; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-6) 
Sec. 58-89. - Decisions on requests. 
Requests made under any section of this division will be considered by the mayor and city council at the next regular council meeting, provided the request and any recommendation required have been submitted to the city clerk at least three weeks in advance of such council meeting, otherwise consideration may be held at the next following regular meeting. 
(Code 2002, § 58-75; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-7) 
Sec. 58-90. - Fines. 
Fines for violation of this division shall be set by the municipal judge, pursuant to guidelines established by the mayor and city council, within the limitations set forth in section 1-12. Fines shall be payable in cash, by money order or other certified funds to the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 58-76; Ord. of 6-5-1997(1), § 10-3-8) 
Sec. 58-91. - Enforcement period for overtime parking. 
For purposes of this division, hours of enforcement for overtime parking shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, for overtime parking violations. All other violations shall be enforced at all times. 
(Code 2002, § 58-77; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-9) 
Sec. 58-92. - Enforcement by citation. 
Enforcement of this division shall be through a civil action in the municipal court by the issuance of a citation which shall either be left with the vehicle or delivered to the person in possession thereof. For the purposes of such civil action, it shall be presumed that the owner of such vehicle is in control and possession thereof. If any person is found to have violated this division, such person shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 58-90. 
(Code 2002, § 58-78; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-10) 
Sec. 58-93. - Immobilization or impounding. 
(a)  A vehicle which has accumulated four or more citations for any violation of this division for which payment has not been made within ten business days of issuance and which is found parked upon the public way or in any public place at any time within the city may be immobilized in place or removed and stored until the citations have been paid and the cost of such impoundment, storage and other charges authorized by this division have been paid in full. If impoundment by immobilization is utilized, a charge shall be made against the violator, such charge to be paid prior to release and in addition to any other storage fees and related costs. 
(b)  The police department shall be authorized to immobilize any vehicle which has accumulated one or more unpaid citations; provided, however, the owner of such vehicle is given written notice of each unpaid citation together with due warning that immobilization or impoundment may be imminent upon failure to promptly pay all fines in full. After the owner of any vehicle has received written notice of four unpaid citations, the police department shall be authorized to immobilize or impound such vehicle without further written notification to the owner. The notice shall inform such owner of the date, nature and number of outstanding violations, and the owner shall then have seven days to pay the outstanding violations or such vehicle may be immobilized in place or impounded. The owner will be provided an opportunity to contest the validity of the proposed action upon written request to the chief of police within seven days of receipt of the notice described in this subsection. Any owner who requests an opportunity to contest the validity of proposed immobilization or impoundment of his vehicle shall be provided a hearing before the municipal court, which shall be scheduled as soon as practicable, and enforcement of this section shall be stayed pending the decision of the municipal court. For purposes of such hearing, the owner of such vehicle shall be presumed to be in possession and control of such vehicle at all times. Any owner failing to appear at the hearing will be assessed a fee not to exceed 50 percent of the amount of each violation. 
(c)  As soon as a vehicle has been removed and stored or immobilized in place under this section, the police officer taking such action shall notify the chief of police, and the chief of police shall notify the registered owner of such vehicle within two business days of the impoundment or immobilization. Such notice shall state the location of such vehicle and the requirements for release as set forth in this division. 
(d)  Any person having custody of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section or who has the authority to release such immobilized vehicle shall not release it until the individual requesting its release presents satisfactory evidence of his right to possession and signs a receipt therefor. In addition, such vehicle shall not be released until all citations have been paid, as well as all other charges provided for in this division, or until the chief of police shall have certified the posting of a bond equal to the total outstanding amounts due on all citations, as well as all other charges provided for in this division. 
(e)  Whenever any person requests the right to post bond pursuant to this section, such bond shall be given in cash and receipt given therefor. Such bond money shall be refunded in the amount of the fine which may be levied for each alleged violation of this division upon payment of such fine or upon a finding by the municipal court of not violating this division. Any bond shall be forfeited unless the person posting it appears in the municipal court in accordance with his summons. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to tamper with or attempt to remove any immobilizing device attached to a vehicle or to extract or attempt to prevent the removal of any vehicle as provided in this section. The penalty for any such violation shall be as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 58-79; Ord. of 3-2-1995, § 10-3-11; Ord. of 6-5-1997(2), § 10-3-11) 
Sec. 58-94. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes. 
(a)  Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor-trailer combination, motorcycle, moped, or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be a violation of a city ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2002, § 58-80) 
Sec. 58-95. - Habitual parking violators. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Habitual violator means three parking violations in a 30-day period, two of which must be on separate days. 
(b)  Identification; notification. Once a habitual violator has been identified, notification must be left with the vehicle notifying the owner/driver that the vehicle has been determined to be a habitual violator and will face increased parking fines. 
(c)  Increased fines for subsequent violations. Once the notification has been left with the vehicle, the fine will increase for the next three citations to $25.00 per citation. The fines for the fourth and subsequent violations after notification will increase to $50.00. 
(d)  Removal from status. The vehicle will be removed from the habitual violator status once the vehicle has no citations for a period of six months. 
(Code 2002, § 58-81; Ord. No. 2003-11-20, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 58-96. - Parking a motor vehicle for selling or advertising for sale. 
(a)  An owner or lessee of any motor vehicle shall not display or park such motor vehicle on real property within the city limit for the purpose of selling or advertising the sale of such vehicle, unless: 
(1)  The property is licensed by the city as a motor vehicle sales lot; or 
(2)  The property owner has obtained a sales permit from the office of the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  The cost of this permit shall be $10.00. 
(c)  Permits shall be limited to a maximum of three permits per person, per year. The permit must be prominently displayed in the front window of the vehicle for sale. 
(d)  The duration of the permit should not be for more than 30 days with the right to renew for one additional permit within a 30-day period. 
(e)  This section shall be in accordance with section 1-12. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to government forfeitures, banks or financial institutions offering repossessed or recovered vehicles for sale upon their own property. 
(Code 2002, § 58-4; Ord. of 8-7-2003(3), § 1) 
Secs. 58-97—58-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 58-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Restricted area means that area of the city located and existing geographically inside the perimeter created by the following roadways: Georgia Business No. 5; Georgia Highway No. 5; Interstate 575; and the city bypass. Such streets shall be known as the alternative truck route and are shown and depicted on a map on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Restricted vehicle means all vehicles or combinations of vehicles, including trailers, having over six wheels per vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
(Code 2002, § 58-106; Ord. of 1-7-1993) 
Sec. 58-122. - Use required. 
A restricted vehicle shall not traverse, transport or use city streets within the restricted area for the purpose of a thoroughfare or accessing other roads or streets by passing through or over the restricted area. 
(Code 2002, § 58-107; Ord. of 1-7-1993) 
Sec. 58-123. - Exceptions. 
All restricted vehicles approaching the city shall utilize the alternative truck route unless the vehicle meets the following classification which shall be expressly exempted from the requirements of this division: 
(1)  Vehicles owned or operated by the city. 
(2)  Vehicles under contract with the city to provide city services. 
(3)  Vehicles used by contractors and materialmen while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of utilities within the city. 
(4)  Vehicles owned by public utilities, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of utilities within the city. 
(5)  Vehicles engaged in emergency services. 
(6)  Vehicles owned or used in the operation of a business enterprise having its business location within the restricted area. 
(7)  Vehicles entering the city that have a business-related purpose within the restricted area, i.e., delivery or pickup of goods or property. 
(8)  Vehicles entering the restricted area for the purpose of making a stop at a business or residence located in the restricted area. 
(Code 2002, § 58-108; Ord. of 1-7-1993) 
Chapter 62 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to require certificate of public necessity and convenience as prerequisite to operation of taxicab within local government's geographical boundaries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 62-19. - Operation of taxicab to be in compliance with article. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a taxicab in the city except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 54-350; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-350, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-20. - License fees for annual operation and driver's permit. 
License fees are hereby levied per annum for each taxicab maintained or operated, and per annum for each driver's permit. The license fees are established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. The business occupation tax shall be in accordance with the current business occupation tax ordinance. The following criteria must be met to maintain a taxicab license: 
(1)  Establishment and maintenance of an office in a commercially zoned area within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(2)  Submission of a copy of current lease or proof of ownership of office space. 
(3)  Establishment and maintenance of a publicly listed telephone number. 
(4)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company. 
(5)  Maintain off-street parking lot capable of accommodating all company vehicles. 
(6)  Maintain a file for each vehicle containing proof of current instruments. 
(7)  Possess a valid six-month auto insurance policy. 
(Code 2002, § 54-351; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-351, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-21. - Permits for operation. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a taxicab or conduct the business of operating taxicabs in the city until the person, firm, or corporation has first applied for and obtained an occupation tax certificate and a taxicab license. The applications for the occupation tax certificate and license shall be made to the city tax collector upon forms provided by the business tax division for that purpose. The license for vehicles shall be issued by the city tax collector. Permits for drivers will be issued by the police department or the city's designee. No person shall operate a taxicab in the corporate boundaries of the city until the person has first applied for and obtained a driver's permit. Permits for drivers will be issued by the city police department. 
(b)  Description of business. The application shall contain, among other things, a detailed description of the equipment to be used in the business and the name of the operators thereof, the point of original terminus of the business, and the address and telephone number of the office or call station from which the business is operated. 
(c)  Indemnity insurance. No taxicab license shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof shall file with the business tax division a policy of indemnity insurance in some indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which policy shall have limits equal to or in excess of the following sums for each taxicab operated: 
(1)  For bodily injury to each person, $50,000.00; 
(2)  For bodily injury to all persons sustained in any one accident, $50,000.00; and 
(3)  For property damage and liability for baggage of passengers, $25,000.00. 
The policy shall be conditioned to protect the public against injury or damage proximately caused by the negligence of the holder of such permit. Each driver shall be listed on the policy at the time of application. Additional drivers or new drivers hired after issuance of the occupation tax certificate shall be covered by a rider to the policy prior to the issuance of a driver's permit. 
(d)  Ages of vehicles. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business is no more than six years old. By December of each year, automobiles of a model year, seven years prior to that year, must be replaced. 
(e)  Annual renewal. All fees for taxicab licenses and taxi drivers permits are due no later than March 31 of each year. 
(Code 2002, § 54-352; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-352, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-22. - Certificate of inspection; posting in cab. 
(a)  A certificate of inspection completed on forms provided by the city and issued by an ASE-certified mechanic and shall be located inside the taxicab at all times certifying that the taxicab and equipment therein are safe and in compliance with applicable law. This certificate must be renewed every 90 days, and the operator of any taxicab business shall be required to keep his taxicab and equipment therein in safe condition conforming to all laws under penalty of having his permit to conduct a taxicab business suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Each taxicab must produce proof of taximeter inspection and calibration for issuance and renewal of taxi decal. 
(c)  The city police department or the city's designee may conduct random inspections to ensure the safety and welfare of the public. 
(Code 2002, § 54-353; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-353, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-23. - Additional equipment. 
The operator of a taxi business shall register with the city or tax collector's office each additional piece of equipment put in use, and same shall be subject to inspection and registration as herein provided. 
(Code 2002, § 54-354; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-354, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-24. - Drivers; qualifications. 
It shall be the duty of all operators to file with the city tax collector the names and addresses, age and physical description of the persons employed as drivers. All drivers shall hold licenses from the state department of driver services as drivers of vehicles for hire, and drivers' permits issued by the city police department. No person shall be employed or shall drive a taxicab who has, within the past five years, been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., or to the offense of driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, or to any open-container violations, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, violence, or the violation of a spirituous, vinous, or malt beverage statute or if the driver has been convicted of an offense of causing death by vehicle. No driver can be issued a taxi driver's permit if the driver has received three or more moving violations in the preceding 12-month period. 
(Code 2002, § 54-355; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-355, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-25. - Information to be displayed at all times. 
The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in an active business displays the following: 
(1)  Inside the cab. The operator shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a map or street guide of the city, the name and photograph of the driver of the taxicab and a schedule of fares. 
(2)  Outside the cab. The operator shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the outside thereof, a numbered decal to be furnished by the city tax collector's office, the name of the company and business telephone number which must be permanently affixed to the roof and bears the term "taxi" or the company name. 
(Code 2002, § 54-356; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-356, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-26. - Operators responsible for violations by drivers. 
To the extent provided by law, operators are responsible for violations of this article by their taxicab drivers whether such drivers are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Code 2002, § 54-357; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-357, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-27. - License—Notice of denial. 
In the event that an application is denied, the city tax collector shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial of the taxicab license. The notice of denial shall include the grounds for denial. 
(Code 2002, § 54-358; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-358, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-28. - Same—Suspension or revocation; transferability. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the city now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(c)  Whenever the tax collector determines there is cause to deny, suspend or revoke the license applied for or issued hereunder, the tax collector shall give the applicant or licensee ten-day written notice of intention to deny, suspend or revoke the license. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the licensee may present a defense to the denial, suspension or revocation before the city council. The ten-day written notice shall include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing will be held. After the hearing, the city council may deny, suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder if any of the grounds set forth in this subsection exist. A license issued under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city council or a designee, and a driver's permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city police department upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The original application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(3)  For failure to meet or maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or permit under this article; 
(4)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period; 
(5)  Refusing to accept a client solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, or sex. Operators and drivers shall not refuse to accept a client unless the client is obviously intoxicated or dangerous; 
(6)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing a driver to operate in the city in violation of the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The applicant, establishment or driver is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(8)  Not taking the most direct route; or 
(9)  For violation of any part of this article. 
(d)  After the city manager makes a recommendation to the mayor and city council to deny suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the mayor and city council, or such board as the mayor and city council may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation as follows: 
(1)  At the hearing: 
a.  The city manager or his designee proceeds first and presents all evidence and arguments in support of the recommendation to deny, suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
b.  The mayor and the city council members or their designee will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
c.  After the city manager makes his presentation, the applicant or licensee or the licensee's legal counsel, will present evidence and argument as to why the license issued hereunder should not be denied, suspended or revoked. 
d.  The mayor and city council members or their designee will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(2)  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the mayor and city council will render a decision. The denial, suspension or revocation of a taxicab license is final unless the licensee files a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Code 2002, § 54-359; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-359, 11-1-2007) 
Sec. 62-29. - No proration of license fee. 
No license fees shall be prorated. 
(Code 2002, § 54-360; Res. No. 01-0373, § 1, 3-21-2001; Ord. No. 2007110101, § 54-360, 11-1-2007) 
Secs. 62-30—62-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWING AND WRECKER SERVICE 

Sec. 62-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means any automobile, or any vehicle of any kind or type or mechanical contrivance or part thereof, which is in an inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled and which does not have a valid license plate or which has been abandoned or discarded according to the definition of the term "abandoned motor vehicle" as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Damaged vehicle means any vehicle showing such mechanical or structural damage to the extent that it cannot properly or safely be operated. 
Inoperative vehicle means a vehicle incapable of movement by its own power, if it is on blocks, or if it remains in place for a period of more than seven days, and in neither case is within a carport, garage or parking way or driveway. Any motor vehicle abandoned within the city shall be disposed of by the proper authorities as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Property owner means the owner of property or his authorized representative, upon which a vehicle to be removed is located. 
Undamaged vehicle means a vehicle which has no or only minor structural or mechanical damage and is capable of being safely and properly operated. 
Vehicle owner means the owner of a vehicle or his authorized representative, lessor, lessee, security interest holders and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of motor vehicle safety. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. 
(Code 2002, § 62-146; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 1) 
Sec. 62-48. - City contract for towing service. 
The city shall from time to time, after public bid, contract with a firm to tow private and public vehicles as requested by the police department. 
(Code 2002, § 62-147; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(a)) 
Sec. 62-49. - Evaluation of bids. 
The method of deciding the low bidder for towing services will be determined by taking quantities of vehicles towed within the previous 12 months, as provided by the city, multiplied by the bidder's unit prices. The evaluation will also consider, in addition to the lowest overall price, service records and public complaints against the towing firms and responsiveness determinations. In addition, the city reserves the right to award the towing contract in the best interest of the city and to accept or reject any and all bids and to waive technicalities and informalities in the bids. 
(Code 2002, § 62-148; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(n)) 
Sec. 62-50. - Minimum service requirements. 
(a)  The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article shall maintain a 24-hour wrecker and tow truck service capable of responding to all calls for service within 15 minutes on at least 90 percent of the calls for service made by the police department. 
(b)  The towing firm shall have the capability of moving all types of motor vehicles, including, but not limited to, minibikes, motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, construction equipment, loaded and unloaded trailers and buses. All towing will be performed with the towing firm's equipment, or leased equipment, and the towing firm's employees, and the towing firm will not contract out any work received from within the city limits. 
(Code 2002, § 62-149; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(b), (c)) 
Sec. 62-51. - Garage required. 
The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article shall maintain at least one protected inside storage area or garage within the city for vehicles under investigation. 
(Code 2002, § 62-150; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(d)) 
Sec. 62-52. - Fenced storage area. 
The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article shall maintain a fenced-off impoundment area within the city for storage of impounded vehicles. Such impoundment area must be separate from any other impoundment facility of the towing firm. Such impoundment area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than six feet high with a gate which can be securely fastened and locked. The fence shall have barbed wire running at the top, and the impound lot must be lighted and capable of storing 25 vehicles. The impound area shall contain surveillance cameras that will provide 100-percent coverage of the impound area. Monitors shall be located within the towing firm's main office and shall be recorded on a 24-hour-per-day basis. 
(Code 2002, § 62-151; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(e)) 
Sec. 62-53. - Attendant required. 
An attendant, who shall be a full-time employee of the firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article, shall be on call for 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(Code 2002, § 62-152; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(f)) 
Sec. 62-54. - Rates posted. 
The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article shall post towing rates reflecting the prices to be charged to the public. Rates shall be posted in open view to the public in the towing firm's lobby. In addition to towing, the firm shall deliver to each owner or representative of every towed vehicle a price sheet reflecting the prices to be charged by the towing firm. 
(Code 2002, § 62-153; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(g)) 
Sec. 62-55. - Business license required. 
The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article must maintain a valid business license. 
(Code 2002, § 62-154; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(h)) 
Sec. 62-56. - State registration; state permits required. 
The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article must maintain registration with the state public service commission and possess all state required permits. 
(Code 2002, § 62-155; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(i)) 
Sec. 62-57. - Equipment. 
(a)  The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article must own and maintain at all times the following equipment or the right to use the equipment under a written lease agreement for the period covered by the contract: 
(1)  One minimum 20,000 gross vehicle weight 20-ton lift and winch rating or larger tandem axle wrecker capable of towing loaded cement trucks, garbage trucks and fire trucks, etc. 
(2)  One minimum 19,000 gross vehicle weight 15-ton lift and winch rating or larger tandem axle wrecker capable of towing loaded medium size trucks and tandem axle tractors from the front. 
(3)  Two slide back wreckers. 
(4)  Two-wheel lift wreckers. 
(5)  Two recovery wreckers. 
(b)  All tow vehicles must be commercially manufactured and rated by the manufacturer. 
(c)  Each wrecker shall have the following accessories at all times: 
(1)  One snatch block per cable rated for the respective winch. 
(2)  One scotch block rated for the truck. 
(3)  One container for trash. 
(4)  One industrial rated push broom. 
(5)  One fire extinguisher approved by the department of transportation. 
(6)  One two-way radio approved by the Federal Communications Commission capable of communicating with wrecker service dispatch. 
(7)  Emergency amber beacons with proper permits. 
(8)  A set of white working lights adjusted to the rear of the wrecker. 
(9)  Set of tools (metric and standard), two lug wrenches 5/16 -inch through three-fourths inch, lockout tool and flashlight. 
(Code 2002, § 62-156; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(j)) 
Sec. 62-58. - Liability insurance. 
The firm towing vehicles pursuant to this article shall maintain in the towing firm's name liability insurance policies in an amount determined by the laws and rules and regulations of the state. In addition, $50,000.00 cargo/garagekeeper's liability insurance and worker's compensation insurance for five or more full-time employees shall be carried in order to cover any and all judgments rendered against the towing firm arising out of any activities contemplated in this article. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured under the policy and shall provide for written notification within 15 days of policy modification, expiration or cancellation. The towing firm shall provide to the city a full copy of the insurance policy no later than five days from date of execution of the agreement or extension thereof or any modification of the policy and upon renewal of the policy. 
(Code 2002, § 62-157; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(k)) 
Sec. 62-59. - Suspension or revocation of contract. 
(a)  The city manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the towing privileges granted in this article for noncompliance with this article. If the city manger seeks to suspend or revoke the towing privilege, the city manager shall give written notification to the towing firm of such action. Such notice shall contain a specification of the violation and shall be served upon the towing firm at least five days prior to a notice of hearing. The towing firm shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  If the city manager shall suspend or revoke the towing privileges, the suspension or revocation shall be, for a period of not less than one day or more than 365 days, within the discretion of the city manager. However, the applicant shall be authorized to continue the towing services until the date of the scheduled hearing. In any hearing conducted by the city manager, the city manager shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of either. Upon a suspension or revocation by the city manager, the towing firm may appeal the decision to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the decision of the city manager. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and city council within 45 days after the notice of appeal by the towing firm. After the hearing by the mayor and city council, the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the city manager or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. If the towing firm does not file an appeal from any decision of the city manager, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Code 2002, § 62-158; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 2(l), (m)) 
Sec. 62-60. - Police department call for service; owner's option. 
(a)  When, in the exercise of its authority to remove vehicles from the city streets, the police department engages a private wrecker service after the owner fails to engage a wrecker service or if an emergency call is made to a wrecker service by the police department, it shall first call the contracted wrecker service; however, in extraordinary circumstances or in an emergency, the police department shall be authorized to call any private wrecker service. 
(b)  A vehicle owner in ordinary, nonemergency situations may arrange a private wrecker service of his choice to remove his vehicle. The responding officer shall advise the vehicle owner of his option to call the wrecker service of his choice. 
(Code 2002, § 62-159; Ord. of 6-8-2001(2), § 3) 
PART III - DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, adopted August 21, 2014, set out provisions intended for use of the Unified Development Code as chapters 1—13. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as chapters 101—113. 

Chapter 101 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

101.01.00 - Title. 
Part III of the City of Canton Code of Ordinances shall be known as and entitled the "City of Canton Unified Development Code" and may be referred to as the "UDC." 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.02.00 - Authority. 
The UDC is enacted based on the authority vested in the City of Canton by the State of Georgia, including but not limited to: the Georgia Constitution of 1983 (Article 9, section 2, Paragraph 4) and the amendments thereto; and, the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. ch. 36-66). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.03.00 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The City of Canton Comprehensive Plan (Plan) is the official development policy and implementation guide for the city to coordinate and direct physical and economic development, related public investment, and, to provide reasonable regulations for the development of private property in the interest of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. This UDC is intended to implement all provisions of the plan for the development and use of land. 
B.  The purpose of this UDC is to: 
1)  Provide for the continuing orderly growth and development of the city; 
2)  Assist in protecting the historical small town character and community identity of Canton; 
3)  Conserve and protect the city's natural beauty and setting, including scenic vistas, cultural and historic resources, natural resources, open space, waterways, hills, and trees; 
4)  Ensure that proposed development and new land uses conserve energy and protect natural resources; 
5)  Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan transportation, water supply, sewerage, energy, and other public infrastructure; 
6)  Ensure that development is designed to create attractive streetscapes and spaces that accommodate pedestrian access and connectivity; 
7)  Minimize vehicle traffic by providing for a mixture of land uses, pedestrian-oriented development, compact community form, safe and effective traffic circulation, and adequate on- and off-street parking facilities; 
8)  Ensure the provision of required streets, sidewalks, utilities, and other facilities; 
9)  Promote the preservation and creation of distinctive neighborhoods that provide diverse housing options; 
10)  Prevent blight and deterioration while conserving the value of buildings; 
11)  Ensure compatibility between different types of development and land uses; 
12)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and structures; 
13)  Regulate the distribution and density of uses on the land to avoid both the undue concentration of population and the inappropriate dispersion of population, prevent the encroachment of incompatible land uses within residential areas, and preserve property values; and 
14)  Ensure that land is developed in conformity with the City of Canton Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.04.00 - Applicability. 
101.04.01 - Generally. 
A.  This UDC shall apply only to the corporate limits of the City of Canton, Georgia, as now or hereafter established. 
B.  No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; no land shall be subdivided; and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the provisions and requirements of this UDC. 
C.  A change of use shall conform to the provisions and requirements of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.04.02 - Exemptions and exceptions. 
The following general conditions or circumstances are exempt from the provisions and requirements of this UDC, and are instead to be governed by the law and rules as they existed at the time of issuance of permit approving such activity: 
A.  Buildings or structures that are legally under construction on the date of adoption of this UDC; 
B.  Buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of this UDC, provided that construction commences prior to the expiration of the building permit, and continues until completed; or 
C.  Development pursuant to an approved development plan or subdivision plat approved prior to the effective date of this UDC, provided that development commences not later than one year after the effective date of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.05.00 - Administration. 
101.05.01 - Community development director. 
The City of Canton Community Development Director (Director) is assigned to administer, interpret, and implement the standards, criteria, and procedures of this UDC. Throughout this UDC, the terms "community development director" and "Director" are used to indicate the responsibility for specified actions, except where specified actions are reserved or specifically delegated by law to another official. In all instances, "community development director" and "director" mean the "community development director or designee." 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.05.02 - Building official. 
The City of Canton Building Official (Building Official) is assigned to enforce the provisions of the state minimum standard codes for construction. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.05.03 - Code official. 
The City of Canton Code Official (Code Official) is assigned to enforce the provisions of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code as amended by Canton. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.06.00 - Rules of interpretation. 
101.06.01 - Generally. 
A.  In the interpretation and application of the UDC all standards, provisions, and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the City of Canton and shall not be construed to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state or federal statutes. 
B.  Specific provisions of this UDC shall be followed in lieu of general provisions that may be in conflict with the specific provision. 
C.  The text of this UDC shall be followed in lieu of any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table that may be in conflict with the text. 
D.  Where provisions of the UDC conflict with other regulations of the Canton Municipal Code or construction codes identified in section 101.09.00 of this UDC, the more stringent restrictions shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.06.02 - Responsibility for interpretations. 
A.  In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this UDC, the director shall be responsible for interpretation. In the interpretation of this UDC, the director shall be guided by the city of canton comprehensive plan and applicable state or federal law. The director may also refer any issue to the city attorney or to the city council of Canton (City Council) for their determination. 
B.  Responsibility for interpretation by the director as set forth in this section shall be limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of the UDC, and shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in the UDC. Interpretation shall not be construed to override the responsibilities assigned by city council, the City of Canton Planning Commission (planning commission), or to any commission, board, or official named in other sections or chapters of the UDC. 
C.  The building official shall be authorized to render interpretations of the state minimum standard codes for construction, which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
D.  The code official shall be authorized to render interpretations of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code as amended by Canton, which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.06.03 - Zoning district boundary interpretations. 
Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts described in chapter 102 shall be made by the director in accordance with the following: 
A.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
B.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street or alley shall be construed as following the street or alley centerline. 
C.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the shoreline of a river, stream, lake or other water body shall be construed as following the centerline of such water body. 
D.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
E.  Where a public road, street, alley, or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, alley, or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.06.04 - Permissible land use interpretations. 
Interpretations regarding a requested use that is not identified as a permissible land use in chapter 102 shall be made by the director in accordance with section 102.04.02.G (How to read the table of uses) of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.06.05 - Construction of words and phrases. 
A.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
B.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
C.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, as well as an individual. 
D.  The words "shall," "must," "will," "is to," and "are to" are always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
E.  The word "erected" or "altered" includes the terms "constructed, reconstructed, restored, extended or structurally altered." 
F.  The word "lot" includes the terms "plot," "tract," or "parcel." 
G.  The word "used" or "occupied" includes the term "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied." 
H.  The words "includes" and "including" mean "including but not limited to." 
I.  The word "day" means a calendar day. 
J.  The word "month" means a calendar month. 
K.  The word "week" means seven days. 
L.  The word "year" means a calendar year. 
M.  All words and phrases are to be interpreted within the context of the sentence, paragraph, subsection, section and chapter in which they occur. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.06.06 - Computation of time. 
Whenever a number of days is specified in this UDC, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice provided in compliance with this UDC, the number of days shall be construed as consecutive calendar days. A time limit shall extend to 5:00 p.m. eastern time on the following working day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or holiday. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.07.00 - Severability. 
If any portion of this UDC be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or if the provisions of any part of this UDC as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this UDC not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council to provide for separable and divisible parts and does hereby adopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.00 - Documents adopted by reference. 
The documents identified in the following subsections include any attachments, future additions, appendices, indexes, and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.01 - Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton. 
The Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.02 - City of Canton Future Development Map. 
The City of Canton Future Development Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and accompanying supporting data, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
101.08.03 - City of Canton Growth Boundary Map. 
The City of Canton Growth Boundary Map, together will all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. In accordance with the growth boundary agreement between the City of Canton and Cherokee County, notification of intent to annex properties lying within the City of Canton Growth Boundary shall be sent to the Cherokee County Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.04 - Delivery of service boundary map. 
The delivery of service boundary map, together will all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.05 - River Mill District Boundary Map. 
The River Mill District Boundary Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. The River Mill District has been designated by the City of Canton as an enterprise zone, consistent with the State Enterprise Zone Employment Act. 
101.08.06 - River Mill District Study. 
The City of Canton River Mill District Study (prepared by ARCADIS G&M, June 15, 2001), with accompanying maps, supporting data, and amendments is hereby adopted by referenced and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.07 - Overlay Zone Community Standards Handbook. 
The City of Canton Overlay Zone Community Standards Handbook (prepared by PBS&J, June 27, 2002), with accompanying maps and supporting data, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.08 - City of Canton Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
The City of Canton Major Thoroughfare Plan, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.09 - Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (latest edition), published by the Atlanta Regional Commission, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.10 - Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control. 
The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (latest edition), published by the state soil and water conservation commission, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.11 - Water Environment Federation Manual. 
The Water Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 (latest edition), published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.12 - Areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its current effective flood insurance study (FIS), with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current effective FIS for the unincorporated county including accompanying maps and other supporting data, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.13 - Cross-connection control manuals. 
The Cross-Connection Control Manual (latest edition), published by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control (latest edition), published by the American Water Works Association (AWWA), are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.14 - Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
The Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (latest edition), published by the Georgia Department of Human Resources Division of Public Health, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.15 - Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
The Standards Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (latest edition), as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.16 - GDOT Design Policy Manual. 
The GDOT Design Policy Manual (latest edition), published by the Georgia Department of Transportation, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.17 - FHWA Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
The FHWA Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (latest edition), published by the Federal Highway Administration, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.18 - American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting. 
The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society (latest edition), as approved by the American National Standard Institute, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.19 - Manual for Railway Engineering. 
The Manual for Railway Engineering, Part 5 (latest edition), published by the American Railway Engineering Association, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.20 - American National Standards Institute Codes. 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Codes (latest edition) regulating parking spaces for the exclusive use of handicapped persons, regulating nursery stock, and any other ANSI code cited in this UDC, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.21 - Georgia EPPC Invasive Plant List. 
The Georgia EPPC Invasive Plant List (latest edition), published by the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.22 - Groundwater recharge area district map. 
The map depicting significant recharge areas as identified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.23 - Watershed protection map. 
The City of Canton Watershed Protection Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.24 - Hickory Log Creek Reservoir Management Plan. 
The Hickory Log Creek Reservoir Management Plan adopted by the City of Canton on May 21, 2009 and approved by the Georgia DNR, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.25 - Generalized wetlands map. 
The City of Canton Generalized Wetlands Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDC. The Generalized Wetlands Map is provided in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) Maps. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.26 - Industrial Pretreatment Program Manual. 
The City of Canton Industrial Pretreatment Program (IPP) Manual, latest edition, is hereby adopted by referenced and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.08.27 - Stormwater Utility Credit Manual. 
The City of Canton Stormwater Utility Credit Manual is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.09.00 - Building and construction codes adopted. 
101.09.01 - Generally. 
A.  The purpose of this Code section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
B.  The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
C.  Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
D.  Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
E.  All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.09.02 - Code remedial. 
A.  These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof — which are public safety, health, and general welfare -through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
B.  Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
C.  The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the City of Canton, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.09.03 - Scope. 
Where, in any specific case, different subsections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
A.  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one and two family dwellings. 
B.  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
C.  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
D.  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems. Except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
E.  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
F.  Fire safety standards. The minimum fire safety standards as adopted in the rules and regulations of the safety fire commissioner, chapter 120-3-3, including all subsequent revisions thereof, are hereby adopted as part of the Code. The City of Canton shall have such authority and responsibility to enforce the state minimum fire safety standards as is provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 25. 
G.  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
H.  One - and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
I.  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.09.04 - Requirements not covered by Code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.09.05 - Exceptions. 
A.  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
B.  Existing buildings. 
1)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
2)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
C.  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or City of Canton as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.10.00 - Property maintenance code adopted. 
101.10.01 - Generally. 
A.  The purpose of this Code section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code as Amended by Canton, hereinafter referred to as "the property maintenance code." Enforcement of the property maintenance code is further described in chapter 105 of this UDC. 
B.  The property maintenance code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. 
C.  Existing structures and premises that do not comply with the provisions of the property maintenance code shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.10.02 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of the property maintenance code, as amended from time to time, shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures (including garages, storage buildings and other accessory structures as well as pool barriers) and all existing premises. 
B.  The provisions of the property maintenance code constitute minimum requirements and standards for: 
1)  Premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; 
2)  The responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; 
3)  The occupancy of existing structures and premises; and for 
4)  Administration, enforcement and penalties. 
C.  The provisions of the property maintenance code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.10.03 - Scope. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of the property maintenance code and the referenced standards, the provisions of the property maintenance code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different subsections of the property maintenance code or other Canton codes or ordinances specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
A.  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by the property maintenance code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. 
1)  No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. 
2)  The requirements of the property maintenance code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Also, the requirements of the property maintenance code are not intended to supersede, and shall not be substituted, for any requirements of any other Canton adopted code or ordinance in effect at the time a building, residence or other structure was constructed, altered or repaired. 
3)  Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises, including accessory structures and pools. The cleanliness and sanitation of the interior of buildings, dwellings and structures, as well as that of the exterior premises and the sanitation of pools, spas and hot tubs attached thereto and under the control of the occupant, shall be the responsibility of the current occupant. If such occupant or owner's designated agent fails to correct any requirements under the property maintenance code, the responsibility shall fall upon the property owner in accordance with the procedures and provision of the property maintenance code and the current construction codes and other provisions adopted by the City of Canton, whichever is more stringent. 
B.  Unsafe structures and equipment. See under the violation of property maintenance code section in chapter 105 of this UDC. 
C.  Existing remedies. The provisions in the property maintenance code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
D.  Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of the property maintenance code shall be executed and installed in a professional manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions as well as the current construction codes and other provisions adopted by the City of Canton. 
E.  Historic buildings. The provisions of the property maintenance code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when enforcement of such provisions would detrimentally alter their historical significance and when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be reasonably safe and in the public interest. 
F.  Exception. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply. 
G.  Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, as well as "changes of occupancy", shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the latest adopted construction codes and other applicable ordinances of the City of Canton and nothing in the property maintenance code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
101.10.04 - Requirements not covered by code. 
Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the property maintenance code, shall be determined by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 102 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USES 

102.01.00 - Generally. 
The use of buildings, structures, and land in accordance with the City of Canton Comprehensive Plan shall comply with the use and development requirements for zoning districts set forth in chapter 102. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied, used or developed only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.01.00 - Establishment and purpose of zoning districts. 
102.01.01 - Official zoning map and districts. 
Zoning districts are established to implement the vision for land use and development patterns as set forth in the comprehensive plan and to respect existing land use and development patterns of the City of Canton. 
A.  Zoning districts for the City of Canton are hereby established as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton, Georgia" and as shown in table 102-1. 
B.  The Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton, Georgia shall be identified by the signature of the mayor of the City of Canton, attested by the city clerk, and shall include the date of adoption. 
C.  The Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton, Georgia may be amended according to the procedures set forth in chapter 105 of this UDC. 
D.  Permissible uses and development standards for each zoning district are shown on table 102-4 and table 102-5 of this chapter. 
Table 102-1 Zoning Districts — City of Canton 

 

 

 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.01.02 - Residential zoning districts. 
The following residential zoning districts are established: 
A.  R-40 single-family residential (40,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for low density single-family detached residences (not including manufactured homes) which are connected to public water and public sewer systems. Private septic systems shall be permissible where public sewer is unavailable, in accordance with this UDC and Cherokee County Environmental Health Office requirements. 
B.  R-20 single-family residential (20,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for medium density single-family detached residences (not including manufactured homes) which are connected to public water and public sewer systems. 
C.  R-15 single-family residential (15,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for medium density single-family detached residences (not including manufactured homes) which connect to public water and public sewer systems. 
D.  R-10 single-family residential (10,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for high density single-family detached residences (not including manufactured homes) which are connected to public water and public sewer systems. 
E.  R-4 Single-family residential (4,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for high-density, single-family detached cluster residences (not including manufactured homes) which are connected to public water and public sewer systems. 
F.  RA-6 residential attached (six du/acre). This district is intended to provide for single family attached (duplexes, tri-plexes and quad-plexes) and detached dwelling units which are individually connected to public water and public sewer systems. This district shall not be construed to allow stacked units or manufactured housing. 
G.  RA-8 residential attached (eight du/acre). This district is intended to provide for high density residential attached residences (duplexes, tri-plexes, and quad-plexes) which are connected to public water and public sewer systems. This district shall not be construed to permit stacked attached units or manufactured homes. Tri-plex dwelling units and quad-plex dwelling units are multiple family dwelling units and require conditional use approval. 
H.  MHP manufactured home park (six du/acre). This district is intended to provide for high-density land-leased communities comprised of manufactured homes which are connected to public water and sewer systems. Stacked units are permissible. 
I.  RM-15 multiple-family residential (15 du/acre). This district is intended to provide for multi-family residences which are connected to public water and public sewer systems. Multiple family residential dwelling units shall require conditional use approval. 
J.  PD-Residential. This district is intended to provide for a mix of residential housing types and densities (not including manufactured homes) which are connected to public water and public sewer systems and which otherwise would not be permitted under this UDC because of the strict application of zoning district or general development standards. The primary intent of this district is to accommodate infill and redevelopment within the city, and the secondary intent is to guide quality greenfield development. This district is established to allow flexibility in land planning and site design, resulting in innovative concepts that deliver high quality design and open space amenities, compatible land uses, greater efficiency in the layout and provision of streets and other infrastructure, and environmentally sensitive development unified in a master plan. Multiple family residential dwelling units shall require conditional use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
102.01.03 - Commercial, office and institutional zoning districts. 
The following commercial, office and institutional zoning districts are established: 
A.  NC neighborhood commercial. This district is intended to provide for limited retail services, convenience goods, and personal services to satisfy the common and frequent needs of surrounding residential neighborhoods. It is the intent of this district that permitted uses are located to create commercial centers or clusters that are unified in design area and are compatible with surrounding residential areas. The use of public water and public sewer systems shall be required. It is the intent of this district that there shall be no 24 hours a day, seven days a week business operations. 
B.  GC general commercial. This district is intended to provide for a wide variety of retail and service uses to satisfy the common and frequent needs of residents in large sections of the city. It is the intent of this district that permitted uses are located to create commercial centers or clusters along the city's major transportation arteries. The use of public water and public sewer systems shall be required. 
C.  CBD central business district. This district is intended to provide for a mix of retail, office-professional, entertainment, residential and civic uses that benefit from close proximity to each other and that will generate pedestrian activity in the city's historic downtown core. The use of public water and public sewer systems shall be required. 
D.  O-RT office residential transition. This district is intended to provide for a transition between residential neighborhoods and adjacent commercial districts by promoting a mixed pattern of compatible development consisting of residential uses and a blend of professional office and limited service and retail activities. 
E.  O-I office institutional. This district is intended to provide for business and professional activities, medical and dental facilities, and community and institutional facilities. 
F.  SU special use. This district is intended to provide for governmental and quasigovernmental institutions and facilities. The use of public water and public sewer systems shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.01.04 - Industrial zoning district. 
The following industrial zoning district is established: 
A.  L-I light industrial. This district is intended to provide for light industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, or dust and do not produce, store or handle hazardous waste. The intent of this district is to permit manufacturing, assembling, wholesaling, warehousing and similar uses that are connected to public water and public sewer systems. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.01.05 - Mixed use zoning districts. 
The following mixed use zoning districts are established: 
A.  PD-Business/office. This district is intended to provide for planned business and office centers, or mixtures thereof, which are connected to public water and public sewer systems and which otherwise would not be permitted under this UDC because of the strict application of zoning district or general development standards. The primary intent of this district is to accommodate infill and redevelopment within the city, and the secondary intent is to guide quality greenfield development. This district is established to promote the master-planned grouping of professional office and business uses in a campus-like setting that establishes unified design and well-planned access, circulation and open space. 
B.  PD-mixed use. This district is intended to provide for a creative, compatible and connected mix of businesses, offices, and residential uses (not including manufactured homes) which utilize public water and public sewer systems and which otherwise would not be permitted under this UDC because of the strict application of zoning district or general development standards. The primary intent of this district is to accommodate infill and redevelopment within the city, and the secondary intent is to guide quality greenfield development. This district is established to promote master-planned development that establishes harmonious relationships between buildings, people and cars, maximizes open space opportunities, and offers a wide variety of goods and services that cater to employees, pedestrians, shoppers, and residents. 
C.  PD-Traditional Neighborhood Development. This district is intended to provide for compact, walkable and mixed use neighborhoods (not including manufactured homes) which utilize public water and public sewer systems and which otherwise would not be permitted under this UDC because of the strict application of zoning district or general development standards. The primary intent of this district is to accommodate infill and redevelopment within the city, and the secondary intent is to guide quality greenfield development. This district is established to promote master-planned development that consists of a mix of residential uses; a community center containing public spaces and commercial, residential, and institutional uses; and open space. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.01.06 - Conversion of previous zoning districts. 
A.  Zoning districts as were established under the previous zoning ordinance of the City of Canton are hereby renamed to the following zoning district names and designations under this UDC, as shown in Table 102-2. All regulations, requirements and provisions of this UDC applicable to a zoning district established under this chapter shall apply to the previously named zoning district as now named, as shown in Table 102-2. 
B.  All special conditions and special stipulations imposed as conditions of rezoning of property and conditions of master plan approval prior to adoption of this UDC are hereby retained and reaffirmed, and shall continue in full force and effect until such time as the property is rezoned or the prior zoning action of city council is amended through the rezoning process established by this UDC. 
Table 102-2 Conversion of Previous Zoning Districts 

 
All special conditions and special stipulations imposed as conditions of rezoning of property and conditions of master plan approval for multiple-family dwellings shall require a conditional use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-16-2017) 
102.01.07 - Zoning districts and future development map relationship. 
Twenty-five character areas are reflected on the future development map for the City of Canton, and each are implemented by individual zoning districts, as indicated in table 102-3. 
Table 102-3 Potential Zoning Districts 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.02.00 - Establishment and purpose of overlay districts. 
102.02.01 - Overlay districts, generally. 
Overlay districts are a special purpose zoning classification used to supplement, not substitute for, the underlying zoning district. The purpose of overlay districts is to address special situations that require additional regulations to protect and promote public and private investment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.02.02 - Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) Overlay District. 
The purpose of the Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) Overlay District is to encourage development that promotes greater livability, mobility, and residential development alternatives in prescribed geographic areas of the City of Canton. The LCI District is intended to produce a more efficient use of land, create opportunities for a more direct connection to alternative modes of transportation, and maximize use of existing infrastructure. 
A.  River Mill District. The River Mill District is depicted on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton. The district is generally located in a portion of the west and south sides of the Central Business District. For properties located in the River Mill District, the use requirements and development standards as established in the underlying zoning district shall apply. Standards for the River Mill District shall be included in a master plan, which must be approved by the city council. 
B.  —Z. Reserved. These subsections are reserved for future LCI overlay districts as established. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.02.03 - Priority Corridor and Intersections of Influence Overlay District. 
A.  The purpose of the Priority Corridor and Intersections of Influence Overlay District is to enhance landscape, streetscape and sign standards to promote a consistent and compatible built environment within established corridors and intersections and to protect the investment of the community at large. 
B.  The Priority Corridor and Intersections of Influence Overlay District is depicted in the Overlay Zone Community Standards Handbook, located in the community development department. For properties located in said district, the use requirements and development standards as established in the underlying zoning district shall apply. The community standards in the Overlay Zone Community Standards shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.02.04 - River Mill District Enterprise Zone. 
A.  Designation. The City of Canton hereby nominates the area described in the River Mill District Boundary Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, as an enterprise zone. 
B.  Zone qualifications. The city council finds the zone meets the qualifications of the Enterprise Zone Employment Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1 et seq.). 
C.  Incentives. The city council hereby ordains and declares that upon designation of the proposed enterprise zone as an enterprise zone, the City of Canton shall provide the following incentives in the zone, including tax incentives, to qualifying business, service or residential enterprises in accordance with the definition of such entities outlined in the Enterprise Zone Employment Act, which are not applicable throughout the City of Canton: 
1)  The City of Canton shall exempt qualifying businesses as outlined in said Act, and further in the River Mill District Study, from state, county and municipal ad valorem property taxes, excluding property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for the general obligation debt that would otherwise be levied on the qualifying business and service enterprises in accordance to the following schedule: 
a.  One hundred percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
b.  Eighty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next two years; 
c.  Sixty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; 
d.  Forty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; and 
e.  Twenty percent of the property taxes shall exempt for the last year. 
2)  All other applicable economic development incentives granted to qualifying projects throughout the city to include: 
a.  Land disturbance permit fees; 
b.  Plan review fees; 
c.  Water system development fees; 
d.  Business license inspection fees; 
e.  Occupation tax up to $500.00 for the first three years, and at 100 percent thereafter; 
f.  Financing of sewer system development fees; 
g.  Freeport tax exemptions; 
h.  Building permit fees, capped up to 50 percent; 
i.  Georgia Job Tax Credit Program; 
j.  Other local fees authorized by the city council, as may be applicable. 
3)  One-stop permitting. 
D.  Determination of eligibility. The city council may make determinations of eligibility for each business, service, or residential enterprise based on the quality and quantity of such additional economic stimulus as may be created within the city. Criteria for consideration may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1)  The value of the enterprise to the economic health and well being of the City of Canton and its citizens; 
2)  Capital investment or reinvestment by the enterprise equal to or greater than the amount of ad valorem tax abated over the first five years of the tax incentive, provided, however, the enterprise has $10,000.00 minimum tax valuation; 
3)  Locating in a vacant or historic building; 
4)  Demolishing a pre-existing obsolete, abandoned, or deteriorating structure, or a structure that is noncompliant with the Standard Building Code as determined by the city building official; 
5)  Assembling multiple tracts of land for one project; 
6)  Creating and sustaining jobs above the state threshold for a prescribed period of ten years; 
7)  Creating jobs for residents of the enterprise zone for a prescribed period of five years; 
8)  Locating in a kudzu-covered, blighted, or deteriorated area and clearing up and landscaping the area; 
9)  Creating opportunities for housing affordability where at least 20 percent of the total units are set aside for the first-time buyers, and 
10)  Creating opportunities for work force housing for public employees. 
E.  Required standards. Every enterprise seeking the benefits provided herein must meet the standards of the design guidelines and standards section in chapter 103 of this UDC, the Overlay Zone Community Standards Handbook, and the River Mill District architectural and street escape design standards. 
F.  Powers of city council. 
1)  The city council is authorized to act in all matters pertaining to the nomination and designation of the area described herein as an enterprise zone and reserves the power to grant the incentives listed above to qualifying businesses in accordance with the authorization powers granted local governments in the administration of the zone in the Enterprise Zone Employment Act. 
2)  The city council is further authorized to direct and designate its staff as liaison for communication with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, the Georgia Department of Industry Trade and Tourism the business community, and all others to oversee zone activities and administration, and communications with qualified businesses, as outlined in the River Mill District Study. 
3)  The city council has the power to administer, require, and enforce compliance with the provisions of section 102.02.04 and such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereinafter, including but not limited to such reports and data information from such entities within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this UDC and state law. 
G.  Contractual agreement. A qualifying business, service or residential enterprise shall consent to enter into a contractual agreement that outlines the incentives offered to the business and a guideline for the recapture, revocation, or reimbursement should the terms of the contract be violated by the target business. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.03.00 - Land Uses permissible in each zoning district. 
102.03.01 - Permissible land uses, generally. 
Table 102-4 identifies those uses that are permissible in each zoning district. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. The zoning districts for the City of Canton are shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.03.02 - How to read the table of uses. 
A.  Within table 102-4 the letter "P" indicates that the land use is permissible by right in a zoning district, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  The letter "C" indicates that the land use is permissible as a conditional use, subject to a determination by city council that the land use conforms to the standards contained in chapter 105. 
C.  The letter "M" indicates that the land use is allowed subject to master plan approval. 
D.  The letters "C/M" indicate that the land use is allowed as a conditional use, subject to a determination by city council that the land use conforms to the standards contained in chapter 105, and subject to master plan approval. 
E.  The column "additional requirements" indicates that the additional requirements specific for the land use shall apply in addition to the provisions of subsections A—D above. Additional requirements for specific land uses are contained in chapter 104. 
F.  A blank cell indicates the land use is prohibited. 
G.  Any land use that is not identified in table 102-4 is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar to and compatible with an identified use in said table by the community development director. 
1)  A determination that a use qualifies as a similar and compatible use shall be made upon the director's finding that: 
a.  The characteristics of, and activities associated with the requested use is similar to one or more of the listed uses, and will not involve a greater intensity than the uses listed in the zoning district; 
b.  The requested use will be consistent with the purpose of the applicable zoning district; 
c.  The requested use will be consistent with the comprehensive plan and any applicable specific plan; 
d.  The requested use will be compatible with the other uses allowed in the zoning district; 
e.  The definition of a requested use is comparable to that of a use identified in table 102-4, as presented in chapter 106 of this UDC and by the LBCS classification and code (Land Based Classification System, published by the American Planning Association) or the NAICS code (North American Industry Classification System, published by the federal government); and 
f.  The requested use is not listed in table 102-4. 
2)  The administrative interpretation shall be subject to appeal, as set forth in chapter 105. 
102.04.00 - Development standards in each zoning district. 
102.04.01 - Development standards, generally. 
Table 102-5 identifies the minimum development standards applicable to all development activity within the City of Canton. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
102.04.02 - How to read the table of standards. 
A.  Within table 102-5 a dash "—" indicates no development standard applies for the specified category. 
B.  The letters "SFD" indicate "Single-family detached." 
C.  The letters "SFA" indicate "Single-family attached." 
D.  The letters "MF" indicate "Multiple-family." 

 

 
a  See also section 103.02.02.A, design standards for lots, all development. 
b  No building or structure shall be erected on a lot that does not abut upon a public or private street. 
c  Minimum of ten feet building separation, subject to fire marshal approval. 
d  Minimum of 20 feet building separation, subject to fire marshal approval. 
e  Building separation subject to fire marshal approval. 
f  See also Canton Historic District Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2016-21, 9-15-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0517-01, 5-17-2018; Ord. No. 2018-0621-01, 6-21-2018; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
Chapter 103 - SITE PLANNING AND PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS 

103.01.00 - Generally. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide design standards applicable to all development activity within the City of Canton. This chapter expands upon the zone standards of chapter 102 by addressing additional details of site planning, project design, and the operation of land uses. These standards are intended to ensure that proposed development is compatible with existing and future development on neighboring properties, and produces an environment of desirable character, consistent with the comprehensive plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.02.00 - Standards for all development and land uses. 
103.02.01 - Design standards for lots, residential development. 
A.  One principal building on a lot. Only one principal building and its customary accessory building or buildings may be erected on any one lot. This pertains to single-family detached zoning districts. 
B.  Residential corner lots. 
1)  The minimum front yard requirement may be reduced to one-half the regulated distance on the portion of the lot fronting on the street or streets having the lower functional classification. However, in no case shall the setback be reduced to less than 15 feet. The minimum front yard for the portion of the lot fronting on the street having the higher functional classification shall be provided in accordance with the provisions established by this UDC for the district in which the lot is located. 
2)  For purposes of establishing the front yard, such yard shall be designated as that abutting the street having the lower functional classification. Where the classification is the same for both streets, the front yard shall be designated as that having the shortest frontage on the street. 
C.  Double frontage lots. 
1)  On lots having frontage on two streets, but not located on a corner, the minimum front yard shall be provided on each street in accordance with the provisions of this UDC. 
2)  On lots having frontage on more than two streets, the minimum front yard shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in this UDC on at least two of the street frontages. The minimum front yard on the other frontage or frontages may be reduced along the other streets in accordance with the provisions of section 103.03.01.B (Residential corner lots). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.02.02 - Design standards for lots, all development. 
A.  Street frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 50 feet on a public or private street, except 35 feet along the right-of-way on cul-de-sacs or as allowed in accordance with the provisions of the development standards table in chapter 102. The lot width at any point from the road right-of-way to the building line shall not be less than these minimum frontage widths. 
B.  Access to public or private streets. 
1)  Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which fronts on a public or private street having a right-of-way of not less than 50 feet. 
2)  Any accessory structure shall have access to a public or private street. 
3)  On double frontage lots, access shall be restricted to the street having the lower functional classification. 
4)  Local streets which will carry less than 600 cars per day may have access points as needed to fit the development pursuant to the requirements of this UDC. Collector streets and arterial streets which are projected to carry more than 600 cars per day shall have a minimum distance (in linear feet) between access points equal to seven times the speed limit for that street except in the Central Business District. 
5)  Private streets shall only be allowed within gated or secured developments. Street signs within these developments shall contain the words "Private Streets" on each sign. 
6)  An individual recorded plat shall be required for each lot which fronts a private street prior to issuance of a building permit. Said plat shall include a statement indicating the street is private. 
C.  Arrangement. 
1)  Side lot lines should be at right angles (90 degrees) to straight lines or radial to curved street lines. 
2)  Side lot lines should be radial to the radius points in all cul-de-sacs. 
D.  Lot coverage. Lot coverage standards are expressed as the maximum percent of land coverage for each zoning district (see the development standards table in chapter 102 of this UDC). The lot coverage ratio is calculated by dividing the total of all impervious surfaces on the lot by the lot area. Impervious surfaces include all buildings, structures, paving, and water bodies. 
E.  Mailbox kiosks. 
1)  A mailbox kiosk is hereby required for all commercial and residential developments. In single family developments, both attached and detached, kiosks must be located on a separate lot of record. This lot is not required to meet the minimum lot size but must be of sufficient size to accommodate the required number of parking spaces and meet setback requirements. For multi-family developments kiosks may be located within the amenity center area. 
2)  Areas used for kiosks shall be maintained by the homeowners association or in the case of a multi-family development the land owner or property management association. 
3)  Parking shall be provided as required in table 103.02.02, Required Parking for Mailbox Kiosks. Parking spaces shall conform to current size requirements and ADA standards. 
4)  Kiosks shall meet all development standards as related to setbacks. 
5)  Access to kiosks shall meet all ADA requirements. 
6)  Kiosks shall be constructed and completed prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. 
Table 103.02.02 Required Parking for Mailbox Kiosks 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018; Ord. No. 2019-0117-02, 1-17-2019) 
103.02.03 - Vision clearance. 
In all districts as established in this UDC, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half feet and ten feet above the finished grade of streets shall be erected, permitted, or maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets. This same standard shall apply to any private streets. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.00 - Landscape and buffer standards. 
103.03.01 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the landscape and buffer standards section is to provide requirements for landscaping and buffering of developments within the City of Canton. The regulations of this section shall be definitive, unless otherwise directed by this UDC and/or City Code. 
B.  This Code section has been developed to benefit the environmental and aesthetic quality of the city. The benefits derived from this section include: 
1)  Provide visual buffering and enhance beautification of the city; 
2)  Moderate stormwater runoff and improve water quality; 
3)  Protect and attempt to enhance property values, thus safeguarding private and public investment; 
4)  Protect the unique identity of Canton by promoting native plants; 
5)  Provide shade; 
6)  Control soil erosion; and 
7)  Reduce some air pollutants and intercept airborne particulate matter. 
C.  The city has devised a plant palette, which is a detailed plant list of trees, shrubs, and ground cover which outlines suitable plant material for the city. The purpose of this palette is to promote the continued development of a regional character and to provide guidance in the decision making for landscape design efforts. The plant palette is listed in section 103.06.11 (City plant palette). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.02 - Applicability. 
A.  The requirements this Code section shall apply to all activity which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit or a building permit on any real property within the city. 
B.  The requirements of section 103.06.00 (tree protection) shall apply in conjunction with this section. 
C.  All areas not devoted to structures, site development features, and natural vegetation shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall include trees, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plant sculpture, art and the use of building/paving materials in a manner that respects the natural topographic features and natural resources of the site. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.03 - General requirements. 
A.  Unless otherwise approved by the director, all plant material selected to meet the replanting and/or landscaping requirements shall be selected from the plant palette for the city. Plant materials shall be placed appropriately for future growth. 
B.  Invasive plant species as shown on the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council (EPPC) Invasive Plant List shall be prohibited. 
C.  Individual single-family lots larger than 10,000 square feet are required to plant a minimum of one understory tree in the front yard. All residential lots shall require that improvements be located so as to provide minimum disturbance to the natural topography of the site and protection to the maximum number of trees. 
D.  All vegetation planted to meet the requirements of this section shall comply with the following standards: 
1)  Caliper measurements for all trees shall be at diameter breast height (DBH). 
2)  Canopy/shade replacement trees shall be at least ten feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than three caliper inches. Multi-stemmed canopy trees shall count only the largest trunk for caliper. 
3)  Understory/flowering replacement trees shall be at least six feet tall planted and have a main trunk of not less than two caliper inches. All multi-stemmed understory/flowering replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes (stems), each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet. 
4)  Evergreen replacement trees shall be at least a seven-gallon size, six feet tall planted, and have a main trunk of not less than one and one half caliper inches. All tree-formed, multi-stemmed, evergreen replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes, each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet and be pruned as tree form at time of planting. 
5)  No more than 40 percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. 
E.  No more than 40 percent of any one plant genus shall be permitted on a landscape and/or tree protection plan. Trees and shrubs shall be evenly distributed on site. 
F.  Landscaping shall not obstruct the view between 24 inches high and 60 inches high on access drives, streets or parking aisles. Landscape plans shall indicate clear sight lines at intersections. 
G.  Where landscaping requirements are included as part of the approved zoning/master plan conditions, the appropriate zoning/master plan project case number shall be noted on the landscape plan. 
H.  In accordance with section 103.03.10 (Landscape plan requirements) of this UDC, a landscape plan shall address all of the landscaping and tree protection requirements of this UDC, which include, but are not limited to, site density factor, tree replacement, interior parking lot plantings, peripheral parking lot plantings, landscape strip plantings, and landscape buffer plantings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.04 - Interior parking lot planting requirements. 
A.  For parking lots having more than ten parking spaces, there shall be a minimum eight-foot-wide (back of curb to back of curb) curbed, pervious landscape strip between rows of parking stalls. Trees shall be centered within the strip as to allow no less than four feet from trunk center to back of curb. The addition of a sidewalk would require a minimum 13 feet wide landscape strip (back of curb to back of curb) to accommodate the minimum required sidewalk width of five feet. 
B.  Plantings shall include one canopy/shade tree per ten parking spaces and shall be spaced every ten parking spaces. 
C.  Trees shall be planted at a minimum of four feet from trunk center to back of curb, so as to prevent injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. Trees shall be planted in line with the striping between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. 
D.  No more than 50 percent of the remaining ground area shall be sodded. 
E.  Curb openings that allow stormwater to enter landscape strips used for stormwater bio-retention areas are required. 
F.  All parking areas that are constructed where there is only a single or double bay of parking and contains more than ten spaces shall be required to install a landscape island after each tenth parking space. This landscape island shall contain one over story tree and shall be the same size as a regular parking space. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
103.03.05 - Peripheral parking lot planting requirements. 
The perimeter of all parking areas shall be landscaped, except where otherwise stated in this UDC. 
A.  A pervious landscaping strip ten feet in width measured from the back of curb shall be located between the parking lot and the abutting property lines, except where driveways or other curb cuts may necessitate other treatment. 
B.  Peripheral plantings shall include one canopy/shade tree per five parking spaces and shall be spaced every five parking spaces along the periphery of parking areas. Every other tree shall be located within the required landscape islands. 
C.  Trees shall be planted at a minimum of four feet from trunk center to back of curb, so as to prevent injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. Where landscaped areas are located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, the trees shall be planted in line with the striping between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. 
D.  No more than 50 percent of the remaining ground area shall be sodded. 
E.  No permanent structures are permitted within landscape strips, with the exception of identification signage, light posts, drainage structures, detention facilities, and rip-rap. This includes pavement, curbing, dumpsters, utility boxes, vacuum/air/water, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.06 - Streetscape landscape strip. 
Those premises located along a corridor or intersection of influence, as specified in the City's Overlay Zone Community Standards Handbook, shall provide for the landscape specifications of that handbook within the landscape plan. These specifications are in addition to all other planting requirements of this UDC. The Overlay Zone Community Standards Handbook is located in the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.07 - Landscape screening requirements. 
Screening shall be used as a buffer between and to reduce the effects of headlight glare, noise, and other objectionable activities. The following minimum requirements shall apply to screening: 
A.  Screening may consist of a fence, a wall, a berm, or vegetation and/or a mix of any or all of the foregoing. 
1)  The finished or decorative side of fences shall face outward. 
2)  The outer or public side of fences and walls shall be landscaped enough to soften the structure with a tree or shrub group at least every 50 feet, subject to approval of the director. 
3)  Berms must be a minimum two feet high, two-foot minimum crown width, and side slopes of no greater than three-to-one (3:1). 
B.  All accessory service structures, dumpsters or trash receptacle areas, heating and cooling units for developments, etc. shall be screened from view of all public rights-of-way and/or adjacent land regardless of adjacent land use or zoning classification by means of a solid screen wall in combination with a row of evergreen planting. 
1)  Said screen wall shall be constructed of materials consistent with those of the primary building(s). 
2)  The minimum height of said screen wall shall be no less than 12 inches greater than the structure it is screening. 
3)  Said trees shall be planted along the perimeter of the screen wall at 15 feet on center, at a minimum height of ten feet, and shall comply with all standards for evergreen trees as required by the American Association of Nurseryman standards. 
C.  All service or delivery areas shall be screened from view of all public rights-of-way and/or adjacent land regardless of adjacent land use or zoning classification by means of a vegetative screen. 
1)  Said screen shall consist of evergreen trees planted a minimum of 15 feet on center. 
2)  Said trees shall be planted at a minimum height of ten feet and shall comply with all standards for evergreen trees as required by the American Association of Nurseryman standards. 
D.  All plantings used for screening shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof. All trees planted shall be a minimum ten feet planted. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of two feet planted, and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least four feet at maturity. 
E.  Plants shall be spaced so as to provide for effective visual screening within three growing seasons. Planting beds required for screening shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.08 - Landscape buffer requirements. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Landscape buffers are intended to separate different land uses and zoning districts from each other and are intended to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas. 
2)  Buffers shall be required between uncomplimentary uses in accordance with the provisions of this UDC or as a condition of zoning/master plan or variance approval. Buffers are a landscaping requirement that is in addition to the minimum landscaping requirements of any site development in the city. 
3)  Buffer areas shall provide an opaque visual screen from finished grade elevation to a minimum height of eight feet. 
4)  Buffer planting requirements shall be guaranteed for the lifetime of the development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to ensure that the buffer serves the purpose for which it is intended. 
5)  Buffer strips shall not contain any parking, detention, or buildings, or portion thereof. 
6)  There shall be a buffer between property(ies) located within the City of Canton and abutting property(ies) located outside of the City of Canton city limits as shown in table 103-1. 
B.  Buffer types. There shall be three different buffer types based on the zoning district of the proposed project and the adjacent property zoning, as shown in table 103-1. Each different buffer identifies the width of the buffer, minimum tree spacing standards and minimum shrub spacing standards, as shown in table 103-2. The three buffer types are as follows: 
1)  Type A buffer: Twenty-five feet densely planted. 
2)  Type B buffer: Fifty feet densely planted. 
3)  Type C buffer: One hundred feet densely planted. 
Table 103-1 Buffer Types by Zoning District 

 
C.  Buffer plantings. 
1)  Existing vegetation shall be used to meet all or part of the requirements of this section whenever possible, if it provides the same level of obscurity as the planted buffer required in this section. 
2)  Required buffer plantings allow for a mix of large canopy trees, small flowering/evergreen trees, and large shrubs. The mix is designed to create a buffer which will give a satisfactory screen within three to five years of planting, under normal maintenance, while allowing room for the various plants to grow. 
a.  Canopy trees. Large canopy trees with a minimum height of eight feet planted and a minimum caliper of three inches shall be planted at the rate shown in table 103-2, buffer planting requirements. 
b.  Understory trees. Understory trees are required to fulfill from no less than 20 to no more than 30 percent of the required number of trees. Additionally, evergreen trees are required to fulfill at least 50 percent of the required trees planted in buffers greater than 25 feet. Two evergreen or small flowering trees for each required tree may be substituted. Trees shall be distributed along the entire length of the buffer. 
c.  Evergreen shrubs. Evergreen shrubs, a minimum of 24 inches in height, of a variety that be expected to reach four or five feet in height within three to five years of planting, shall be provided. Shrubs shall not be planted closer than six feet on center. Additionally, shrubs shall not be planted closer than six feet to planted trees, nor within the drip line of existing trees. Shrubs shall also be distributed along the entire length of the buffer. Evergreen shrubs shall be provided at the rate shown in table 103-2. 
d.  Planting rows. The number of planting rows for supplemental plantings or replanting of shrubs is determined by the buffer width, as shown in table 103-2. 
3)  Buffers must be replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
Table 103-2 Buffer Planting Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2019-0117-01, 1-17-2019) 
103.03.09 - Interstate 575 buffer requirements. 
A.  A tree protection zone shall be established which shall include all property within a horizontal distance of 75 feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 575. The 75-feet strip shall remain undisturbed. 
B.  Where an interchange is located, including the ramps, the tree protection zone shall be reduced to 25 feet which shall be undisturbed. 
C.  Where a public road, street or alley exists as of December 16, 1997, and is located within the tree protection zone, a tree protection setback in lieu of the standard 75 feet shall be required that is the greater of: (i) 25 feet from the right-of-way or (ii) the stated building/structure setback for that particular zoning district in which such right-of-way is located. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.03.10 - Landscape plan requirements. 
A.  Applicability. 
1)  A landscape plan shall be required for any development with greater than one-acre disturbance in the city. 
a.  The landscape plan shall be prepared and stamped by a landscape architect registered in the state or under the supervision of an engineer and stamped by an engineer registered in the state. 
b.  Individual single-family, owner-occupied residential properties are exempt from said professional stamp requirement. 
2)  A landscape plan shall be required for single-family residential subdivision development plans which address common areas including, but not limited to, such areas as parks, active and passive recreation areas and entrances. These residential common areas shall maintain or exceed the minimum site density factor of 20 tree units per acre in accordance with section 103.06.06.B. 
3)  A landscape plan shall be required for any project wherein buffer areas or other landscaping areas or treatments are required by this section, this UDC, conditions of zoning/master plan/variance, or other regulations of the city, and shall be approved prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit and/or a building permit. 
B.  Submittal requirements. 
1)  The landscape plan may be submitted as part of the tree protection plan in accordance with section 103.06.00 (Tree protection), provided that all required information is legible, or as a separate drawing which includes, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Name, address, and phone number of owner of record and applicant. 
b.  Boundary lines of the tract by distance and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, land lot, land district, north point, graphic scale, and date. 
c.  Adjacent land uses and zoning classifications. 
d.  Approximate location of all specimen trees or stands of trees. 
e.  Location of proposed buildings, structures and paved areas. 
f.  Location of all existing and proposed storm, sanitary, and utility lines. 
g.  Location of all existing and proposed contours (two-foot minimum). 
h.  General location of all proposed trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, mulching, and other features proposed within the landscaped area. A scale sufficient to clearly show all details shall be used. 
i.  Planting schedules with proposed plant material names (common and botanical), quantity, size, spacing, and any special planting notes. Denote evergreens in planting schedule. 
i.  Total site area, 
ii.  Site density calculations, 
iii.  Required parking landscape, landscape buffers and/or landscape screening calculations, 
iv.  Overlay zone calculations. 
k.  All parking islands must show they are planted with canopy/shade trees. 
l.  Planting details, especially on steep slopes, if applicable. 
m.  The following notes shall be indicated in bold letters on the landscape plan: 
"**A MAINTENANCE INSPECTION OF TREES WILL BE PERFORMED AFTER ONE FULL GROWING SEASON FROM THE DATE OF THE FINAL CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION. PROJECT OWNERS AT THE TIME OF THE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE. 
**IF THE LANDSCAPE DESIGN OR PLANT MATERIAL ARE CHANGED IN ANY WAY FROM THE CITY OF CANTON'S APPROVED PLAN, TWO SETS OF REVISED PLANS SHALL BE SUBMITTED TO THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT FOR APPROVAL PRIOR TO ANY LANDSCAPE INSTALLATION. FAILURE TO DO SO WILL REQUIRE SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL OF AS BUILT PLANS PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY." 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.00 - Parking and loading. 
103.04.01 - Off-street parking requirements. 
A.  It shall be required that in all zoning districts, with the exception of the Central Business District (CBD), off-street parking shall be provided at the time of initial construction of any principal building or when a structural alteration or change in the principal building produces an increase in dwelling units, guestrooms, floor area, seating, or bed capacity or when a conversion in use occurs. 
B.  Off-street parking spaces shall have direct access to a street or alley and shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the requirements identified in table 103-3 (off-street parking standards). 
C.  In the case of mixed uses, or uses with different parking requirements occupying the same building or premises, or in the case of joint use of a building or premises by more than one use having the same parking requirements, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
1)  Any subsequent change in use that requires additional parking spaces based on the requirements in table 103-3 shall require action by the applicant to satisfy any additional parking requirements. 
2)  A request to waive the requirement to satisfy any additional parking requirements may be made in writing to the director that provides documentation from a parking demand analysis indicating the total parking demand of all the uses at any one time will be met by the total number of existing parking stalls. 
D.  The parking requirements in table 103-3 are in addition to handicapped parking spaces and loading spaces that are required in accordance with this section. 
E.  Vehicle parking spaces may exceed the maximum number allowed by up to 20 percent if the additional spaces are designed with porous materials in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2. 
1)  A request to exceed the maximum number of spaces shall be made in writing to the director that provides documentation from ITE, ULI, APA or a traffic engineering study indicating a need for more parking. 
2)  A request to exceed the maximum number of spaces by more than two percent or to utilize non-porous materials shall be made in writing to the director that provides documentation from a traffic engineering study indicating a need for the request. 
3)  Upon approval of the request by the director, a parking plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the director. 
Table 103-3 Off-Street Parking Standards 

 
F.  The parking of vehicles in the front yard or of property zoned or used for single family uses shall be restricted to impervious surfaces (concrete or asphalt). Impervious surface area shall not exceed 50 percent of the front yard area. 
G.  All areas designated for parking of vehicle, drive aisles, loading/unloading zones shall be constructed of impervious material such as concrete or asphalt. The allowance for pervious material as noted in section 3.04.01.E is excepted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
103.04.02 - Unclassified use. 
Where the proposed land use cannot be classified within the uses herein specified, the director shall determine the specified use most closely related to the proposed use and the minimum requirements for the specified use so determined shall apply to the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.03 - Parking space standards. 
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces herein required shall be computed and provided in accordance with the following specifications: 
A.  The number of spaces required shall serve residents, customers, patrons, visitors, and employees. 
B.  Each parking space shall have adequate drives and room for ingress and egress to each parking space with a minimum size of eight feet by 22 feet for each parallel parking space and ten feet by 18 feet for each perpendicular head-in parking space, and shall be designed in accordance with the minimum standards as defined in this section. 
C.  For parking lots having 25 or more spaces, up to 20 percent of the required number of parking spaces may be designated as compact vehicles only. These spaces shall be a minimum size of eight feet by 16 feet in accordance with this section. Said spaces shall be clearly indicated and marked by a sign on each space so as to be readable by approaching drivers. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.04 - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Parking spaces shall be marked and designated for the exclusive use of handicapped persons in accordance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) code as adopted by city council and 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.05 - Location of parking on other property. 
If the required automobile parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property provided such property lies within 250 feet of the main entrance or exit to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.06 - Shared parking facilities. 
A.  Standards. 
1)  Up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required for public assembly and recreation uses, excluding religious facilities, may be provided and used jointly by commercial uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as said public assembly and recreation uses. 
2)  Up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a religious facility may be provided and used jointly by commercial uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as said religious facility. 
B.  Approval. A shared parking calculation projection shall be provided that demonstrates that each use will have adequate parking provisions at all times. Said calculation must receive director review and approval. 
C.  Access agreements. 
1)  For contiguous properties sharing parking spaces under this section, cross-easements shall be filed establishing access to the parking spaces in perpetuity and documentation of filing provided to the community development department. 
2)  A written agreement among all owners of record shall be provided and held on file with the community development department. All renewed or terminated leases shall be filed with the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.07 - Access to parking lots. 
A.  A plan of ingress and egress and stormwater drainage shall be submitted to the director and shall be approved prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit for off-street parking lots, whether public or private. 
B.  Installation of entrances, exits, and drainage systems shall have been completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
C.  All curb cut locations as well as widths shall comply with this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.08 - Extension of off-street parking into a residential district. 
Required off-street parking may extend up to 300 feet into an adjoining residential district provided that it: 
A.  Has its access to or fronts upon the same street as the property in the commercial or industrial district for which it provides the required parking space. 
B.  Is separated from abutting properties in the residential district by a 50-foot-wide buffer strip, installed in accordance with this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.09 - Parking lot screening. 
The perimeter of all off-street, surface parking lots shall be screened with a landscape buffer in accordance with section 103.03.05 (Peripheral parking lot planting requirements) of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.10 - Outdoor lighting. 
A.  Outdoor lighting of off-street parking areas shall be directed away and shielded from abutting residential districts and all rights-of-way. 
B.  Outdoor lighting of off-street parking areas shall not cause a distraction to, or impair the vision of, the motoring public. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.11 - Minimum parking dimensions. 
Minimum dimensions for off-street and travel aisles thereto shall be as follows: 
A.  Ninety-degree angle parking. Each parking space shall not be less than ten feet wide nor less than 18 feet in length. 
1)  Two-way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 26 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line, with the exception that the travel aisle may be a minimum of 24 feet wide when parking spaces are provided on only one side of the aisle. 
2)  One -way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 20 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line. 
B.  Sixty-degree angle parking. Each parking space shall not be less than 10 feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 18 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. 
1)  Two-way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 20 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line. 
2)  One-way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 20 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line. 
C.  Forty-five-degree angle parking. Each parking space shall not be less than ten feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 18 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. 
1)  Two-way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 20 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line. 
2)  One-way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 15 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line. 
D.  Thirty-degree angle parking. Each parking space shall not be less than ten feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 18 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. 
1)  Two-way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 20 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line. 
2)  One-way travel aisle. The travel aisle shall not be less than 14 feet wide when measured perpendicular to the parking line. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.12 - Loading areas. 
On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, retail business or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading services to avoid undue interference with public use of streets and alleys. 
A.  Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area 12 feet by 40 feet, with 14 feet height clearance, and shall be provided according to table 103-4. 
B.  For the above-described uses, one loading space shall be provided for the first 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof. Uses in excess of 25,000 square feet shall provide loading spaces according to table 103-4. 
C.  All plans for off-street loading areas shall be subject to the approval of the director. 
D.  Uses in the CBD district shall be exempt from these off-street loading requirements. 
Table 103-4 Loading Space Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.04.13 - Specific parking requirements in residential districts. 
A.  The parking of construction vehicles or equipment is prohibited on any lot not currently issued a building permit for construction activities in any residential zoning district. Construction vehicles or equipment shall include, but not be limited to, loaders, backhoes, dump trucks, tandem trailers loaded with grading or excavation equipment, or similar equipment. 
B.  The parking of recreational vehicles, including but not limited to, an RV, boat, or camper trailer, shall be allowed in a carport or garage or, if parked outdoors, shall be in a side or rear yard and parked on surface material composed of asphalt, concrete, brick, cement pavers or other approved hard surface other than gravel or loose fill. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2019-0117-06, 1-17-2019) 
103.04.14 - Parking surface standards. 
The surface of any parking area; including but not limited to a parking or loading spaces; aisle or driveway shall be designed to control storm water runoff and be improved with concrete, asphalt, brick, cement pavers or other approved hard surface other than gravel or loose fill. 
(Ord. No. 2019-0117-07, 1-17-2019) 
103.05.00 - Signs. 
103.05.01 - Signs, purpose and intent. 
A.  Purpose. 
1)  The city council finds that the natural surroundings, history, and people of the City of Canton combine to provide the Canton community with unique charm and beauty. The signs section has been adopted to assure that signs installed in the City of Canton are compatible with the unique character and environment of the community. 
2)  The city council finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals, businesses, and government may convey a variety of messages. Left unregulated, however, signs can become a threat to the public health and safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the overall economic growth of the City of Canton as an aesthetic nuisance. Numerous professional studies have been prepared that examine and establish the effect of signs on traffic safety, aesthetics and economic prosperity, including: 
a.  "The Public Purpose of Roswell's Sign Ordinance and the Implications of Doing Without It: A Position Paper" (December 7, 1999) by Jerry Weitz, Ph.D., AICP; and 
b.  "Safety Impacts of the Emerging Digital Display Technologies for Outdoor Advertising Signs" (April 2009) by Jerry Wachtel for AASHTO and the Standing Committee on Research of the National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP). 
3)  In particular, based on the cited materials and the studies referenced therein as well as other related studies, the city finds that unregulated signs: 
a.  Can be a safety hazard to drivers and pedestrians; 
b.  Can distract drivers; 
c.  Can create unsafe, cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares throughout the city; 
d.  Can hamper economic growth; 
e.  Can lower property values; 
f.  Can adversely impact public investments; 
g.  Can degrade the utility of public safety signs; and 
h.  Can adversely impact the aesthetic quality of the community and surrounding environment. 
4)  The purpose of this Code section is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements. It is further determined that the provisions of this section cannot achieve the end result desired unless the community voluntarily cooperates in upholding these provisions. 
5)  Bearing in mind the concepts presented above, the purpose of this section is to: 
a.  Preserve and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Canton. 
b.  To promote and accomplish the goals, policies and objectives of the City of Canton Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  To balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate signage for business identification. 
d.  To promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially attributable to cluttered, distracting, and/or illegible signage. 
e.  To prevent property damage and personal injury from signs which are improperly constructed or poorly maintained. 
f.  To promote the use of signs which are aesthetically pleasing, of appropriate scale, and integrated with surrounding buildings and landscape, in order to meet the community's expressed desire for quality development. 
g.  To protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape which affects the image of the City of Canton. 
B.  Intent. It is the intent of this section to: 
1)  Provide functional flexibility, encourage variety and create an incentive to relate signage to basic principles of good design. 
2)  Assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets, and other public structures and spaces, are protected by exercising reasonable controls over the character and design of sign structures. 
3)  Provide an improved visual environment for the citizens of, and visitors to, the City of Canton, and to protect view sheds within the community. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.02 - Applicability. 
A.  The requirements of this section shall apply to all properties, regardless of zoning district. 
B.  The requirements of this section shall apply to all signs that are or intended to be viewed from a street, public right-of-way, adjacent property, property in public ownership, or any outdoor space. 
C.  No sign shall be placed or maintained on any property, building or other structure within the city except in conformity with this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.03 - Display of property numbering. 
A.  Consistent with the International Fire Code, section 505, and International Property Maintenance Code, section 304, each premises throughout the city shall display the street number assigned by the issuing authority on the building facade, mailbox, curb and/or door so that it is discernible from the street. If multiple residences, offices or stores are located in one building, the inclusive numbers shall be displayed on the building facade, mailbox and/or exterior door, and individual numbers displayed on or over the entry door to each residence, office or store. 
B.  The required dimensions of each property number shall be as follows: 
1)  The height shall be no less than four inches and shall be no greater than eight inches. 
2)  The minimum stroke width shall be one-half inch. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.04 - General requirements applying to all signs. 
A.  Height restrictions. In addition to the height requirements identified in this UDC, all signs shall be subject to the height limitation of the district in which the sign is located, and, in event of conflict, the most stringent standard shall apply. 
B.  Location restrictions. 
1)  Unless otherwise provided in this UDC, all signs shall be located on private property and in no case on public property or within the public right-of-way, private right-of-way, ingress and egress easements, driveway and maneuvering areas, or within utility easements, except with respect to swinging or projecting signs in the downtown district that meet the standards of section 103.05.10.B.3. 
2)  No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended parallel or at a location that would cause an obstruction to vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
3)  No sign shall interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
4)  No sign shall be located on any building, structure, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as allowed under the provisions of this section. 
5)  All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with National Electrical Code specification. In no case shall any sign be installed within five feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guy wire. 
C.  Setbacks. 
1)  Unless otherwise provided for herein, all signs shall be located outside public or private rights-of-way or at least ten feet from the back of the curb or edge of pavement of the adjacent street, whichever is greater. 
2)  Signs located on a corner lot shall be no closer than 30 feet from the intersection of street right-of-way lines and shall be set back outside of the public or private right-of-way, or 15 feet from the back of the curb or edge of pavement of the adjacent street, whichever is greater. 
D.  Construction and inspection. 
1)  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is structurally safe, clean, and in good repair. 
2)  Except as otherwise provided in this UDC, all signs for which a permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with applicable building and electrical codes. 
3)  All illuminated signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the latest adopted version of the National Electrical Code. 
4)  All signs, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
5)  In the case of a sign with a translucent face, the material shall be a pan-molded background with embossed copy. In the case of a sign with copy less than six inches, or a sign face smaller than two feet by four feet, a pan face with flat copy may be used. In the case of a sign face larger than 100 square feet and exceeding 40 feet in height, a sign face made of flexible, reinforced material stretched over a supporting frame may be used. 
6)  All signs of plastic material, including copy, facing or display surface, must be in accordance with ASTM D 635 Standard Test Method for Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of Burning of Plastics in a Horizontal Position. 
7)  All edges and backs of signs, with the exception of wall signs comprised of individual channel letters, shall be fully encased in metal or other noncombustible material. 
8)  All components of an illuminated sign shall be U.L. listed, or the equivalent thereof, with an identification label that shows the manufacturer of such sign. 
9)  Every sign may be inspected by the building official from time to time so as to determine continuing compliance with this UDC. 
E.  Illumination. 
1)  No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds, or has any other such adverse effect on traffic. 
2)  The light from all illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that the light shall not be of any intensity or brightness which will interfere with the peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties and roadways. 
3)  No illuminated sign shall be constructed or maintained within 75 feet of the property line of any single-family dwelling. 
4)  No series, lines or rows of electric lights shall be allowed. Bare bulb illumination and illumination of flashing or moving lights shall also be prohibited. 
5)  No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner as to be confused with, or construed as, traffic control devices. 
6)  Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to the motoring public. 
7)  An externally-illuminated sign, where allowed, shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
8)  An internally-illuminated sign, where allowed, shall completely shield the source of light from direct view. 
F.  Maintenance. 
1)  The owner of any sign shall be responsible for ensuring that the sign is inspected annually and in good condition. 
2)  Every sign, including those specifically exempt from this section with respect to permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times. 
3)  All signs shall be neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or of rust resistant material. 
4)  The director shall have the authority to inspect all signs and to issue a citation or order the repainting, repair, alteration, or removal or a sign which shall constitute a hazard to public safety, health or general welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or obsolescence. 
5)  No sign face shall be obscured by landscaping or vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.05 - Prohibited signs. 
Except as otherwise provided by this UDC, the following types of signs are prohibited: 
A.  Signs imitating warning signals; signs displaying lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; signs using words, slogans, dimensional shapes or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
B.  Any sign or lighting device, whether on the exterior of the building, freestanding, or on the inside of a window which is visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel, or from any public or private right-of-way, with intermittent, flashing, rotating, scintillating, blinking, strobe light, or animated illumination. 
C.  Signs attached to any utility pole, or structure, street light, tree, rock, natural object, fence, fire hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench, or other location on public property, except as provided herein. Signs, other than those placed by a local, state or federal government, located within the public street right-of-way or within ten feet of the curb or closest edge of the pavement of any public street. 
D.  Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road by a person of normal hearing. 
E.  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. 
F.  Balloons, streamers, pennants, air or gas filled figures, banners and other similar signs, other than as allowed by this UDC. 
G.  A-frame, sandwich-type, sidewalk or-curb-type signs, other than as allowed by this UDC. 
H.  Roof signs. 
I.  Projecting or swinging signs of a size in excess of those allowed by this section. 
J.  Advertising benches. 
K.  Directional signs greater than two and one-half square feet in size. 
L.  Portable signs. 
M.  Pole or pylon signs are prohibited as freestanding signs. 
N.  Signs displaying nudity. 
O.  Obscene signs, as defined under O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
P.  Signs that are dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard, nuisance or to be unsafe or fail to comply with any provision of building codes, electrical codes or this UDC. 
Q.  Abandoned signs. 
R.  Tri-vision signs. 
S.  LCD signs and similar type technologies (except as permitted by this section). 
T.  LED signs and similar type technologies (except as permitted by this section). 
U.  Signs that are in violation of the rules and regulations of any zoning overlay district or the decision of any board responsible for design review. 
V.  Permanent window signs which exceed 30 percent of the aggregate window and door glass area. 
W.  Signs located in the public right-of-way and other locations that are prohibited under section 103.05.04.B (Location restrictions). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2019-0117-03, 1-17-2019) 
103.05.06 - Permit required. 
A.  Generally. Except as specifically exempted by section 103.05.07 (Exempt signs), no person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, re-face, move, improve or convert any sign in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit for such sign from the department of community development upon forms that are furnished by that department. 
B.  Application form. Each application for a sign permit shall provide the following information: 
1)  The current zoning of the proposed sign location. 
2)  The type of sign as defined in this UDC. 
3)  A design and stress diagram or plan drawn to scale using an architectural or engineering scale that contains the necessary information to enable the building official to determine that such sign complies with all regulations of the IBC, as amended, and NEC, as amended. 
4)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and the proposed specific location of the subject sign on the subject property. A sketch or drawing to scale of the proposed location shall be included, showing the proposed height of installation of the sign and distances from all other signs and structures on the premises, from the public rights-of-way, and from corridors of influence. 
5)  The square-foot area of the proposed sign and the aggregate square-foot area if there is more than one sign face. A sketch or drawing of the proposed sign shall show the size, dimensions, character height, materials, colors and any other information as required by the director to ensure compliance with this UDC. 
6)  Written consent of the owner or lessee, or his or her agent, granting permission for the placement or display of the subject sign. 
7)  Name, address, and telephone number of the sign contractor. 
8)  Any pertinent or required permits, such as an electrical permit. 
C.  Review and approval process. 
1)  All applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the community development department who, together with the building inspection department and any other necessary individual or department, shall review all applications for sign permits without unreasonable or unnecessary delay to ensure that the application is complete and that the specifications, sketches, drawings, permits and other requirements conform and comply with this UDC and all other pertinent laws and ordinances; however, no action can be taken until the application requirements have been met. The application shall not be deemed to be complete until all required information is submitted to the city. 
2)  The director shall grant or deny the sign permit application within 15 business days from the date the completed application was filed with the community development department; however, no review can take place until the application is complete. The burden is on the applicant to provide the city with an application meeting all requirements of this UDC for completeness. 
3)  An application meeting the standards of this UDC shall be granted. If the city does not respond within 15 business days from the date of submission of a completed application, the permit shall be deemed granted. If at a later date the city discovers that the application was not in compliance with the standards of these regulations, the permit shall be deemed to be invalid. 
D.  Denial. If, after review and investigation as required herein, it is determined that the application fails to meet one or more of the standards of this UDC, the permit shall be denied and the director shall make a written report of the denial and the reasons therefor. A copy of the report shall be sent by certified mail to the designated return address of the applicant as stated on the application. The application for a permit shall be denied if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1)  The application does not comply with any of the requirements of this UDC; or 
2)  The application would violate any building, electrical, or other adopted Codes of the City of Canton. 
E.  Fees. 
1)  No permit shall be issued until the appropriate, completed application has been filed with the community development department, the completed application has been approved by the community development department, by the building inspection department, and any other necessary individual or department, and fees have been paid as provided herein. Fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of city council. 
2)  No refunds will be made of a permit fee after the permit is issued. After the time limits set forth in subsection F. below, a new application for the sign shall be processed and another fee shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule that is applicable at that time. 
F.  Duration of permit. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been erected, displayed or completed within 45 days after the date of issuance; provided that where proof is provided by an applicant that the sign is under fabrication, one extension of this time period may be made without penalty. 
G.  Effect of permit issuance. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the erection or display of the sign according to the plans as filed with the application and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this UDC, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the director from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this UDC. 
H.  Permit affixed to sign. Every sign for which a permit is issued shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation erecting and maintaining such sign and shall have affixed on the front thereof the permit number issued for said sign. In case of window displays, the permit number will suffice where the display is maintained by the store licensee. 
I.  Suspension, revocation of a permit. No permit shall be suspended or revoked except for violation of a provision of this UDC. Violations of any provision of this UDC shall be grounds for suspending or revoking the permit which has been granted by the city to the owner and/or applicant erecting the sign. The permittee shall receive written notice of a violation by personal service or certified mail and shall have ten calendar days to cure said violation; or the permittee may, within that ten-day period of time, submit a written request to the community development department for a hearing before the board of zoning appeals to contest the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.07 - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempted from the permit requirements of this section; however, exemption from the permit requirement does not relieve a sign owner from compliance with the remaining provisions of this section or UDC: 
A.  Any sign or banner erected and maintained by a governmental entity. 
B.  Official notices or advertisements posted or displayed by or under the direction of any public official or court officer in the performance of official or court-directed duties or by trustees under deeds of trust, deeds of assignment, or other similar instruments. 
C.  Directional signs measuring less than two and one-half square feet along private streets and driveways, and in off-street parking areas. Notices of any railroad, bridge, ferry, or other transportation or transmission company necessary for the direction or safety of the general public. 
D.  Drive-thru menu sign accessory panel exchanges. 
E.  Signs erected more than two feet inside a building. 
F.  Any sign that is not visible from a street, adjacent property, outdoor space, public right-of-way or other public property, including any sign that is placed within a business, office, mall, or other enclosed area. 
G.  Any permanent window sign, for purposes of viewing from outside the premises; provided the aggregate sign area for such sign(s) shall not exceed 30 percent of the aggregate window and door glass area. 
H.  Nameplates that do not exceed 24 by six inches size and are permanently affixed upon a building or structure. 
I.  Building, suite, apartment and/or house numbers and letters used for the address identification of premises and measuring not less than four inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch and measuring not more than eight inches in height, unless a larger size is required by the International Fire Code or International Property Maintenance Code. 
J.  Official flags. Flags may be displayed on a flagpole which meets the height and setback requirements of the zoning district in which the flagpole is placed, with the exception that the flagpole shall be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. One flagpole per parcel is permitted. 
K.  Historic signs. 
L.  Temporary signs that do not require a permit, in accordance with section 103.05.11.A. 
M.  Directional signs within an office or industrial park which is zoned O-I or L-I shall be allowed. The sign size shall be limited to ten feet in height, contain no more than 32 square feet of sign area and have a brick or stone base of 18 to 24 inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
103.05.08 - Measurement of sign area and height. 
A.  Computation of sign area. In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas allowed under this section, the following shall establish how sign areas are measured. 
1)  Freestanding signs. Sign area shall be measured for freestanding signs, including monument signs where required in this UDC, as follows: 
a.  Sign area shall be measured as the entire area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character, together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
b.  The area of the frame shall not be included in computing the area of a permanent freestanding sign when the frame is composed of stone or brick and provided additional conditions are met: 
i.  The frame contains or has attached no copy, words, writing, letters, or advertisement, although one trademark, insignia, coat of arms, or other similar identifying mark may be affixed to the frame, but may not be internally illuminated. 
ii.  The monument is no higher than eight feet. 
c.  The area of any "time and temperature" sign, when installed in accordance with this UDC, shall not be included in computing the area of a permanent freestanding sign. 
2)  Painted or wall signs. Sign area shall be measured as the entire area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character. 
3)  Double-faced signs. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are located two feet or less from one another at all points, or located at an interior angle of 45 degrees or less from one another, the sign area shall be measured as the area of one face. Where the two faces are not equal in size, the larger sign face shall be used. 
4)  Sign supports. The necessary supports or structure on which any sign is placed shall not be included in determining the sign area, unless such supports are designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the display. 
B.  Measurement of sign height. All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the adjacent street to which the land upon which the sign is located has access. The grade level shall be calculated as the average street grade along the frontage of the subject property. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.09 - Sign design. 
A.  Monument signs. 
1)  Monument signs shall be constructed with a brick or stone base and frame within which advertising panels are contained. 
2)  The ground mounted base shall be equal to or greater than the length of the sign face including the cabinet or any other structure within which the sign is located. 
3)  The base shall be 18 to 24 inches high. 
4)  The use of exposed poles in ground signs is prohibited. 
B.  Wall signs. 
1)  A wall sign shall not extend more 12 inches beyond the facade of the building where attached. 
2)  The height of a wall-mounted sign shall not interfere, impede, or cause injury to pedestrian traffic. 
3)  Wall signs shall be limited to the following size (square footage and height), as shown in table 103-5: 
Table 103-5 Wall Sign Size Requirements 

 
C.  Projecting and Swinging Signs. Projecting and swinging signs attached to a building shall meet the following requirements: 
1)  The maximum number of faces is two, with a total sign area of eight square feet per side. 
2)  The minimum clearance from the sidewalk to the bottom of the sign shall be ten feet with a maximum height not to exceed 22 feet when measured from the sidewalk, but in no case shall it be located or extend above the first floor. 
3)  In no case shall the sign extend above the roofline of the building nor extend more than four feet from the surface of the building. 
4)  Signs shall be attached to the building utilizing a decorative metal bracket. All brackets shall be painted flat black, only. 
D.  Awnings and awning signs. 
1)  The awning shall be located below the storefront cornice or sign panel. 
2)  Awning sign letters shall not exceed eight inches in height and shall be designed as an integral part of the awning design. 
3)  The awning valance shall not extend greater than seven feet from the building. 
4)  The awning shall not cover the piers on either side of the storefront. 
E.  A-frame signs. 
1)  The maximum number of faces is two, with a total sign area of eight square feet per side. 
2)  A-frame signs shall be located against the building facade, as to maintain a minimum of 48 inches of clear walking path along the public sidewalks. 
3)  A-frame signs shall be located only along the primary roadway, within the horizontal boundary created by the extents of the building frontage. 
F.  Digital message signs. 
1)  The messages displayed must be complete in themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or to any other sign. 
2)  Display of message must be static. When the display changes, it must change with no phasing, rolling, scrolling, flashing, twirling, blending, or in any manner which imitates movement. 
3)  Signs shall change no more than one time per hour. 
4)  Text messages shall be composed of one color with the background composed of one color. Pictures, logos, images, graphics, and symbols may be displayed from one color to full color. 
5)  Signs shall be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell that automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions. 
6)  Prior to issuance of a sign permit for an electric sign, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed 15-foot candles measured four feet perpendicular to any surface of the electronic sign. 
7)  No sign shall display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or otherwise impair the vision of the driver or result in a nuisance to the driver. 
8)  No sign shall be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal. Lighting shall not be used that may be mistaken for police or other emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2019-0117-03, 1-17-2019) 
103.05.10 - Permanent signs. 
The following requirements, which are summarized in table 103-7 (permanent sign requirements by zoning district), shall pertain to all permanent signs within the City of Canton. 
A.  Residential zoning districts. 
1)  A maximum of two monument signs per residential development entrance is permitted. These signs shall not exceed eight feet in height or 50 square feet in area. 
2)  Multiple-family dwellings shall meet the following additional requirements: 
a.  There shall be the option of: 
i.  A maximum of one projecting or swinging sign, mounted on a post, for each building with a maximum height of two feet and a maximum sign area of four square feet per side with a maximum of two sides; or 
ii.  A maximum of one wall sign mounted per building to a structural member of the building. The sign shall have a maximum height of two feet and a maximum sign area of three square feet per sign; or 
iii.  A maximum of one wall-mounted shingle per building with a maximum sign area of three square feet with a maximum of two sides. 
b.  Window signs are limited to emergency contact numbers. 
3)  Institutional uses are allowed one wall sign up to 32 square feet in area on the building wall, and one monument sign not to exceed eight feet in height or 50 square feet. 
4)  Wall signs are prohibited in single-family residential zoning districts. 
5)  Home occupations. One unlighted sign not exceeding one square foot in area and located not less than 20 feet from any property line shall be allowed. 
B.  Commercial, office, and institutional zoning districts. 
1)  NC, GC, and O-I districts. 
a.  One monument sign per property frontage shall be permitted. This sign shall not exceed ten feet in height or 50 square feet in area. 
i.  In order to erect multiple monument signs, the use must have frontage on two or more publicly dedicated streets. 
ii.  In those instances where one of the street frontages is on a local street serving a single-family residentially zoned subdivision, a second sign on the local street shall be prohibited and the sign area shall not be combined. 
iii.  If any applicant has an existing sign that does not conform to this UDC, the sign in violation shall be brought into conformance or removed prior to a permit being issued for multiple signs. 
b.  On a lot with multiple businesses, monument sign size shall be limited to the following (see table 103-6): 
Table 103-6 Monument Sign Size Requirements, Multiple Businesses 

 
c.  Monument signs allowed by this subsection are permitted to have manual changeable copy boards of not more than 12 square feet incorporated into the allowable sign area. 
d.  In addition to the monument signs allowed by this subsection, there may be one wall sign for each separate use or business on a parcel in commercial districts. 
i.  In order to erect multiple wall signs, the commercial/office or institutional use must have frontage on two or more publicly dedicated streets or be located in an end unit or corner unit of a commercial shopping center and/or office building. 
ii.  If any applicant has an existing sign that does not conform to this UDC, the sign in violation shall be brought into conformance or removed prior to a permit being issued for multiple signs. 
2)  O-RT District. 
a.  One monument sign per property frontage shall be allowed. This sign shall not exceed eight feet in height or 50 square feet in area. 
b.  In addition to one monument sign, there shall be the option of: 
i.  A maximum of one projecting or swinging sign, mounted on a post, for each building with a maximum height of two feet and a maximum sign area of four square feet per side with a maximum of two sides; or 
ii.  A maximum of one wall sign mounted per building to a structural member of the building. The sign shall have a maximum height of two feet and a maximum sign area of three square feet per sign; or 
iii.  A maximum of one wall-mounted shingle per building with a maximum sign area of three square feet with a maximum of two sides. 
c.  Window signs are limited to emergency contact numbers. 
3)  CBD district. 
a.  Only the following signs are allowed in the CBD district: 
i.  For zero lot line buildings, one of the following: projecting sign (or swinging sign), or awning with awning sign, as allowed by this UDC; and 
ii.  One wall sign located on the primary building frontage. Those having secondary building frontage shall be permitted to have an additional wall sign located on the secondary building frontage; and 
iii.  One A-frame sign; and 
iv.  Window signage, as allowed by subsection 103.05.10.B.3)b below. 
v.  Where there exists within the limits of the occupying property boundary a minimum of 80 square feet of continuous pervious surface which is located on the primary roadway and is not utilized for auto or pedestrian circulation, buildings are only allowed the following in addition to subsection iv above: One monument sign not to exceed five feet in height and 20 square feet in area and constructed in accordance with this UDC, with the exception that the base and frame may be constructed of wood; or one double post sign with framed sign panel that is not flush with the ground and shall be no greater five feet in height and 20 square feet in area and shall be constructed of wood. 
b.  Permanent window signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the aggregate window area. Signs on doors shall not exceed ten percent of the door glass area. 
c.  The total area of all signs allowed shall not exceed 75 square feet or two square feet for every one-foot of building frontage, whichever is less. 
d.  Signs in this district shall be illuminated as required by subsection 103.05.10.B.3 CBD District. There shall be no neon lighting or internal lighting allowed, with the exception that internal lighting is allowed with freestanding signs. All non-freestanding signs shall be down lit. All down lighting components shall be painted flat black, only. 
e.  No neon signs shall be allowed to be visible from the exterior of the building, with the exception of one sign indicating the words "open" or "closed," per premises. 
f.  The A-frame sign shall be removed from its exterior location during nonbusiness hours. Those A-frame signs remaining on the exterior, during nonbusiness hours, shall be subject to citation for each occurrence. 
C.  Industrial and special use districts. 
1)  Subsection 103.05.10.B.1 NC, GC, and O-I districts shall apply to the L-I and SU zoning districts. 
2)  In addition to the monument signs allowed by this subsection, there may be one wall sign for each separate use or business on a parcel in industrial or special use districts. 
a.  In order to erect multiple wall signs, the use must have frontage on two or more publicly dedicated streets or be located in an end unit or corner unit of an industrial suite building. 
b.  If any applicant has an existing sign that does not conform to this UDC, the sign in violation shall be brought into conformance or removed prior to a permit being issued for multiple signs. 
D.  Mixed use districts. Signage for a planned development, whether new or existing, must be established by approval of a master signage plan in accordance with the provisions of this section and the planned development districts section of chapter 104 of this UDC. 
1)  Standards as to type, number, size, height, location, orientation or other design provisions established in addition to or in lieu of the restrictions placed on signs by this section are to be incorporated into the master signage plan. 
a.  Master signage plans shall illustrate all proposed signs in sufficient detail so as to provide knowledgeable review and design specificity. 
b.  Master signage plans shall show, describe or illustrate all signs proposed to be located on a lot and the buildings and structures therein, whether existing or new, and whether permitted by right or as additional signage under these regulations. 
c.  Signs that are otherwise exempt under this section need not be shown on the master signage plan. 
2)  Upon approval, the master signage plan shall supersede any conflicting restrictions and regulations of this section for the property to which it pertains. 
3)  Following approval, the master signage plan shall be recorded by the owner in the office of the clerk to the superior court prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development, and shall be included in any sale, lease or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development. 
4)  A copy of the approved master signage plan, as recorded, shall be filed with the director prior to issuance of any sign permit. 
5)  All tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser or other occupant, shall comply with the approved master signage plan. 
Table 103-7 Permanent Sign Requirements by Zoning District 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.11 - Temporary signs. 
A.  Permit not required. A temporary sign permit is not required for the following: 
1)  Accessory signs. One non-illuminated accessory sign located on private property that meets the following requirements is permitted at all times: 
a.  Signs shall be mounted not closer than ten feet to the back of the curb or pavement or from the edge of the public right-of-way, whichever is further from the street. 
b.  No sign shall project over property lines. 
c.  Not more than one sign shall be allowed per platted parcel of property. 
d.  Signs shall require permission of the property owner on whose property they are erected and shall meet the standards of this section with respect to maintenance and location. 
e.  Signs shall not exceed six square feet in size. 
f.  Signs shall be wall mounted or ground installed. Ground signs shall not exceed 42 inches in height. 
2)  Real estate signs. One non-illuminated real estate sign per street frontage that meets the following requirements is permitted as follows: 
a.  Maximum sign area shall be limited to four square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. 
b.  Multiple listing strips, sale pending and sold signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign and are subject to the same maximum area and maximum height requirements. 
c.  One on-premises open house or open for inspection sign, not exceeding four square feet in area with a maximum height of eight feet, may be allowed in addition to the above requirements of this subsection. 
d.  A maximum of one real estate brochure/information box may be allowed per parcel of land. 
e.  All real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days after ownership or occupancy has changed. 
3)  Yard sale signs. Signs for temporary yard sales, estate sales, and the like, located in residential districts and subject to the following provisions are permitted: 
a.  There shall be no more than one sign per parcel of property. 
b.  The sign shall require permission of the property owner on whose property they are erected and shall meet the standards of section 103.05.00 with respect to maintenance and location. 
c.  The maximum area of the sign shall be two square feet. 
d.  Signs are permitted to be posted from 3:00 p.m. on the Thursday before the event to 7:00 a.m. on the Monday following the event. 
e.  No sign shall be illuminated. 
4)  Weekend directional signs (WEDS) used to convey directions to a specific, time-limited weekend place or event are allowed in all zoning districts subject to the following provisions: 
a.  There shall be no more than one sign per parcel of property. 
b.  All WEDS must be placed on private property with the owner's permission. Written permission of the property owner must be provided to the community development department indicating the property owner allows the display of the WEDS sign on his or her property. Further, each sign shall prominently display identification issued by the community development department indicating the property owner's permission and the sign location with contact number and responsible party. 
c.  WEDS shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on the Friday immediately preceding the event to 7:00 a.m. on the Monday immediately following the event. The responsibility to remove all WEDS is that of the sign owner. 
d.  WEDS shall not exceed four square feet in area and three feet in height and shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. 
e.  WEDS shall be constructed of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be constructed of paper. 
f.  No sign shall be illuminated. 
g.  Weekend directional signs shall also include the sale of real estate. 
5)  Signs for community events. Temporary signs pertaining to events of a civic, community, philanthropic, memorial, educational, religious or other noncommercial nature; provided however, the total aggregate area of such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in area, shall not be posted more than one week before such event and must be removed within three days after the event. Temporary signs or banners erected on residentially zoned property or on property with a residential use that pertains to graduation, wedding, anniversary, birth of a child or similar type event cannot exceed 32 square feet in area, cannot be placed more than 14 days prior to the event and must be removed 14 days after the event. 
6)  Campaign signs, political signs. 
a.  Number. Each parcel may have one temporary freestanding campaign sign for each political candidate or issue on each street frontage. 
b.  Area. On commercial and industrial used property, no campaign sign may exceed 16 square feet in area per face. On residential used property, no campaign sign may exceed six square feet in area per face. Campaign signs may be double-faced, if placed perpendicular to the street right-of-way. 
c.  Height. No freestanding campaign sign may exceed four feet in height (to bottom of sign). 
d.  Location. Campaign signs may be placed in front, side or rear yard of any parcel that fronts, sides or rears on a public street right-of-way. 
e.  Lighting. Campaign signs may not be illuminated. 
f.  Time limit. Campaign signs are allowed between the date of closing of filing for candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
B.  Permit required. A temporary sign permit is required for temporary signs that are not identified in section 103.05.11.A, as follows: 
1)  Number. No more than one temporary sign is permitted per premises. 
2)  Duration. 
a.  A permit allowing usage of this type, not including "grand opening" signs, shall not exceed 21 consecutive days in a calendar quarter, after which time the owner of the temporary sign or the owner of the premises shall remove the sign from the premises. 
b.  A permit for a temporary "grand opening" sign shall not exceed 30 consecutive days in a calendar quarter, after which time the owner of the temporary sign or the owner of the premises shall remove the sign from the premises. 
c.  Only one permit for temporary signage shall be issued for the same premises within the same quarter of the year (i.e., January 1—March 31, April 1—June 30, etc.). In the event a temporary sign is not removed within five days after the expiration or revocation of the permit, no new temporary sign permit will be issued for that premises for a period of the remainder of 12 months. 
3)  Placement. 
a.  All signs must be set back from the roadway edge by at least ten feet or outside the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
b.  The placement of a temporary sign in a parking space required to meet the minimum parking requirements for the premises is prohibited. 
4)  Maximum height and area. 
a.  The sign area of temporary signs, with the exception of air or gas-filled inflatable devices, shall not exceed a maximum of 32 square feet in area per face. 
b.  Air or gas-filled inflatable devices shall not exceed a height of 30 feet, as measured from the permanent structure upon which it is affixed, nor exceed a total of nine cubic feet. 
i.  Such signs or devices shall be securely attached to some permanent structure or to the ground. 
ii.  Inflatable signs and devices shall not be erected or displayed beyond seven days out of any 21-day permit period. 
5)  Fastening of sign. Every temporary sign, when in use, shall in some manner be securely fastened to a permanent structure or to the ground. 
6)  Lighting. All incandescent bulbs in, on, or attached to any temporary sign shall be P.A.R.-rated outdoor lamps of not more than 100 watts; however, spot-type bulbs are prohibited. Animation is prohibited on all temporary signs. 
7)  Required label. Each temporary sign shall have permanently affixed thereto and prominently displayed thereon the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the sign. 
8)  Fee. Fees shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. 
9)  Relationship to permanent sign. No temporary sign shall be located so as to block the view of permanent signs or to as to create a safety hazard, nor shall a temporary sign exceed the size of any permanent sign related to the same user. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
103.05.12 - Discontinued uses. 
When a business or service using a sign is discontinued, all sign faces relating to such use shall be removed within ten business days from the date of discontinuance. The sign structure may remain in place. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.13 - Vacant and undeveloped property. 
Any commercial, office, mixed use or industrial zoned property or any residential zoned property that is ten acres or larger in area, that is not occupied on a regular basis and any commercial, office, mixed use or industrial zoned property or residential zoned property that is ten acres or larger in area that is not developed property, and any commercial, office, mixed use or industrial zoned property or residential zoned property that is ten acres or larger in area undergoing development may contain only one free standing sign authorized by section 103.50.00, except during an election period. Such sign may be a double faced sign consisting of two sign panels erected back to back or in a V formation, provided that such sign faces shall be part of the same sign structure and shall not be more than 42 inches apart from any point of the sign, and the angle of separation for the V-shaped structure shall not exceed 30 degrees. Each sign face shall be limited to 32 square feet of sign area and the sign shall be erected to a height of no more than ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
103.05.14 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Signs which were approved and erected under the previous sign regulations, other than temporary or portable signs, may continue in existence until one of the following conditions occurs: 
1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it unsightly or a hazard; or 
2)  The sign has been damaged by act of God by at least 50 percent of its value, such that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign to a reasonable condition. Under this subparagraph, the city shall not remove or order the removal of such a nonconforming sign without paying just compensation in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83. In the event the city elects not to pay compensation for removal of any sign damaged by at least 50 percent of its value, the sign may be restored to its original condition. 
B.  A nonconforming sign shall not continue if use of the premises served by the sign ceases for any reason for a period of more than 60 days. After such time, the sign shall lose its legal nonconforming status and shall be removed. Any subsequent sign erected on the premises shall conform with all requirements of this UDC. 
C.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted until the sign is due to be removed under the provisions of subsection 103.05.14.A above. A sign structure may remain in place provided it is safe and structurally sound. 
D.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as repainting or electrical repairs, shall be permitted until the sign is due to be removed under the provisions of subsection A. above. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the provisions of this section; other than repair of a sign damaged by act of God pursuant to subsection 103.05.14.A.2 above. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall excuse the owner of a nonconforming sign from payment of all applicable fees and other costs due as a result of the existence of the sign within the city. 
F.  No nonconforming sign shall be moved, in whole or in part, to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by the sign at the time it became nonconforming, unless moving the sign makes it conforming. 
G.  Any sign in violation of this UDC shall result in the sign owner receiving written notice of a violation by personal service or certified mail. The community development director may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice, issue a citation for violation of this UDC, requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court, or may institute injunctive or other appropriate legal or administrative proceedings to prevent, correct, or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.15 - Violation of section; removal of violating signs. 
A.  Any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant or is unoccupied for a period of 60 days or more, or any sign that pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of 60 days or more. An abandoned sign, including the sign structure, is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises. 
B.  No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be promptly removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises. 
C.  The director, or his or her designee, shall cause to be removed any sign in any public right-of-way without notice. 
D.  Any sign in violation of this UDC shall result in the sign owner receiving written notice of violation by personal service or certified mail, except in circumstances of imminent peril to the public safety. The notice shall allow the owner ten days, or such longer time as reasonable under the circumstances, to remove the sign or otherwise to bring the sign into compliance with the signs section. Where the owner fails to comply with the notice, the community development director may issue citation. The community development director may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunctive or other appropriate legal or administrative proceedings to prevent, correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.05.16 - Penalties for violations; enforcement. 
A.  Violations of the signs section shall be punishable by the issuance of a citation and summons to municipal court. Any person found guilty of violating this UDC shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $200.00 per violation. If the offending sign is not removed or corrected within ten business days of the disposition of the citation in municipal court, the owner shall be subject to multiple violations and fines in municipal court until the sign is removed or brought into compliance with this UDC. 
B.  In the event that any sign is erected or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this section, the director, or his or her designee, may, in addition to other remedies, issue a citation for violation and summons to the municipal court, or institute injunctive or other appropriate actions to prevent or abate such violations. 
C.  This section shall be administered and enforced by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.00 - Tree protection. 
103.06.01 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the tree protection section is to provide standards for the protection of trees as part of the land development process; to prevent massive grading of land, both developed and undeveloped, without provision for replacement of trees; and to protect trees during construction whenever possible in order to enhance the quality of life within the city. The regulations of this section shall be definitive, unless otherwise directed by this UDC and/or City Code. 
B.  This Code section has been developed to benefit the environmental and aesthetic quality of the city and to recognize that trees in Canton are a city resource worth protection and maintaining. The benefits derived from this section include: 
1)  Provide visual buffering and enhance beautification of the city; 
2)  Moderate stormwater runoff and improve water quality; 
3)  Protect and attempt to enhance property values, thus safeguarding private and public investment; 
4)  Protect the unique identity of Canton by promoting native plants; 
5)  Control soil erosion; 
6)  Reduce some air pollutants and intercept airborne particulate matter; 
7)  Preserve stand of trees and "specimen" trees; and 
8)  Protect natural vegetation except where its removal is necessary for responsible property development or control of disease and infestation. 
C.  This section shall serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing of land and its disturbance, so as to preserve, insofar as possible, the natural and existing growth of vegetation, and to replace whenever possible the removed foliage with new vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.02 - Applicability. 
A.  The terms and provisions of this section shall apply to all activity which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit (LDP) or a building permit on any real property within the city. 
B.  No clearing, grubbing, grading, or other removal of existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage may occur until it is determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of this UDC. 
C.  A tree removal permit shall be required in accordance with the following standards: 
1)  No disturbance shall occur within the protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees without an approved tree removal permit. 
2)  A tree removal permit is required to remove any tree larger than five inches in diameter from any property. 
3)  For all building permit submittals, there shall be a fee for obtaining a tree removal permit as indicated in section 103.06.08 (Removal of trees) of this UDC. The fee will be established by city council. 
4)  If any tree, five-inch DBH or greater, is removed from any property without a tree removal permit, the property owner shall pay a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. 
D.  The requirements of section 103.03.00 (Landscape and buffer standards) shall apply in conjunction with this section. 
E.  Table 103-8, summary of applicability and exemptions summarizes those activities which are exempt from the provisions of this section and those for which a tree protection plan/landscape plan must be approved prior to the issuance of an LDP and/or building permit. 
Table 103-8 Summary of Applicability and Exemptions 

 
* Permit required to remove tree; however no fee is required. 
F.  In addition to the requirements of table 103-8, all legitimate timber harvesting shall be required to provide and maintain a 50-foot undisturbed buffer along the entire perimeter of the property, including road frontages, during the land disturbance activity, except for the authorized access crossings. Once tree harvesting takes place in conformity with the above regulations, no development of the property shall be permitted for a period of three years that would require the cutting of trees preserved. No timber harvesting shall be undertaken on any nonresidential parcel of land unless the transitional buffer zones required by section 103.03.00 are preserved in a natural and undisturbed state. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.03 - Permitting process. 
A.  Pre-submittal meeting. Prior to submission of any permit drawings, the applicant is encouraged to contact the community development department to discuss this chapter as it relates to the applicant's property. 
B.  Bond requirement. A tree protection plan and a landscape plan, either as separate or combined drawings and a landscape performance/landscape maintenance bond are to be submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy to the community development department. Said bond shall be submitted for 150 percent of the associated costs for materials, installation and two-year maintenance of the vegetation required by this section for replacement trees and all other required landscaping. One estimate shall be provided from a reputable landscape professional for the amount upon which the required bond is established. The bond form may be found at the community development department. 
C.  Payment into city fund. Where the site cannot adequately support the trees required by this section, a non-refundable amount equal to 100 percent of the material, installation and one year's maintenance costs may be paid into the city tree fund. Said fund shall be utilized to install trees throughout the City. Locations for said plantings will be chosen at the city's discretion. One estimate shall be provided from a reputable landscape professional for the amount upon which the required fund payment is established. Payment of this fund as a recompense alternative is subject to approval by the director and is due prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit and/or building permit. 
D.  Land disturbance authorization. Land disturbance may proceed only after a permit is obtained and tree protection measures have been installed. 
1)  To adequately protect the site, tree save areas shall be delineated in the field with tree protection measures. 
2)  The director shall review and approve the installation of tree protection measures on the site prior to any land disturbance activity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.04 - Implementation procedures. 
A.  Generally. An approved tree protection/landscape plan must be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Inspections. In addition to unscheduled inspections conducted by the director during construction to ensure compliance with the approved tree protection plan, the following inspection process shall apply: 
1)  When the developer/owner has installed the required landscaping improvement, he/she shall request an inspection by the director. 
2)  If the director approves the installation, the two-year maintenance bond shall be submitted. 
3)  If the director does not approve the landscape implementation, he/she shall submit a report stating his/her reasons for disapproval so that the developer may make the necessary corrections. After the corrections have been made, a reinspection shall be requested. 
C.  Bond release. At 45 days prior to the expiration of the two-year landscape maintenance period, the director shall inspect the site and shall make a determination of whether or not the required trees and landscaping are healthy and have a reasonable chance of surviving to maturity. Upon such finding, the bond shall be released at the two-year expiration date. In absence of such finding, the bond shall not be released and the owner of the property shall be notified to replace the unhealthy trees and landscaping or take other appropriate action as approved by the director. Upon failure of the owner to comply with the director decision regarding such trees, the city shall use the bond to the extent necessary to bring the property into compliance. The final inspection shall be scheduled within ten working days' notice. 
D.  Maintenance. Trees, which are used to meet the density requirements, shall be fully maintained after the date of final landscape establishment inspection by the property owner. Failure to maintain the required tree density factor at any time during the life of the project shall be a violation of this section. Trees which have been used to meet the tree density requirements shall not be removed at any time without approval of the director. Removal of such trees shall result in replacement of like kind and size by the property owner. 
E.  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the director to enforce the provisions and requirements of this section. The director shall conduct periodic inspections of the site before work begins and during clearing, construction, and post construction phases of development in order to ensure compliance with these regulations and the intent of this section. Tree protection must remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development. In the event of failure to comply with and/or to maintain approved tree protection measures the Director shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any land disturbance permit and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or a portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.05 - Tree protection standards. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Existing trees shall not be disturbed, except as outlined in this UDC. 
2)  No person shall cut, carve or otherwise damage any tree. 
3)  No person shall attach rope, wire, nails, or advertising posters to any tree. 
4)  No person shall set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heart thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
5)  Any large, rare, or historically significant trees on a project site shall be highlighted by the designer (see section 103.06.07, specimen trees). 
6)  It is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. Reasonable effort shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Alteration of building design; 
b.  Alternate building location, parking area, detention area, or drainage system; or 
c.  Relocation of utilities. 
7)  Careful thought and consideration is expected to be given to saving trees in the development process. 
8)  The guidelines and standards in sections 103.06.05.B and 103.06.05.C shall apply to trees proposed to be retained for credit toward meeting the site density factor on a property. 
9)  For the purpose of section 103.06.00, caliper measurements for all trees shall be at diameter breast height (DBH). 
B.  Site planning. Tree space is the most critical factor in tree protection through the site development process. Disturbance within the critical root zone (CRZ) can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. To protect these CRZs the following planning considerations should be applied: 
1)  The use of tree save islands and stands is encouraged rather than the protection of individual (non-specimen) trees scattered throughout a site. This will facilitate ease in overall organization as related to tree protection. 
2)  Tree protection and grading requirements are two design constraints, which are most often in conflict. The use of berms or retaining walls, instead of cutting, to provide detention can be used to preserve significant trees. Detention ponds can be designed around significant trees by adding depth to minimize width where possible. Retaining walls can also be used to mitigate cuts and fills. Tree wells and/or aeration systems can also be provided for trees in areas of fill. 
3)  Underground water and wastewater lines, storm sewers, irrigation lines and both underground and overhead electric and telephone lines can have a considerable impact on trees. The layout of the project site utility plans should accommodate the required tree protective zones. Utilities should be placed along corridors between tree protective zones. 
4)  Construction activities such as parking, material storage, concrete washout, burn hole placement, silt fence installation, etc. shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within tree protective zones. 
C.  Methods of tree protection. Most trees can tolerate only a small percentage of CRZ loss. To protect these CRZs, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained. Tree protection devices are necessary to eliminate activities detrimental to trees including, but not limited to: 
1)  Soil compaction in the critical root zone resulting from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials; 
2)  Root disturbance due to cuts, fills, or trenching; 
3)  Wounds to exposed roots, trunks, or limbs by mechanical equipment; 
4)  Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, etc. 
D.  Methods of preventing encroachment. The following describes ways to help control unnecessary encroachment on existing trees. These methods and guidelines shall be followed for tree protection throughout all phases of construction. 
1)  Active protective barriers. Barriers shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely around the critical root zones of all specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones, prior to any land disturbance. Deviations from this must be approved on an individual basis by the community development director. Barriers will be a minimum four feet high, constructed in a post and rail configuration. A two-inch-by-four-inch post and a one-inch-by-four-inch rail, with the posts no further than six feet apart, are recommended. Chain-link fence with the same post spacing is also acceptable. All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with "tree save area" signs posted visibility on all sides of the fenced in area. All tree fencing shall be maintained throughout the land disturbance and building construction, and should not be removed until all construction and landscaping is complete. 
2)  Passive protective barriers. Tree save areas and their CRZs which are located 61 feet or greater from any grading, storage, construction or traffic areas may be protected by four-foot orange laminated plastic safety fencing. Passive tree protection fencing is to be used only for areas remote from construction activity. 
3)  Boring. No open trenching shall be allowed within the protected zone as defined by the protective barricades. All underground utilities to be installed within this protection zone shall be installed by boring underneath the root zone. Any exceptions must be approved by the community development director. Utilities may be tunneled in the root zone at a 24-inch minimum depth providing that plans are approved showing the location and method. 
4)  Filling/clearing within root zone. Fill dirt no deeper than two inches may be allowed within the drip line of the tree. No grubbing is permitted in the root zone. In the protected root zone, any stumps, dead trees and shrub growth to be removed shall be cut flush or ground out. Stump grinding will be accomplished with equipment and methods acceptable in normal arboriculture operations. All holes will be backfilled completely the same day of the operation. 
5)  Soil compaction. Where compaction might occur due to traffic or material storage, the tree protection zone must first be mulched with a minimum four-inch layer of shredded hardwood mulch, or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
6)  Clearing activities. Roots often fuse and tangle amongst trees. The removal of trees adjacent to tree save areas can cause inadvertent damage to the protected trees. Wherever possible, it is advisable to cut minimum two-foot trenches (e.g. with a ditch witch) along the limits of land disturbance, so as to cut, rather than tear, the roots. Trenching may be required for protection of specimen trees. The cutting down and then grinding the stump of the adjacent removed trees, as opposed to bulldozing them and ripping their roots, can also aid the protected trees. 
7)  Tree removal. To minimize potential root loss from soil disturbance in an overlapping root situation. All roots attached to a tree inside a tree save area that extends outside the tree save areas shall be cut by hand if the soil is to be disturbed. The removal of any tree adjacent to a tree within a tree save area shall not be removed by heavy equipment. Cutting the roots by hand or with a ditch witch is acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.06 - Tree protection plan. 
A.  Basic requirements. Any proposal for development or improvement of any tract of land shall include a tree protection/landscape plan, including trees to be planted in order to meet the minimum requirements of section 103.06.00. 
1)  The tree protection plan shall be submitted, along with other permit drawings, to the community development department prior to any clearing, grubbing, grading or other removal of the existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. 
2)  No tree removal shall occur prior to approval of the tree protection plan. 
3)  The tree protection plan may be submitted as part of the landscape plan, provided that all required information is legible, or as a separate drawing which includes, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Name, address, and phone number of owner of record and applicant. 
b.  Boundary lines of the tract by lengths and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, land lot, land district, north point, graphic scale, and date. 
c.  Approximate location of all specimen trees and their critical root zones. Indicate those specimen trees proposed for removal or for protection. Removal of specimen trees is subject to the director's approval. 
d.  Approximate location of all trees or stands of trees proposed to be protected. Indicate location of and label completed sample areas. 
e.  Exact location of specimen trees when their protection is questionable, or might result in a change of the site design. 
f.  Location of proposed buildings, structures and paved areas. 
g.  Locations of all existing and proposed utility lines. (Utility lines must be placed along corridors between critical root zones of trees which will remain on the site.) 
h.  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
i.  Limits of tree protection areas, showing trees to be maintained and planted, specifying species and size. 
j.  Location of all existing and proposed contours (two-foot minimum). 
k.  Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree protection zones, including tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signage, etc. Provide detail of methods utilized. 
l.  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of all tree protection measures. 
m.  Plan should indicate staging areas for parking, materials storage, concrete washout, silt fence installation and debris burn where these areas might affect tree protection. 
n.  The required site tree density factor must be satisfied. Compliance shall be clearly demonstrated on the tree protection plan. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculation must be clearly indicated on the drawing. A summary table of the number of existing trees to remain and new trees to be planted, by diameter shall be shown along with the calculations showing tree density achieved for the site. 
o.  Additional information as required on a case by case basis. This could include, but is not limited to, a certified arborist's appraisal of the tree's viability and projected life span. 
p.  The following notes shall be indicated on both the tree protection plan and the grading plan in large bold letters: 
"ALL TREE PROTECTION MEASURES SHALL BE INSTALLED AND INSPECTED PRIOR TO THE START OF ANY LAND DISTURBANCE AND MAINTAINED UNTIL FINAL LANDSCAPING IS INSTALLED. CALL THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT FOR AN INSPECTION BY THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR OR HIS/HER DESIGNEE. 
NO PARKING, STORAGE, OR ANY OTHER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES ARE TO OCCUR WITHIN TREE PROTECTION AREAS. 
A MAINTENANCE INSPECTION OF TREES WILL BE PERFORMED AFTER TWO FULL GROWING SEASONS FROM THE DATE OF THE FINAL CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION/FIRST CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY INSPECTION. PROJECT OWNERS AT THE TIME OF THE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE." 
B.  Determination of site density factor. The minimum required quantity of trees on a site after development must produce a total site density factor (SDF) of 20 units per acre. 
1)  All projects within the city shall maintain or exceed a minimum site density factor of 20 units per acre. The site density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. 
2)  Minimum tree site density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in this section. 
3)  The term "unit" is not synonymous with "tree." 
4)  Existing trees proposed to be retained and new trees proposed to be planted in order to meet the buffer requirements of section 103.03.00 or the conditions of zoning/master plan or variance approval shall not be considered in fulfilling the requirements of this section concerning site tree density factors. 
a.  Buffer requirements are considered to be in addition to the minimum site tree density requirements. 
b.  See applicable zoning/master plan or variance conditions for any additional landscaping or buffering requirements. 
5)  The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this section, or some combination of the two. All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried. 
6)  The trees, both retained and new, where feasible shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site with emphasis on tree groupings to achieve results following professional landscape standards. 
7)  Trees identified to be preserved and counted as credit towards meeting required site tree density shall have four-foot tree protection fencing installed at the critical root zones. For methods of tree protection, see section 103.06.05. All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to the start of any land disturbance and maintained until final landscaping is installed. 
8)  Minimum required site tree densities must be maintained at all times. Failure to maintain the required tree densities may result in replanting. 
9)  The site density factor (SDF) is determined as follows: SDF = (total site area, in acres) × 20 
C.  Credit for existing trees. Credit for existing trees proposed to be retained on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in table 103-9, credit for existing trees. 
1)  Credit shall be given for all trees retained on a property having a diameter of five inches DBH or more, except trees located in a required zoning buffer and/or state waters' buffers. 
2)  Only 50 percent of tree credits may be calculated from areas located in the floodplain or delineated as wetlands. No existing tree shall be counted as credit towards site density if greater than ten percent of its CRZ is disturbed. 
3)  Using table 103-9 calculate the existing density factor (EDF) of trees five inches DBH or greater which will remain on the site and be protected during construction. 
4)  The following guidelines and standards shall apply to trees proposed to be retained for credit toward meeting the site density factor on a property: 
a.  Canopy/shade replacement trees shall be at least ten feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than three caliper inches. Multi-stemmed canopy trees shall count only the largest trunk for caliper. 
b.  Understory/flowering replacement trees shall be at least six feet tall planted and have a main trunk of not less than two caliper inches. All multi-stemmed understory/flowering replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes, each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet. 
c.  Evergreen replacement trees shall be at least a seven-gallon size, six feet tall planted, and have a main trunk of not less than one and one-half caliper inches. All tree-formed, multi-stemmed, evergreen replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes, each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet and be pruned as tree form at time of planting. 
d.  No more than 40 percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. 
Table 103-9 Credit for Existing Trees (EDF) 

 
D.  Establishing the replacement density factor (RDF). To calculate the replacement density factor (RDF), subtract the existing density factor (EDF) from the site density factor (SDF). 
E.  RDF = SDF — EDF 
1)  Example procedures for calculating the required replacement density factor (RDF): 
→  Step 1—Calculate the site density factor (SDF) by multiplying the number of site acres by 20. 
Example = 1.85 acres X 20 = 37.0 Units 
→  Step 2—Calculate the existing density factor (EDF) of trees that will remain on site to be protected during construction. EDF is determined by converting the tree diameter (DBH) of individual existing trees to density factor units, using table 103-9. These units are then totaled to determine the EDF for the site. 
Example = A total of 12 trees will remain on the 1.85 acre site in step 1. The trees include: 
•  Three 12-inch pines. 
•  Four 18-inch oaks. 
•  Three 20-inch pines. 
•  Two 24-inch oaks. 
When converted to density factor units using table 103-9, we arrive at the following values: 

 
Adding together the units of all remaining trees, the sum total of units = 25.8 
Since the existing density factor (EDF) is less than the required site density factor (SDF), replacement trees are required. The minimum site density factor (SDF) for a 1.85-acre site, established in step 1 has not yet been met. 
→  Step 3—Calculate the replacement density factor (RDF) by subtracting the existing density factor (EDF) (step 2) from the site density factor (SDF) (step 1). RDF = EDF — SDF 
Example = RDF = 37.0 (SDF) — 25.8 (EDF) = 11.2 (RDF) 
Credit for new trees proposed to be replaced on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter or height) times the units assigned in table 103-10, credit for replacement trees. Credit shall be given all new trees replaced on the property except for new trees of less than one and one-half inches in diameter and new trees planted in a required zoning buffer and/or state waters' buffers. The number of new trees planted is determined as follows: 
→  Step 4—The replacement density factor (RDF) can be converted back to caliper inches using table 103-10. Any number or combination of transplantable size trees can be used so long as their total density factor units will equal or exceed the replacement density factor (RDF). 
Example = On the 1.85-acre site the following number and size of trees will be planted as replacement trees: 

 
Adding together the units of proposed replacement trees, the sum total of units = 11.4 units. 
Proposed replacement units of 11.4 is greater than the replacement density factor (RDF) of 11.2 units; thus, minimum replacement requirements have been met and in this case, exceeded. 
Table 103-10 Credit for Replacement Trees (RDF) 

 

 

 
*All evergreens shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at the time of planting. Height rather than caliper size shall determine the unit value of evergreens. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.07 - Specimen trees. 
A.  Generally. Trees unique due to age, size, species or historic relevance are to be identified during the survey process and special consideration must be made to work around them. It is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. Design of buildings, hardscape and utilities are to be developed with consideration to preserving and featuring specimen trees. 
B.  Criteria. The following criteria are used by the city to identify specimen trees. These criteria must be met for a tree to qualify: 
1)  Size. 
a.  Large hardwoods (oaks, poplars, sweet gums, etc.), 26-inch DBH or larger. 
b.  Large softwoods (pines, deodar cedar, etc.), 30-inch DBH or larger. 
c.  Small trees (dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.), eight-inch DBH or larger. 
2)  Other. A lesser-sized tree can be considered a specimen tree if, in the judgment of the director it is: 
a.  A rare or unusual species or of historical significance. 
b.  Specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a project or landscape. 
c.  A tree with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
C.  Additional density credit. In order to encourage the protection of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit may be given for specimen trees which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. 
1)  Such design features shall include, but may not be limited to alteration of building design, alternate building location, parking area, detention area, drainage system, or relocation of utilities. 
2)  Credit for any specimen tree thus saved for such purpose would be two times the assigned unit value in table 103-9, credit for existing trees. Applicable credit must be approved by the director. 
D.  Replacement, generally. Specimen tree replacement, in addition to minimum required tree density, shall be required in recompense for the removal of specimen trees. 
1)  Removed specimen trees shall be replaced by species with potential for comparable size and quality. 
2)  Specimen trees that are removed must be replaced by trees a minimum three-inch caliper at 14-foot minimum height, with an inch-for-inch replacement of the specimen tree removed. 
E.  Replacement due to damage. Any tree designated on the tree protection plan to be saved which is damaged during construction or as a result of construction, as determined by the director, shall be replaced with a tree or trees equal to the unit value of the tree damaged. However, any specimen tree damaged as described above shall be replaced with trees equaling an inch-for-inch replacement of the tree damaged. 
F.  Replacement due to improper removal. Any specimen tree which is removed without appropriate review and approval of the director must be replaced by trees equaling a two times an inch-for-inch replacement of the tree removed. The owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees which will be three-inch minimum caliper. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is not sufficient evidence of its condition. Such action may also result in a stop work order issued by the director. 
G.  Replacement as required maintenance. In the event any specimen tree or trees should not survive more than 24 months following completion of development, the owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees (three-inch minimum caliper) having an inch-for-inch replacement of the specimen tree removed on the site as approved by the director. Failure to maintain the required tree density factor at any time during the life of the project shall be a violation of this section and may result in replanting. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.08 - Removal of trees. 
A.  Permit required. A tree removal permit shall be required for removing trees, five-inch DBH or greater. Permit applications shall be submitted to the community development department or in conjunction with an application for a land disturbance permit and/or building permit, whichever is applicable as determined by the director. 
B.  Fees. 
1)  There will be a fee for obtaining a tree removal permit based on the number of trees to be removed from all commercial, office, and industrial zoned properties and all residential zoned properties having greater than one acre land disturbance. 
2)  The fee will be established by city council resolution. 
3)  Homeowners on those properties with less than one acre land disturbance who remove trees on their own residential property, shall not pay any fee but are required to obtain a tree removal permit. 
4)  If any tree five-inch DBH or greater is removed from those properties requiring a tree removal permit as listed above without a tree removal permit, the property owner shall pay a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. 
5)  Tree removal plans submitted in conjunction with an application for a land disturbance permit and/or building permit will not be required to pay an additional tree removal permit outside the fees required for the land disturbance permit and/or building permit. 
C.  Review and inspections. The director will review the tree removal plans and inspect the project site when necessary prior to the removal of any trees. 
D.  Tree removal standards. 
1)  Safety standards. The contractor shall be solely responsible for pedestrian and vehicular safety and control within the work site and shall provide the necessary warning devices, barricades, and ground personnel needed to give safety, protection, and warning within the area where tree removal or pruning is to occur. Blocking of public streets shall not be permitted unless prior arrangements have been made with the city and are coordinated with the appropriate departments. Traffic control is the responsibility of the contractor and shall be accomplished in conformance with state, county and local highway construction codes. 
2)  Tree pruning. Pruning is to be performed by tree workers who, through related training and on the job experience, are familiar with the techniques and hazards of this work including trimming, maintenance, repairing or removal, and equipment used in such operations. The use of climbing spurs or irons is not approved in pruning operations on live trees. This type of work is a potentially hazardous occupation and is to be undertaken only by trained personnel or under the supervision of trained personnel, all of whom are covered with workers compensation, property damage, public liability, and complete operations insurance. 
3)  Tree removal. Trees shall be removed in accordance with accepted industry standards and procedures and in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Extreme care shall be taken so as to prevent limbs, branches and trunks from falling and creating damage to adjacent homes, driveways, sidewalks, trees, shrubs, streets and other property, both public and private. 
b.  Tree removal is a potentially hazardous occupation and is to be undertaken only by trained personnel or under the supervision of trained personnel, all of whom are covered with workers compensation, property damage, public liability, and complete operations insurance. 
4)  Cleanup. Debris and logs shall not be left on the public right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to remove and dispose of, in a proper and acceptable manner, all logs, brush and debris resulting from the tree removal operation unless otherwise directed by the city. No person shall be issued a tree removal permit unless said person agrees to remove all cut logs, brush, and debris from the premises. Removal of such debris shall be performed daily so as not disrupt the work of other contractors on the site. Absolutely no burying on site is allowed. No burning on site is allowed without a permit issued by the city fire department. 
5)  Trees on private property. It shall be the duty of the person or persons owning or occupying property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in a manner that they will not obstruct or shade street lights, obstruct passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct views of any street intersection. Any trees that are diseased or insect infested shall be removed, sprayed, or treated in a manner that they will not infect or damage nearby public vegetation or cause harm to the community or citizens therein. The director may order trees on private land that cause obstructions, present insect or disease problems, or otherwise present a danger to public health or safety be pruned, removed, or treated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.09 - Maintenance requirements. 
A.  Release of bond. At 45 days prior to the expiration of the two-year landscape maintenance period, the Director shall inspect the site and shall make a determination of whether or not the required trees and landscaping are healthy and have a reasonable chance of surviving to maturity. Upon such finding, the bond shall be released at the two-year expiration date. In absence of such finding, the bond shall not be released and the owner of the property shall be notified to replace the unhealthy trees and landscaping or take other appropriate action as approved by the director. Any trees planted to meet the required tree site density factor which are dead or near death must be replaced. 
B.  Failure to comply. Upon failure of the owner to comply with the director's decision regarding trees' health at the end of the two-year landscape establishment period, the city shall use the bond to the extent necessary to bring the property into compliance. Final inspection shall be scheduled within ten working days' notice. 
C.  Additional requirements. 
1)  Trees which are used to meet the tree density requirements shall be fully maintained for an additional two years after the date of final landscape establishment inspection. It is the responsibility of the property owner to water, fertilize, and treat trees in order to maintain tree health and vigor. The property owner shall, at all times, maintain the required tree density. Failure to maintain the required tree density factor at any time during the life of the project shall be a violation of this section. 
2)  It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying property subject to this section to maintain said property in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. Property shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Planting beds shall be mulched to prevent weed growth and maintain soil moisture. Plant materials shall be pruned as required to maintain good health and character. Turf areas shall be mowed periodically. All roadways, curbs, and sidewalks shall be edged when necessary in order to prevent encroachment from adjacent grassed areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.10 - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 105.15.00 (Enforcement) of this UDC. Where an offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. Each tree cut, damaged, or poisoned shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of a premise, where anything in violation of this section shall exist, or any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership that may have assisted in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.06.11 - City plant palette. 
A.  Unless otherwise approved by the director, all plant material selected to meet the landscaping, buffering, and/or planting requirements of this UDC shall be selected from the plant palette for the city, as shown in table 103-11. Plant materials shall be placed appropriately for future growth. 
B.  Invasive plant species as shown on the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council (EPPC) Invasive Plant List shall be prohibited. 
Table 103-11 City of Canton Plant Palette 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.00 - Design guidelines and standards. 
103.07.01 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish community design standards for the City of Canton in order to encourage orderly development, to protect property values to further enhance and preserve the aesthetics that attribute to the quality of life of Canton, to protect the investments made by existing development, to ensure compatibility and harmony of the built environment, to respect the history and integrity of the city by minimizing any adverse impacts of new development, and by encouraging creativity through a variety of building materials and design elements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.02 - Applicability. 
A.  Community design plans shall be submitted to the community development department for all properties within the City of Canton, said properties to include non-single-family detached residential, commercial, office, institutional, industrial, and special use which are engaged in new construction, renovation, being refurbished, additions to existing structures, or being remodeled. 
B.  Review and approval or denial of community design plans shall be performed by the City of Canton Oversite Committee. The Canton Oversight Committee shall not review any project within the Canton Historic District. Projects within the historic district are reviewed by the historic preservation commission when warranted. 
C.  Should any activity which is regulated by a city business license cease to operate at its existing location or vacate its location for 60 days or more, a design plan including the architectural intent of the structure shall be submitted to the community development department prior to issuance of any new business license or reoccupation of the structure by an existing business. This shall apply to any change of business license holder even if the activity being conducted is identical to the previous business license occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
103.07.03 - Exemptions. 
The following structures shall be exempt from this section: 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings (except as may be conditioned by a rezoning); 
B.  Agricultural structure (harvesting of timber, sod, or plants/vegetables grown for consumption or sale). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.04 - Submittal requirements. 
The following information shall be included when submitting for community design standard review: 
A.  Elevation drawings including front, rear, and sides of the proposed building(s). All elevation drawings shall be to scale. 
B.  Building materials list for each structure. 
1)  Acceptable building materials are: 
a.  Brick; 
b.  Decorative stone, decorative block; 
c.  Concrete or wood lap siding; 
d.  Finished block; 
e.  Stucco, E.I.F.S.; 
f.  Glass; 
g.  Structural panels or other material as approved by the city. 
2)  The city encourages the majority of the exterior façade of buildings to be brick or stone. 
3)  Acceptable building materials for structures in industrial zoning districts are those listed in subsections B.1 and B.2 above in addition to structural panels. 
4)  Residential structures that are proposed to accommodate a non-residential use (as may be allowed by the zoning district in which the structure is located) shall retain existing building material or utilize materials found on surrounding residential structures. 
C.  Colors of all structures shall be submitted and displayed in a chip form customary of the paint industry. (See community and development department staff for acceptable samples of a variety of color chips found throughout the city's built environment.) 
D.  Notations on design plans which provide details of any appendages (attached or fixed) including, but not limited to, HVAC units, satellite dishes, cold storage rooms/coolers, compressors, grills, security gates, or any other element that may affect the exterior of the subject building(s). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.05 - General community design requirements. 
The following requirements and policies are established as the minimum community design requirements of the City of Canton. These requirements are set forth for the entire community including the City of Canton to establish the aesthetic standards in which all construction is strongly encouraged to follow. These same standards shall be used to govern all public buildings constructed by the city as well as those imposed upon the community at large: 
A.  All design shall be in keeping and is encouraged to be compatible with the existing built environment. 
B.  Factors considered for community design shall include: 
1)  Mass of building(s); 
2)  Height; 
3)  Size; 
4)  Site placement; 
5)  Relationship of proposed structure(s) to those properties adjacent to subject structure(s); 
6)  Color; 
7)  Materials used and in combination thereof; 
8)  Compatibility of the structure to the balance of the overall project; 
9)  Preservation of any scenic views or corridors; 
10)  Historical compatibility when appropriate for area; 
11)  Design components shall be related to the physical and aesthetic elements of the project as a whole; 
12)  Design to complement adjacent and surrounding properties; 
13)  Design shall be of such to protect the visibility of any material or element that may be visible from a street (public or private), drive, or adjacent properties; 
14)  Any attached device to the subject structure shall be in keeping with the overall scope of the building and shall not be the predominant or primary characteristic of the building but secondary to the building; 
15)  Protection of view corridors; 
16)  Protection from shadow casting of subject building(s) in relationship to the built environment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.06 - Fees. 
A fee for plan submittal and review shall be established by city council. Said fee shall be submitted at the time of plan review submittal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.07 - Approval. 
A.  Upon approval of community design plans, the director shall commit to writing said approval to the applicant. 
B.  The approval period shall follow the same as established for land disturbance permits and building permits. The applicant is entitled to one 90-day extension in which to begin work. Said extension request shall be made in writing by the applicant to the director and shall be submitted two business days prior to the expiration of approval. Upon expiration of said extension, the applicant shall reapply for community design standard review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.08 - Denial. 
A.  Should the application seeking approval of community design standards be denied, it shall be found and described so in writing to the applicant stating the reason(s) for said denial and shall include a list of prescribed remedies. 
B.  Reasons for denial shall pertain to the following: 
1)  Negative impact to the environment; 
2)  Negative impact to property values; 
3)  Negative impact to surrounding or adjacent properties; 
4)  Negative impact to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.09 - Enforcement. 
Any violation or attempted violation of section 103.07.00 or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.10 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director with respect to any determination made in accordance with section 103.07.00 shall have the right to appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
103.07.11 - Other design considerations. 
In addition to section 103.07.00 and other design-related standards identified in this UDC, additional design requirements may apply, including but not limited to the City of Canton Historic District Design Guidelines that are on file at the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 104 - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

104.01.00 - Generally. 
The purpose of chapter 104 is to provide design standards in specific situations, including additional standards to address potential impacts of specific uses, standards for uses that are accessory to the principal building on a property, and standards for temporary uses. The standards in this chapter do not exempt uses from meeting all other applicable requirements of this UDC, unless noted herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.02.00 - Accessory uses. 
104.02.01 - Generally. 
In addition to the principal uses, the uses identified in this section are considered to be a customary accessory use, and as such may be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory provided that all setback, yard requirements, and provisions of this section are met. 
A.  All zoning districts. 
1)  Accessory uses shall be located in the side or rear yard. 
2)  Accessory uses shall be a minimum of ten feet from any side and rear property line with the exception that freestanding accessory dwellings, where allowed, shall meet the minimum setback requirement for a principal dwelling as required by the underlying zoning district. 
B.  Residential districts. The following uses are considered to be a customary accessory use to a dwelling located in residential zoned districts: 
1)  Private garage not to exceed the following storage capacities: 
a.  One- or two-family dwelling: Four automobiles. 
b.  Multiple-family dwelling: Two automobiles per dwelling unit. 
c.  Group dwelling: One and one-half automobiles per sleeping room. 
2)  Open storage space or parking area for motor vehicles provided that such space does not exceed the maximum respective storage capacities listed above, and provided that such space shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle licensed as one ton or more in capacity per family residing on the premises. 
3)  Shed or tool room. 
4)  Children's playhouse and play equipment. 
5)  Quarters for the keeping of pets owned by occupants for noncommercial purposes provided that such use does not generate a nuisance to adjoining properties. 
6)  Private swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana in accordance with section 104.02.03 of this UDC. 
7)  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of manmade or natural catastrophes. 
8)  Accessory dwelling units in accordance with section 104.02.02. 
9)  A fence or wall not more than four feet in height may project into or enclose that portion of the property between the structure and public or private street(s). 
a.  The fence or wall shall be at least ten feet from the roadway, or off the right-of-way, whichever is greater, but in no instance shall the fence or wall cause a sight distance problem to the motoring public. 
b.  A fence or wall may project into or enclose other portions of the side or rear yard of the property provided the fence or wall does not exceed a height of eight feet. 
c.  The decorative or finished side of the fence shall face outward. 
C.  Commercial, office and institutional districts; mixed use district; and, industrial districts. The following requirements shall pertain to any fence or wall: 
1)  The decorative or finished side of the fence shall face outward. 
2)  No fence or wall constructed or installed shall permit any anti-person or anti-animal feature unless it is a security fence. 
3)  A security fence shall be permitted within the C-G (General Commercial) and L-I (Light Industrial) zoning districts. 
a.  The security fence shall not exceed eight feet in height, but shall allow three strands of barbed wire above the eight feet height. 
b.  The security fence shall not project into or enclose any portion of the property located between the main structure and any public or private street(s). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.02.02 - Accessory dwelling units. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Accessory dwellings include, but are not limited to, basement apartments, garage apartments, caretaker quarters, guesthouses, and other accessory dwellings. 
2)  Accessory dwellings shall not include tents, boats, manufactured storage buildings and mobile structures including RV's and travel trailers, with the exception that RV's and travel trailers may be allowed for occupancy in a campground or travel trailer park as permitted in this UDC. 
3)  Accessory dwellings are permissible within the principal dwelling or as a freestanding dwelling in residential zoning districts. 
B.  Within principal dwelling. Accessory dwellings contained within a principal dwelling shall comply with the following standards: 
1)  There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling in a principal dwelling unit; 
2)  The accessory dwelling shall be accessible from the interior of the principal dwelling; 
3)  The accessory dwelling shall have no more than one bedroom; 
4)  The accessory dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the habitable floor area of the principal dwelling or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less; 
5)  One additional off-street parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling; and 
6)  The accessory dwelling shall comply with all building and health code standards. 
C.  As freestanding dwelling. Freestanding accessory dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
1)  There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot; 
2)  The accessory dwelling unit may be located in a second floor over a detached garage or may be a separate structure; 
3)  The accessory dwelling unit shall have no more than two bedrooms; 
4)  The accessory dwelling shall be located only within the rear yard; 
5)  The lot shall comply with the minimum lot area standards set forth in chapter 102 of this UDC; 
6)  The accessory dwelling shall meet the minimum setback requirement for the principal dwelling, as required by the underlying zoning district; and 
7)  One additional off-street parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.02.03 - Home occupations. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  A home occupation is permissible in a lawfully established dwelling unit in any zoning district where residential uses are permissible. All home occupations shall meet the standards set forth in section 104.02.03.C. 
2)  The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: 
a.  Office for professionals, such as attorneys, drafters, realtors, insurance agents, engineers, architects, appraisal services, and other similar professions for consultations; 
b.  Instruction or teaching, such as, but not limited to, academic tutoring, performing arts, fine arts, or culinary arts provided that no more than two students are instructed at any one time; 
c.  Administrative or clerical support services, such as transcription, court reporters, stenographers, notary public, or addressing services; 
d.  Personal services, such as beauty or barber shop, nail technician, dress-making or tailoring, provided that the service is limited to one station; 
e.  Pet grooming; 
f.  Day care for six or fewer children (family day care home); 
g.  Licensed medical practitioner (excluding veterinarians); 
h.  Manufacturers' or sales' representative office; 
i.  Studios for artists, photographers, or artisans; and 
j.  Outdoor instructional services for swimming. 
3)  An interpretation by the community development director that a use not listed in section 104.02.03.A.2 is similar shall be based on the tasks and activities normally associated with the proposed use and the similarity of those tasks and activities with the tasks and activities normally associated with a listed use. 
4)  Under no event shall the permitted uses under this section be deemed to circumvent any of the regulations of the State of Georgia, nor be deemed to allow a use by any individual who has not first been approved by the appropriate department having authority over the same for the State of Georgia. 
5)  In no event shall the uses as permitted under this section require the City of Canton, its departments or employees to be responsible for enforcement of any requirements placed on an individual by the State of Georgia, or to have any responsibility to anyone, where someone is maintaining a facility as would otherwise be allowed under this section without first meeting all State of Georgia requirements and regulations. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and are prohibited: 
1)  Towing truck business; 
2)  Auto detailing; 
3)  Private clubs; 
4)  Auto repair; 
5)  Veterinarian; 
6)  Restaurants and taverns; and 
7)  Taxi services. 
C.  Standards for all home occupations. 
1)  Location. Except for permitted outdoor instructional services the use shall be carried on wholly within the principal building. The attachment of an accessory building by breezeway, roof, or similar structure shall not be deemed as sufficient for the accessory building to be considered as a portion of the primary building. 
2)  Size. Not more than 25 percent of the floor area, not to exceed 500 square feet, of the principal building shall be used for the conduct of the home occupation. 
3)  Displays. No merchandise or articles shall be displayed for advertising purpose, nor be displayed in such a way as to be visible from outside the dwelling. 
4)  Business equipment and vehicles. No equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises except that one business vehicle (the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed one and one-half tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport or garage. 
5)  Residential character maintained. There shall be no alteration of the residential character of the building or premises, and the conduct of the home occupation shall not increase the normal flow of traffic or on-street or off-street parking. 
6)  Inhabitants. The number of persons working for the home occupation who are not residents living on the premises shall not exceed one. 
7)  Parking. One off-street paved parking space shall be provided in addition to the required parking for residential use of the building. 
8)  No motor power, other than electrically operated motors, shall be used and the total horsepower of such motors shall not exceed three horsepower or one horsepower for any single motor. 
9)  Nuisance factors. The home occupation shall not constitute a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood. The use of machinery or equipment, the instruction or teaching of performing arts such as voice or music, or any other objectionable condition that produces noise, smoke, odor, vibration, or electrical interference beyond the property line of the lot on which the home occupation is located shall be prohibited. 
10)  Signage. See the permanent signs section in chapter 103. 
11)  Business license required. All home occupations shall have a business license from the City of Canton. 
12)  Outside storage. Outside storage of materials used in connection with a home occupation is prohibited; however, storage of materials in an accessory building is permissible. 
13)  Business hours. No business involving on-site visits by customers shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, nor shall business involving on-site visits by customers be conducted on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.02.04 - Uses accessory to religious facilities. 
A.  Uses and activities on the premises of a religious facility other than the principal use of worship shall be considered accessory uses and shall be clearly ancillary to the primary use. Such uses and activities shall be limited to: 
1)  Religious instruction (such as "Sunday School," Bible school, or similar instruction or study typically associated with the religion); 
2)  Offices to support the establishment; 
3)  Child or adult day care; 
4)  Private academic school, including nursery school or preschool; 
5)  A fellowship hall, with or without a kitchen, (which may be known as a community center, activity hall, or life center); 
6)  Recreation facilities; 
7)  Individual meeting spaces; 
8)  A parsonage; and 
9)  Outdoor play or activity areas. 
B.  Accessory uses shall be subject to applicable requirements in section 104.03.18. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.02.05 - Outdoor display, storage and sales. 
A.  Where allowed. 
1)  Outdoor displays. 
a.  Outdoor display areas shall only be allowed on property zoned or approved for retail, sales of goods and merchandise. 
b.  Outdoor display areas located in a front yard shall occupy no more than ten percent of the front yard area and shall not encroach on any required parking areas or be located in a designated landscape area. 
2)  Outdoor storage. 
a.  Outdoor storage shall only be allowed in the rear yard of any property zoned or approved for retail or industrial uses. 
b.  Storage areas shall be screened from view by an opaque fence a minimum of six feet in height. 
c.  Storage areas may also be used as outdoor display areas. 
3)  Outdoor retail sales. 
a.  Outdoor retail sales shall only be allowed in the GC Zoning District. 
b.  All merchandise shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the road/street and 50 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
c.  Merchandise and goods for sale shall not exceed a height of ten feet in the front yard and 20 feet in the rear yard. 
d.  Merchandise shall not be displayed in any required parking or landscape/buffer area. 
B.  Exceptions. The following uses are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
1)  Areas designated for the outdoor sale or display of plant material and seasonal items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, and fruits and vegetables. 
2)  Sale, leasing or renting displays of automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles and farm implements. 
3)  Retail sale of goods that are placed under a permanent canopy attached to the principal structure. Any goods or items that would impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic or be in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act are prohibited. 
C.  Surface materials. All display and storage areas shall have merchandise placed upon a concrete or asphalt surface. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.02.06 - Swimming pools. 
All swimming pools shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted to the community development director indicating the location of the pool and all yard setbacks. 
1)  A swimming pool shall not be constructed within the required front yard of any lot. 
2)  A swimming pool shall not be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line or to an interior side lot line. 
B.  Construction plan. 
1)  A construction plan shall be submitted to the community development director including the structural design of said pool or any accessory buildings. 
2)  Accessory buildings and/or pool houses shall comply with all of the requirements given for "accessory buildings" included in this UDC. 
C.  Fencing. 
1)  All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence and maintained in good condition with a self-closing gate and lock. The lock shall be placed a minimum of five feet above the ground level. 
2)  Fencing shall be a minimum five feet in height. 
3)  Picket spacing shall be no less than four inches on center. 
4)  Fencing shall be located in such a manner that it does not obstruct visibility at road intersections. 
5)  Fencing shall comply with all the requirements that pertain to visibility in section 103.02.03 and section 104.02.01.B.9. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.00 - Additional requirements for allowed uses. 
104.03.01 - Amusement or theme park. 
A.  Minimum lot size shall be ten acres. 
B.  Minimum setback for buildings, parking lots and access drives when abutting residential zoning districts shall be 200 feet. 
C.  Minimum setback for buildings when abutting non-residential zoning districts shall be 100 feet. 
D.  Parking lot design shall include paved aisles and pervious parking space materials as approved by the community development director. 
E.  Property shall front a major arterial street. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.02 - Archery or shooting range. 
Archery and shooting ranges, as defined by this UDC, shall be totally enclosed indoor facilities that meet all applicable standards established by the following: 
A.  National Rifle Association (NRA) Range Source Book (latest edition as amended) published by the NRA. 
B.  Lead Management and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Compliance for Indoor Shooting Ranges published by the National Association of Shooting Ranges (NASR) and OSHA. 
C.  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearm and Explosives (ATF) registration requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.03 - Assisted living services (personal care home). 
A.  Family personal care homes and group personal care homes shall meet the following requirements: 
1)  Property shall front a collector or arterial road. 
2)  Minimum building setbacks shall be 50 feet from any side or rear property line. 
3)  Outdoor activity areas shall be fenced according to the standards of NFPA 101: Life Safety Code. 
4)  No more than two parking spaces may be located in the driveway, garage, or in the front yard; additional spaces shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be screened from view from adjacent properties. 
B.  Congregate personal care homes shall front a collector or arterial road. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.04 - Bed and breakfast inn (B&B). 
A.  All parking (including handicap parking) shall be onsite and off-street, and it shall be provided in the side and/or rear of the property. Parking areas shall be set back a minimum of ten feet and screened from adjacent properties. 
B.  There shall be no cooking facilities within the guest rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.05 - Campground/RV park. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Property shall front an arterial road and shall be within one-quarter mile of an interstate highway or state route. 
2)  The condition of soils, groundwater level, drainage, and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
3)  Such parks or campgrounds shall provide restroom facilities. Restrooms shall be equipped with flush-type features and shall provide toilet, washbasin and bathing facilities. If restrooms are not connected to public sanitary sewer system, a private septic tank system shall be required as approved by the environmental health department. 
4)  Permissible accessory uses and structures, not to exceed ten percent of gross area of a site, include management headquarters, recreational facilities, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a campground or RV park. 
B.  Site design standards. 
1)  Minimum lot size shall be 20 acres. 
2)  Access shall be prohibited through residential zoning districts. 
3)  Minimum setback for pads or campsites from a public right-of-way shall be 50 feet. 
4)  Minimum setback for pads or campsites from the nearest adjacent residence on an adjoining parcel shall be 200 feet. 
5)  No guest may occupy an individual pad or campsite for more than 90 days. 
6)  A minimum buffer width of 50 feet from any residential zoning district, planted in accordance with the requirements of section 103.03.00, shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.06 - Cemetery. 
A.  Any person or persons establishing a cemetery, or mausoleum or combination thereof, for the purpose of selling any grave space, lot or crypt shall do so in accordance with the Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000. 
B.  Any person or persons establishing a private cemetery or mausoleum, or family burial plot shall comply with the following provisions: 
1)  The minimum setback for structures, storage, materials, equipment, or interment lots shall be: 
a.  Forty feet from any front property line; 
b.  Twenty-five feet from any side or rear property line; 
c.  Twenty-five feet from any state waters; and 
d.  One hundred and fifty feet from a drinking water well. 
2)  A cemetery shall not be located in a wetland, 100-year floodplain, floodway or flood hazard area. 
3)  Mausoleums and columbaria may be located only within the boundaries of approved cemeteries. Mausoleums and columbaria shall have facades of brick or stone. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.07 - Child day care. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  All facilities regulated in this section shall comply with state regulations and acquire applicable state licenses for operation. 
2)  When any child day care facility is operated as a home occupation, it shall comply with section 104.02.03, home occupations. 
B.  Family day care home and group day care home requirements. 
1)  A family day care or group day care home may operate only within a freestanding structure or within a single-family dwelling. 
2)  Drop-off and pick-up areas shall be off-street. 
C.  Child day care center requirements. 
1)  A child day care center may operate only within a freestanding structure, within a religious facility, or within a private school. 
2)  Drop-off and pick-up areas shall be off-street. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.08 - Colleges and universities. 
A.  Property shall front an arterial road. 
B.  Outdoor recreation areas shall have a minimum 150-foot setback from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
C.  Outdoor lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties, as measured at the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.09 - Golf course. 
Golf courses not associated with a residential neighborhood shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  The golf course shall be a full 9-hole or more course. 
B.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use shall be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line except where such property line is a street line. 
C.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
D.  Outdoor lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of properties used or zoned for residential purposes and shall be turned off not later than 9:00 p.m. 
E.  Safety netting at least 32 feet in height shall be required on the perimeter of the playing area abutting public or private streets. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.10 - Golf driving range. 
A.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area with ten feet in depth to screen adjacent property. 
B.  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
C.  Outdoor lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of properties used or zoned for residential purposes and shall be turned off not later than 9:00 p.m. 
D.  Safety netting at least 32 feet in height shall be required on the perimeter of the playing area abutting public or private streets or residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.11 - Grade schools. 
A.  Minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
B.  Property shall front an arterial or collector road. 
C.  Outdoor recreation areas shall have a minimum 75-foot setback from any property zoned or used for residential purposes and shall be fully enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of four feet. Outdoor lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of properties used or zoned for residential purposes and shall be turned off not later than 9:00 p.m. 
D.  Drop-off and pick-up areas shall be separated from parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.12 - Hotel, motel or tourist court. 
Any hotel, motel or tourist court in which more than 35 percent of the units include kitchenettes or kitchen facilities, the following shall apply: 
A.  Minimum lot size shall be two acres. 
B.  At a minimum, provisions for weekly cleaning of each suite must be provided. 
C.  Each suite must be protected with a smoke detector and sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal. 
D.  Each suite shall be required to include an automatic power shut off timer for each stove/cook top unit or other type burner. 
E.  There shall be no outside storage allowed or long term parking of heavy equipment, or parking of construction or related equipment. 
F.  No facility under this section is to be converted or used primarily as an apartment or condominium. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.13 - Leased and rented dwellings. 
A.  Purpose. 
1)  The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Canton by promulgating certain minimum dwelling space and occupancy requirements for dwellings and structures on property leased or rented for human habitation. 
2)  This section is hereby declared remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereon which are public safety, health and general welfare from hazards incident to the use and occupancy of residential dwellings and accessory structures leased or rented for human habitation. 
B.  Scope. 
1)  The provisions of this section shall apply only to leased or rented dwellings or portions thereof, all accessory structures or portions thereof located on property, used or unused, designed or intended to be used for human habitation or the storage of materials associated with human habitation. 
2)  This section establishes minimum standards for occupancy, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for construction, replacement or repair of dwellings except such as are contrary to the provisions of this UDC. 
3)  Dwellings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
4)  This section does not apply to dwellings occupied by any owner for residential purposes as defined herein. 
C.  Existing dwellings and structures. 
1)  Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing building without requiring the building to comply with all the requirements of this section provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of any other ordinances governing new construction. 
2)  The community development director shall determine, subject to appeal to city council, the extent, if any, to which the existing building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section for new construction. 
3)  Minimum dwelling space requirements: Every applicable dwelling and its premises shall conform to this section. 
D.  Building requirements. 
1)  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 200 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least an additional 100 square feet of floor area per additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms. 
2)  In every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
3)  Habitable areas, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms and kitchens, other than storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven and one-third feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the room area. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum room area. 
4)  Each property owner shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place within the dwelling a notice of maximum occupancy setting forth the maximum number of persons that may occupy said dwelling and/or each sleeping space therein under this section and any other information as deemed necessary by the code enforcement official. It shall be a violation of this UDC for any property owner to fail to comply with this subsection or for any occupant to remove, destroy, deface or otherwise interfere with the posting of the notice of maximum occupancy at the dwelling. 
E.  Unit registration. 
1)  Every residential rental unit shall be registered annually with the City of Canton within 60 days of enactment date of this UDC, within 30 days from the date of occupation of the residential rental unit pursuant to any residential lease agreement, or by April 1 of each year, whichever shall first occur. 
2)  Failure to register or failure to timely register a residential rental unit under this section shall be a violation of this UDC. Failure to provide accurate information in connection with the registration of a residential rental unit shall be violation of this UDC. 
F.  Inspections. 
1)  The code enforcement official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of residential dwellings and premises in the interest of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of such dwellings and of the general public. 
2)  For the purpose of making such inspections, the code enforcement official, is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all residential dwellings and premises. The owner or occupant of every residential building or the person in charge thereof shall give the code enforcement official free access to such residential building and its premises, at all reasonable times and places for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. 
3)  To facilitate the enforcement of this section, the judge of the municipal court shall have the power to issue orders for the inspections of any building or structure covered under this section, subject to the provisions of the Georgia and United States Constitutions. 
G.  Power to issue citations. 
1)  Whenever the code enforcement official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this section or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the owner, operator or occupant responsible thereof by the issuance of a citation. Service of the notice shall be as follows: 
a.  By delivery to the owner, operator or occupant personally, or by leaving the notice at his or her usual place of abode with a person of suitable age and discretion; 
b.  By depositing the notice in the United States post office addressed to the owner, operator or occupant at his or her last known address with postage prepaid thereon; or 
c.  By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises which is the subject of the citation. 
H.  The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions under this section and to try and, in the case of conviction, to punish persons in violation of any provision of this section. 
I.  It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator or occupant to fail to comply with any applicable provision of this section. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be punished as follows: 
1)  First offense: One hundred dollars. 
2)  Second offense: Five hundred dollars. 
3)  Third offense: Seven hundred fifty dollars. 
4)  Fourth and subsequent offense: A fine or imprisonment, or both, as allowed under the laws of the State of Georgia for a misdemeanor as the judge of the municipal court deems appropriate upon consideration of the evidence. 
5)  In addition to the punishments set forth in subsections I.1 through I.4 above, the judge of the municipal court may, in his discretion, impose community service for any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.14 - Life care services. 
A.  Access shall be from an arterial road. 
B.  Minimum building setbacks shall be 50 feet from any side or rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.15 - Manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes placed in the city shall be constructed in conformity with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and shall be installed so as to comply with Chapter 120-3-7 Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes of the Rules of Comptroller General Safety Fire Commissioner. The installation of tiedowns and ground anchors may vary from model to model and may comply with manufacturer's specifications where said specifications exist. 
B.  A pre-owned manufactured home may be installed after the building official finds the home to be in compliance with: 
a.  HUD requirements; 
b.  The electrical wiring standards as set forth in the National Electric Code; and 
c.  The standards set forth in Chapter 120-3-7 Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes of the Rules of Comptroller General Safety Fire Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.16 - Planned development districts. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Proposed development standards for all planned development (PD) zoning districts are subject to master plan approval by the city council in accordance with the requirements of this UDC. 
2)  Access shall be provided from an arterial or collector street. 
3)  Regional-serving, "big box" commercial, and industrial uses shall be accessible from a major arterial street. 
4)  The total number of off-street parking spaces required in a PD zoning district may be reduced during the master plan approval process based on unique land use types or combinations, or based on a recognized standard for shared parking between complimentary uses. 
5)  All development shall be organized to include, protect or enhance as many of the following open areas and features as possible: 
a.  Natural features such as stream or river corridors, bluffs, ridges, steep slopes, and mature trees; 
b.  Landscaped buffers or visual transitions between different types or intensities of land uses; and 
c.  Areas that accommodate multiple compatible open space uses rather than a single use. 
6)  Minimum required common open space requirements may include land occupied by active recreational uses such as pools, playgrounds, and walking trails; however driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and designated outdoor storage areas shall not be counted as common open space. 
7)  The use of alleys is encouraged for development that is residential or predominantly residential. Where alleys are used they shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
a.  The minimum right-of-way width of a residential alley shall be 16 feet. 
b.  The minimum right-of-way width of a commercial or industrial alley shall be 20 feet. 
c.  All platted alleys shall be paved. 
d.  Residential alleys shall connect through the block to a publicly dedicated street on each end and must provide access to at least 50 percent of the garages on lots adjacent to the alley. 
e.  The applicant must provide for private ownership and maintenance of the alley. 
B.  Additional standards by district. 
1)  PD-Residential District. 
a.  Minimum overall project land area shall be five acres. 
b.  Minimum common open space shall be 25 percent of the total project land area. 
c.  A minimum of 25 percent of project land area shall be developed as single-family detached dwellings. 
d.  A maximum 25 percent of project land area may be developed for townhouses. 
e.  A maximum of 25 percent of project land area may be developed for duplexes and multiple-family dwellings. 
2)  PD-Business/Office District. 
a.  Minimum overall project land area shall be five acres. 
b.  Minimum common open space shall be 25 percent of the total project land area. 
c.  Section 103.07.00 (Design guidelines and standards) of this UDC shall apply. 
3)  PD-Mixed Use. 
a.  Minimum overall project land area shall be five acres. 
b.  Minimum common open space shall be 25 percent of the total project land area. 
4)  PD-Traditional Neighborhood Development. 
a.  Minimum overall project land area shall be five acres. 
b.  Mix of uses. A mixture of uses consisting of a mix of residential uses and housing types, a community center, and open space is required. 
i.  A community center may include a mix of mix of commercial/office, residential, civic or institutional, and open space uses, organized so that residential blocks are within approximately one-quarter-mile of the community center. 
ii.  Commercial uses in the community center shall not exceed 6,000 square feet in size, but may be larger for specialty and bulk sales stores. In addition, active, pedestrian-oriented uses are desired such as neighborhood commercial uses (food services, retail uses and personal services). 
iii.  Residential uses in the community center may include duplexes, townhouses, multiple-family dwellings (including senior housing), residential units located on upper floors above commercial/office uses or to the rear of storefronts, and "live/work" units. 
iv.  Civic or institutional uses in the community center include, but are not limited to, municipal offices, fire stations, police precincts, libraries, museums, community meeting facilities, post offices, religious facilities, educational facilities, and transit shelters. 
v.  Open space uses in the community center may include a central square, neighborhood park, and playground. 
c.  Open space. A minimum of 25 percent of the overall project land area shall be common open space. Ninety percent of the lots within areas devoted to residential uses shall be within one-quarter-mile from common open space. Large outdoor recreation areas shall be located at the periphery of neighborhoods rather than central locations. 
d.  Residential units. The number of residential dwelling units and the amount of nonresidential development (excluding open spaces) shall be determined as follows: 
i.  In areas devoted to residential uses, the number of single-family detached units, duplexes and townhouses permitted may be five to eight dwelling units per net acre; 
ii.  The number of multi-family units may be 15 to 40 dwelling units per net acre; 
iii.  Accessory dwelling units shall be permissible in addition to the number of single-family detached dwelling units authorized under this section. However, the total number of accessory dwelling units shall not be more than ten percent of the total number of single-family attached and detached units. 
e.  Community centers. 
i.  In community center areas, the number of residential units permitted shall be calculated the same as above plus an additional number of units not to exceed ten percent of the amount permitted above. 
ii.  All dwelling units constructed above commercial/office uses shall be permissible. 
f.  Commercial space. The total ground floor area of nonresidential development uses, including off-street parking areas, shall not exceed 25 percent of the traditional neighborhood development. 
g.  Lots and block standards. 
i.  Street layouts should provide for development blocks that are generally in the range of 200 to 400 feet deep by 400 to 800 feet long. A variety of lot sizes should be provided that allow diverse housing choices. 
ii.  Lot widths should create a relatively symmetrical street cross section that reinforces the public space of the street as a simple, unified public space. 
h.  Building setbacks. 
i.  Building setback, front—Community Center area. Structures in the Community Center area have no minimum setback. Commercial and civic or institutional buildings shall abut the sidewalks in the Community Center area. 
ii.  Building setback, front—Residential. Single-family detached residences shall have a building setback in the front between zero and 25 feet. Single-family attached residences and multi-family residences shall have a building setback in the front between zero and 15 feet. 
iii.  Building setback, rear—Residential. The principal building on lots devoted to single-family detached residences shall be setback no less than 30 feet from the rear lot line. 
iv.  Side setbacks. Single-family detached residences shall be setback no less than five feet from the side lot line, with the exception that zero lot-line single-family dwellings may be accommodated by the use of fire-rated walls in accordance with applicable building codes. 
i.  Building height. Buildings shall be no more than two and one-half stories, 40 feet for single-family residential, or four stories, 60 feet for commercial, multi-family residential, or mixed use. 
j.  Building design guidelines. 
i.  The architectural features, materials, and the articulation of a facade of a building shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street or courtyard. 
ii.  The front façade of the principal building on any lot shall face onto a public street and shall not be oriented to face directly toward a parking lot. 
iii.  Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hooded front doors or other similar architectural elements shall define the front entrance to all residences. 
iv.  For non-residential buildings, section 103.07.00 (Design guidelines and standards) of this UDC shall apply. 
v.  New structures on opposite sides of the same street should follow similar design guidelines. This provision shall not apply to buildings bordering civic or institutional uses. 
k.  Garages and accessory dwelling units. Garages and accessory dwelling units may be placed on a single-family detached residential lot within the principal building or an accessory building provided that the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 800 square feet. 
l.  Circulation standards. The circulation system shall provide for different modes of transportation. The circulation system shall provide functional links within the residential areas, Community Center area, and open space and shall be connected to existing and proposed external development. The circulation system shall provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes (especially off street bicycle or multi-use paths or bicycle lanes on the streets), limit access onto streets of lower traffic volume classification, and promote safe and efficient mobility through the district. 
i.  Residential sidewalks. Clear and well-lighted sidewalks, five feet in width, depending on projected pedestrian traffic, shall connect all dwelling entrances to the adjacent public sidewalk. 
ii.  Community Center sidewalks. Clear and well-lit walkways shall connect building entrances to the adjacent public sidewalk and to associated parking areas. Such walkways shall be a minimum of five feet in width. 
iii.  Disabled accessibility. Sidewalks shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
iv.  Crosswalks. Intersections of sidewalks with streets shall be designed with clearly defined edges. Crosswalks shall be well lit and clearly marked with contrasting paving materials at the edges or with striping. 
v.  Bicycles. Bicycle circulation shall be accommodated on streets and/or on dedicated bicycle paths. Where feasible, any existing bicycle routes through the site shall be preserved and enhanced. Facilities for bicycle travel may include off-street bicycle paths (generally shared with pedestrians and other non-motorized users) and separate, striped, four-feet bicycle lanes on streets. If a bicycle lane is combined with a lane for parking, the combined width shall be 14 feet. 
vi.  Public transit access. Where public transit service is available or planned, convenient access to transit stops shall be provided. Where transit shelters are provided, they shall be placed in highly visible locations that promote security through surveillance, and shall be well-lighted. 
vii.  Motor vehicle circulation. Motor vehicle circulation shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic calming features such as "queuing streets," curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians may be used to encourage slow traffic speeds. 
m.  Street hierarchy and associated sidewalk requirements. Each street within a district shall be classified according to the following (arterial streets should not bisect a traditional neighborhood development): 
i.  Collector. This street provides access to commercial or mixed-use buildings, but it is also part of the city's major street network. On-street parking, whether diagonal or parallel, helps to slow traffic. Additional parking is provided in lots to the side or rear of buildings. Sidewalks, a minimum of five feet in width, are required on both sides of the street. 
ii.  Sub-collector. This street provides primary access to individual residential properties and connects streets of lower and higher function. Design speed is 25 mph. Sidewalks, a minimum of five feet in width, are required on both sides of the street. 
iii.  Local street. This street provides primary access to individual residential properties. Traffic volumes are relatively low, with a design speed of 20 mph. Sidewalks, a minimum of five feet in width, are required on both sides of the street. 
iv.  Alley. These streets provide secondary access to residential properties where street frontages are narrow, where the street is designed with a narrow width to provide limited on-street parking, or where alley access development is desired to increase residential densities. Alleys may also provide delivery access or alternate parking access to commercial properties. 
n.  Street layout. The district shall maintain the existing street grid, where present, and restore any disrupted street grid where feasible. In addition: 
i.  Intersections shall be at right angles whenever possible, but in no case less than 75 degrees. Low volume streets may form three-way intersections creating an inherent right-of-way assignment (the through street receives precedence), which significantly reduces accidents without the use of traffic controls. 
ii.  Corner radii. The roadway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a maximum radius of 15 feet for local streets and 20 feet for intersections involving collector or arterial streets. The intersection of a local street and an access lane or alley shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a maximum radius of 10 feet. 
iii.  Curb cuts. Curb cuts for driveways to individual residential lots shall be prohibited along arterial streets. Curb cuts shall be limited to intersections with other streets or access drives to parking areas for commercial, civic or multi-family residential uses. 
iv.  Clear sight triangles shall be maintained at intersections, as specified below, unless controlled by traffic signal devices: 

 
o.  Street orientation. 
i.  The orientation of streets should enhance the visual impact of common open spaces and prominent buildings and minimize street gradients. 
ii.  All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land, except local streets may terminate in stub streets when such streets act as connections to future phases of the development. 
iii.  Local streets may terminate other than at other streets or public land when there is a connection to the pedestrian and bicycle path network at the terminus. 
p.  Parking. Parking areas for shared or community use shall be encouraged. In addition: 
i.  In the mixed-use area, any parking lot shall be located at the rear or side of a building. 
ii.  A parking lot or garage may not be adjacent to or opposite a street intersection. 
q.  Landscaping and screening standards. Overall composition and location of landscaping shall complement the scale of the development and its surroundings. In general, larger, well-placed contiguous planting areas shall be preferred to smaller, disconnected areas. 
i.  General screening. Where required by this section, it shall be at least six feet in height, unless otherwise specified. Required screening shall be at least 50 percent opaque throughout the year. Required screening shall be satisfied by one or some combination of: a decorative fence not less than 50 percent opaque behind a continuous landscaped area, a masonry wall, or a hedge. 
ii.  Street trees. A minimum of one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof, shall be required. Acceptable street trees are identified in table 103-11 (Canton Plant Palette) of this UDC. Trees can be clustered and do not need to be evenly spaced. No tree shall be planted closer than two feet from a public street or sidewalk. In those instances where trees are planted closer than five feet from a public street or sidewalk, either concrete or HDPE root barriers must be installed. Root barriers must be a minimum of 30 inches deep, but depending upon size, location and species of tree to be planted, the community development director may require the root barrier to be 36 inches to 42 inches deep. Alternative methods of root barriers may be considered at the discretion of the community development director. If placement of street trees within the right-of-way will interfere with utility lines, trees may be planted within the front yard setback adjacent to the sidewalk. 
r.  Parking area landscaping and screening. All parking and loading areas fronting public streets or sidewalks, and all parking and loading areas abutting residential districts or uses, shall provide: 
i.  A landscaped area at least five feet wide along the public street or sidewalk. 
ii.  Screening at least four feet in height and not less than 50 percent opaque. 
iii.  One tree for each 25 linear feet of parking lot frontage. 
s.  Parking area interior landscaping. 
i.  The corners of parking lots, "islands," and all other areas not used for parking or vehicular circulation shall be landscaped. Vegetation can include turf grass, native grasses or other perennial flowering plants, vines, shrubs or trees. Such spaces may include architectural features such as benches, kiosks or bicycle parking. 
ii.  Specific planting requirements shall adhere to section 103.03.04 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.17 - Racetrack. 
A.  Property shall front an arterial roadway. 
B.  Minimum lot size shall be 100 acres. 
C.  Minimum setback for buildings shall be 500 feet from all property lines. 
D.  Minimum setback for parking lots and access drives, when abutting residential zoning districts shall be 500 feet. 
E.  Minimum buffer shall be 500 feet on all sides. 
F.  Outdoor lighting shall not shine or cause glare on any abutting property. 
G.  Hours of operation shall be no sooner than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m. 
H.  Loudspeakers or paging systems shall be designed, installed and used such that they are not heard at the property line of adjacent properties. 
I.  Outside storage, loading areas, refuse and solid waste containers, and sanitation facilities shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and from the public right-of-way and shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.18 - Religious facilities. 
A.  Buildings shall be located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 50 feet from all property lines. 
B.  If adjacent to residential zoned property, a buffer of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning. 
C.  Outdoor activity or recreational areas shall be no closer than 75 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. Outdoor lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of properties used or zoned for residential purposes and shall be turned off not later than 9:00 p.m. 
D.  Accessory uses may be provided in accordance with section 104.02.04 (Uses accessory to religious facilities). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.19 - Restaurant, with drive-through facility. 
A minimum of one trash receptacle shall be placed adjacent to the drive-through lane(s). The trash receptacle shall be accessible to, and for the use by, motorists utilizing the drive-through facility. 
In the CBD (central business district), a restaurant with drive-through facility shall: 
1.  Be part of a minimum three-acre mixed use site; 
2.  Submit a master plan of the mixed use project for city council approval; 
3.  Not be adjacent to residential use; 
4.  Not utilize a back-lighted menu board sign; 
5.  Provide ingress-egress area on site, no que area allowed to encroach into city street; 
6.  Only operate the drive-through facility between the hours of 6:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2016-21, 9-15-2016) 
104.03.20 - Sexually oriented business. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Code section to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
B.  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4 , L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774(2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. , 535 U.S. 425(2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M. , 529 U.S. 277(2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres , Inc., 475 U.S. 41(1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres , 427 U.S. 50(1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560(1991); California v. LaRue , 409 U.S. 109(1972); and Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins , 331 F.3d 1196(11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins , 223 F.3d 1306(11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor , 240 F.3d 944(11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama , 378 F.3d 1232(11th Cir. 2004); Gary v. City of Warner Robins , 311 F.3d 1334(11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange , 217 F.3d 1350(11th Cir. 2000); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry , 187 F.3d 1251(11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County , 200 F.3d 1325(11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile , 140 F.3d 993(11th Cir. 1998); L ady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville , 176 F.3d 1358(11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County , 285 F.3d 1319(11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga , 107 F.3d 403(6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker , 670 F.2d 943(11th Cir. 1982); International Food and Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale , 794 F.2d 1520(11th Cir. 1986); Gammoh v. City of La Habra , 395 F.3d 1114(9th Cir. 2005); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane , 368 F.3d 1186(9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset , 316 F.3d 702(7th Cir. 2003); and Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston , 274 Ga. 520(2001); Morrison v. State , 272 Ga. 129(2000); Sewell v. Georgia , 233 S.E.2d 187(Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982(1978)(sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan , 601 S.E.2d 106(Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County , 272 Ga. 887(2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee , 270 Ga. 33(1998); World Famous Dudley's Food and Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park , 265 Ga. 618(1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson , 242 Ga. 214(1978); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas—1986; Indianapolis, Indiana—1984; Garden Grove, California—1991; Houston, Texas—1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona—1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee—1999-2003; Los Angeles, California—1977; Whittier, California—1978; Spokane, Washington—2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota—1994; Littleton, Colorado—2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma—1986; Dallas, Texas—1997; Greensboro, North Carolina—2003; Amarillo, Texas—1977; New York, New York Times Square—1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the city council finds: 
1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this section, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this section are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
C.  Classification. The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
2)  Adult cabaret; 
3)  Adult theater; 
4)  Seminude model studio; 
5)  Sexual device shop; 
6)  Sexual encounter center. 
D.  License required. 
1)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
2)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in this UDC, of a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
3)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the community development department a completed application made on a form provided by the city. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection D.4 below and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection, accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
a.  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
b.  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
c.  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate, accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
d.  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
e.  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
f.  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this UDC, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
g.  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or, been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
h.  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this section shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. 
i.  The information provided pursuant to this subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the community development director within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
4)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
5)  Confidentiality; disclosure. The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this section shall be maintained by the community development department on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by court order. 
E.  Issuance of license. 
1)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the community development director shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the city and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the community development director shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The community development director shall issue a license unless: 
a.  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
b.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
c.  The license application fee required by this section has not been paid. 
d.  The sexually oriented business is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this section or is not in compliance with locational requirements of this section or the locational requirements of any other part of this UDC, the Canton Code of Ordinances, or Georgia law. 
e.  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or, been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
f.  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this UDC. 
2)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the community development director shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the community development director shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The community development director shall issue a license unless: 
a.  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
b.  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this section for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
c.  The license application fee required by this section has not been paid. 
d.  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or, been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
3)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this UDC. 
F.  License information; posting. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
G.  Fees. The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall established by city council. 
H.  Inspection. Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the community development director and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this section, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this section, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
I.  Expiration and renewal of license. 
1)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this section. 
2)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
J.  Suspension. 
1)  The community development director shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this section or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this section. 
2)  The community development director shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly violated this section. 
K.  Revocation. 
1)  The community development director shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee violates this UDC or has allowed an employee to violate this UDC and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. 
2)  The community development director shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
a.  The licensee has given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license. 
b.  The licensee has engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
c.  The licensee has engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
d.  The licensee operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
e.  The licensee has engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
3)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
4)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this section, city Council revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
L.  Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
1)  When the community development director issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the community development director shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this section for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the community development director for the respondent. The notice shall specify a date, not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date the notice is issued, on which the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the community development director's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. 
2)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the community development director's witnesses. The community development director shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this section, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
3)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the tenth day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the community development director to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, community development director shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
4)  If any court action challenging the decision of the hearing officer is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. 
5)  The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the community development director: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's denial, suspension, or revocation decision, the community development director shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. The provisional license shall not be construed to provide the applicant with any substantive right, entitlement, or claim of estoppel beyond the ability to operate until the court enters judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. 
M.  Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
N.  Hours of operation. No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
O.  Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Community development director may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five-foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsection O.5 above. 
7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
8)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
P.  Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
1)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: 
a.  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; 
b.  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
c.  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
2)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
3)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
Q.  Penalties and enforcement. 
1)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such. 
2)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this section to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this section, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this section or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
R.  Applicability of section to existing businesses. All existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of 90 days following the effective date of this UDC. By the end of said 90 days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the requirements of this section. 
S.  Prohibited conduct. 
1)  It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business licensee to violate the following regulations or to allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations: 
a.  It shall be a violation of this section for a person to, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while nude, remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet. 
b.  It shall be a violation of this section for a person to, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a seminude condition unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet. 
c.  It shall be a violation of this section for any employee who regularly appears seminude in a sexually oriented business to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
d.  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
e.  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
2)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the community development director, and summarizing the provisions of subsection S.1 above, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
T.  Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. This section does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this section. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this section, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this section, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
U.  Failure of city to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. In the event that a city official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this section within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the city official under this section, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city's action has passed. 
V.  Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
1)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: 
a.  One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by another sexually oriented business or by a business licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises; and 
b.  One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by a religious facility, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, any residential structure or any property zoned for residential purposes. 
2)  For the purpose of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on a boundary line of the sexually oriented business parcel to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel occupied by a religious facility, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, any residential structure, any property zoned for residential purposes, another sexually oriented business, or a business licensed by the State of Georgia to sell alcohol on the premises. 
W.  Nonconformity. 
1)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this UDC or Canton Code of Ordinances, a nonconforming sexually oriented business, lawfully existing in all respects under law prior to the effective date of this UDC, may continue to operate for one year following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location. At the conclusion of said one year, the use will no longer be recognized as a lawful nonconforming use, except that a nonconforming sexually oriented business may obtain an extension of the original one-year period upon a showing of financial hardship. An application for an extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion of the aforementioned one-year period. 
2)  An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the community development director, and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, appraised value of the property and/or leasehold interests, and costs of relocation. Within ten days after receiving the application, the community development director shall schedule a hearing on the application before the hearing officer, which hearing shall be conducted within 30 days after the community development director is in receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be provided to the applicant via certified mail at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten days after the hearing on the application for a hardship extension. The hardship extension shall be granted upon a showing of financial hardship. Such a showing shall be established if the hearing officer makes the following findings: 
a.  The applicant has, prior to the effective date of this section, made a substantial investment, including, but not limited to, lease obligations incurred in an arms-length transaction, in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; 
b.  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
c.  The applicant has made good-faith efforts to recoup the investment prior to the conclusion of the one-year period. 
d.  Any extension granted under the provisions of this subsection shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
104.03.21 - Skilled nursing services. 
A.  Property shall front an arterial street. 
B.  Minimum building and storage areas setbacks shall be 100 feet from any side or rear property line. 
C.  Emergency vehicle entrances shall not face residentially zoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.22 - Sports stadium or arena. 
A.  Minimum lot size shall be 20 acres. 
B.  Minimum setback for buildings, parking lots and access drives when abutting residential zoning districts shall be 200 feet. 
C.  Minimum setback for buildings when abutting non-residential zoning districts shall be 100 feet. 
D.  Parking lot design shall include paved aisles and pervious parking space materials as approved by the community development director. 
E.  Property shall front a major arterial road. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.23 - Storage facility. 
A.  Storage facilities are a non-residential building, portion of a building, or group of buildings. 
1)  Exterior unit access: An exterior unit access storage facility generally consists of a long, single-story, simplified building with roll-up doors and direct drive up access to conventional outside units. 
2)  Interior unit access: An interior unit access storage facility consists of a building with all units contained within that building and all units having an access door from an interior hallway. 
B.  Exterior unit access storage facilities shall be constructed to no greater than 180 feet in length on any given side of the building. Exterior unit access storage facilities shall provide a minimum 24-foot wide drive aisle. 
C.  Storage facilities shall be limited to the rental of storage units and the pick-up and deposit of goods or property in dead storage, with the exception that moving truck rentals and moving equipment (e.g. boxes, dollies, blankets) sale or rental are permissible. 
D.  Storage units shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate or process goods; conduct servicing or repair; conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind; or conduct any other commercial or industrial activity. 
E.  Individual storage units shall not have electrical outlets except ceiling light fixtures and necessary switches. 
F.  The maximum gross floor area of an individual storage unit shall be 340 square feet. 
G.  Individual storage units or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility shall not be considered premises for assigning a legal address in order to obtain a business license or other governmental permit or license to do business; nor as a legal address for residential purposes. 
H.  The following materials shall not be stored in any self-service storage unit. Each lessee shall be required to sign a written statement certifying that none of the following will be stored in the unit leased by that individual or corporation: 
1)  Hazardous materials; 
2)  Flammable and combustible liquids; 
3)  Explosives; and 
4)  Black powder and smokeless propellants. 
I.  All property stored on the premises shall be entirely within an enclosed building. No exterior storage of any item shall be permitted. 
J.  Storage shall not occur in required parking spaces, drives, parking lanes nor within required building setback areas. 
K.  No vehicle maintenance, washing or repair shall be permitted. 
L.  One caretaker or security guard dwelling is permitted on the premises. Maximum gross floor area permitted for residential use shall be 1,200 square feet. 
M.  Floor area within the rental or leasing office or other subdivided tenant unit, which is devoted to uses other than the rental of storage units, shall be provided with additional parking spaces, at a ratio of one per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
N.  Storage unit doors shall be screened from view and shall not be visible from any street. 
O.  Storage facilities shall provide a minimum 25-foot landscape buffer along all property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2019-0117-04, 1-17-2019) 
104.03.24 - Vehicle storage yards. 
Any motor vehicle repair business or motor vehicle storage yard doing business within the city shall construct and maintain a screening fence or enclosure to conceal from public view such motor vehicles stored or accumulated on its place of business. 
A.  Such screening fence or enclosure shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be made of either wood, metal, shrubbery, trees or other appropriate means, so that the enclosure is opaque and prevents visibility of the storage yard from the public right-of-way. 
B.  Such screening fence or enclosure shall not be within five feet of any public street or right-of-way unless approved by the community development director. 
C.  A written plan including the design and installation of the screening fence or enclosure shall be subject to approval by the community development director prior to installation. 
D.  Such screening fence or enclosure shall be subject to inspection by the community development director for proper installation and maintenance to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.25 - Wireless telecommunication facilities (communication towers). 
A.  Purpose. This section is designed and intended to balance the interests of the city's residents, telecommunications providers and telecommunications customers in the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services and so as to promote the city as a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this section shall: 
1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the city. 
2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities. 
3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennas. 
5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city. 
6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunications tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers. 
7)  Encourage and promote the location of new wireless telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
B.  Overall policy and desired goals for telecommunications facilities. In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities protects the health, safety, public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this section, the city adopts an overall policy with respect to granting a conditional use permit (CUP) for wireless telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the following goals: 
1)  Requiring a CUP in accordance with requirements of this section for any new wireless telecommunications facility. 
2)  Requiring a permit (not a CUP) in accordance with requirements of this section for any new collocation or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility. 
3)  Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or collocation of wireless telecommunications facilities among service providers. 
4)  Requiring, promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner, including but not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
5)  In granting a CUP, the city has found that the facility shall be in the most appropriate site as regards being the least visually intrusive among those available in the city. 
C.  Exceptions from a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
1)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, wireless telecommunications facilities that existed on or before the effective date of this UDC shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist, provided however, that any visible modification or substantial change (as defined in this UDC) of an existing wireless telecommunications facility will require the complete facility, including the tower if applicable, and any new installation to comply with this section, as will anything changing the structural load. 
2)  Any repair and maintenance of a wireless facility not requiring additional construction or site modification does not require an application for a CUP. 
3)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the collocation and/or shared use of antennas on existing telecommunication towers or other tall structures or compatible use structures, such as water towers and other towers, that are proven by an applicant to be structurally adequate to accommodate the collocation shall be exempt from the public hearing requirement otherwise required for a tower, and shall be subject only to administrative review by the community development director. 
D.  Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this section: 
1)  Public service facilities owned and operated by the City of Canton. 
2)  Any facilities expressly exempt from the city's siting, building and permitting authority. 
3)  Any facilities that are exempted from local regulation by the Federal Communications Commission. 
E.  Location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
1)  Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the following priorities, "a" being the highest priority and "d" being the lowest priority. 
a.  On existing towers or other structures without increasing the height of the tower or structure. 
b.  On properties in areas zoned L-I and SU. 
c.  On properties in areas zoned GC and O-I. 
d.  On properties zoned NC and PD—Business/office. 
e.  On properties zoned CBD and RM-15. 
2)  If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a detailed explanation and justification must be provided as to why a site of any higher priority designations was not selected. The applicant seeking a CUP must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why the proposed site was chosen and the reasons why higher priority locations were deemed unfit or undesirable. 
3)  An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the only site leased or selected or because there is an existing lease with a landowner. An application shall address collocation as an option. If such option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the community development director why collocation is commercially impracticable or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting collocation shall not be a valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship. 
4)  Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the city may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements; 
b.  Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or district; 
c.  The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation; 
d.  The placement and location of wireless telecommunications facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the city, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; 
e.  The placement and location of a wireless telecommunications facility would result in a conflict with, compromise in or change of the nature or character of the surrounding area; 
f.  Conflicts with the provisions of this section; 
g.  Failure to submit a complete application as required under this section. 
F.  Preferred location sites. 
1)  Collocation sites. Any existing wireless telecommunications towers currently in use shall be preferred location sites regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site; provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this section, and collocation sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the community development director, and the site is not on a property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
2)  Publicly used structures. Publicly used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly used structures include but are not limited to facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flagpoles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
3)  Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roofline can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
G.  Collocation. 
1)  The city, as opposed to the construction of a new tower, requires wireless facilities to be located on existing towers or other suitable structures without increasing the height of the tower or structure, unless such is proven to be technologically impracticable. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying all existing towers and antenna, as well as suitable structures, inside the city limits and within one mile of the location of any proposed new tower. 
2)  An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the applicant. 
3)  Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
4)  The applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasipublic agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to collocate an antenna, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit such collocation. The applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
H.  Nuisances. Wireless telecommunications facilities, including without limitation power source, ventilation and cooling, shall meet the following requirements: 
1)  Shall be operated at all times within the limits of the city's noise control ordinance (chapter 30, City of Canton Code of Ordinances, Article II); 
2)  Shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant; and 
3)  Shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
I.  Removal of antennas and towers. 
1)  All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. 
2)  If, upon inspection by the community development director, any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. 
3)  If such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owner requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. If such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, it shall be considered a nuisance, and the city may proceed under the nuisance abatement procedures to remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. 
4)  Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
J.  Abandoned facilities. Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. 
1)  The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. 
2)  If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment, it shall be considered a nuisance, and the city may proceed under the nuisance abatement procedures to remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. 
3)  The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. 
4)  Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
5)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this section as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
K.  Penalty for violation. 
1)  Any person who attempts to erect or who erects a telecommunications facility covered by this section without having first obtained the necessary building permit, conditional use permit or variance in the manner provided in this UDC shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
2)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this section or without obtaining the required permits or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this section, the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
L.  Permit procedures. Application for a site approval or CUP for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the community development director by the person who will own and operate the telecommunications facility. The information in this subsection shall be submitted when applying for any site approval, CUP or other permit or variance included in this section and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete. 
1)  Review process. 
a.  Within 150 calendar days of the date an application for a new wireless telecommunication facility is filed with the community development department, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the community development director and the applicant, the City of Canton shall: 
i.  Make its final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and 
ii.  Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision. 
b.  Within 30 calendar days of the date an application for a new wireless telecommunication facility is filed with the community development department, said department shall determine if it is a complete application and, if it determines the application is not a complete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application. To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the calendar day review period set forth in subsection a. above. 
c.  See subsection L.6 below for the review process for applications that do not require a CUP. 
2)  Basic information. Basic information required on the application for site approval, a conditional use permit or other permit or variance required under this section shall be as follows: 
a.  Site plan to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in chapter 103 of this UDC, and conforming to the requirements as specified in this UDC. 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service; personnel needs; equipment needs; and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
3)  In addition, to subsection L.2 above, a report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the state shall be submitted documenting the following: 
a.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design, with the exception that a request for collocation will not require a description or evaluation of the technical, business, or service characteristics of said request. 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower or structure. 
d.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that the site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
e.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity, and the towers that will be linked for this system, with the exception that a request for collocation will not require a description or evaluation of: the proposed service characteristics; the need for proposed wireless facilities; or the justification of the business decision to collocate wireless facilities. 
f.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity including their grid maps of the coverage area associated with the location in the city. 
g.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
h.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
i.  Designation of which location preference, identified in subsections 104.03.25.E and F, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location or is a disfavored site, describe the following: 
i.  What publicly used building, collocation site or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list, by address with lot and block number noted and map and parcel numbers, and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; 
ii.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; 
iii.  Why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful, with the exception that; and 
iv.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and citywide network. 
4)  Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application for site approval, a conditional use permit or other permit or variance required under this section shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
i.  Street address; 
ii.  Assessor's block and lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number (map and parcel numbers); 
iii.  Zoning district; 
iv.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
v.  The number of antenna and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation; 
vi.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
vii.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations, but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunications facility site. 
5)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  If the proposed telecommunications site is zoned GC, PD-Business/Office, NC, O-I, CBD, or RM-15 and there are alternative sites in L-I or SU, the applicant must justify in the CUP application why those alternate sites have not been proposed. Only claims as to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement will be considered. The planning commission and City Council shall carefully weigh such claims and the evidence presented in favor of them against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the community development director. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If collocation on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such collocation is not being proposed. If collocation on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, the applicant must so state and demonstrate. Only claims as to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement will be considered. The planning commission and city council shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
c.  In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
d.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennas. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antenna locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. 
e.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewer, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
6)  Expedited review for building permits only (collocation or modification). When a telecommunications facility does not require a CUP and requires only a site and design review before it may be erected, the community development director will render a decision in accordance with the following: 
a.  For a proposed collocation or modification that does not increase the overall height or width of the structure to which the wireless facilities are to be attached and does not increase the dimensions of the equipment compound initially approved by the city, the following process applies: 
i.  The community development director shall approve or disapprove the application and also advise the applicant in writing of his or her final decision within 90 calendar days of the date an application for modification or collocation is field with the community development department, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the community development director and the applicant. To the maximum extent practical, the community development department shall render decisions within 15 business days after receipt of a complete application. 
ii.  Within 30 calendar days of the date an application for modification or collocation of wireless facilities is filed with the community development department, said department shall determine if is a complete application and, if it determines the application is not a complete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application. To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward a maximum 90-day review period set forth in subsection a. above. 
b.  For a proposed modification of an existing base station or tower that does not "substantially change" (see glossary for definition) the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, the following process applies: 
i.  Within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits a request seeking approval under this section, the community development director shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this subsection. 
ii.  The 60-day period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement or in cases where the community development department determines that the application is incomplete. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications. 
iii.  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the community development department must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information. Such delineated information does not require documentation intended to illustrate the need for such wireless facilities or to justify the business decision to modify such wireless facilities. 
iv.  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the community development department's notice of incompleteness. 
v.  Following a supplemental submission, community development department will have ten days to notify the applicant that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
7)  Conditional use permits and variances. 
a.  A request for a CUP pursuant to this section shall be initiated by application to the community development director and handled in accordance with the cup provision in chapter 105 of this UDC and in accordance with the Permit Procedures requirements of section 104.03.25.L. City council may issue a CUP under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the applicable requirements in chapter 105 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
b.  A request for a variance shall be initiated by application to the community development director and handled in accordance with the variance provision of chapter 105 of this UDC. The board of zoning appeals may issue a variance under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the application requirements in chapter 105 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
c.  In granting a CUP or variance, the city council or board of zoning appeals may impose additional conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
M.  Basic requirements. 
1)  Building codes and safety standards. 
a.  To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity and condition of screening and/or camouflaging. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in the state. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the community development director. 
2)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  To the extent that the holder of a CUP for wireless telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a CUP shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency including, but not limited to, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
b.  To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a CUP shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
3)  Height. 
a.  All new towers shall be of the monopole type, unless such is able to be proven to be technologically impracticable. No new towers of a lattice or guyed type shall be permitted, unless relief is otherwise expressly granted. 
b.  The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the technical need by the service provider for the total height of any tower, facility and/or antenna requested and the basis therefore. To enable verification of the need for the requested height, documentation in the form of propagation studies must include all backup data used to produce the studies at the height requested and at a minimum of ten feet lower height. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
c.  The maximum permitted total height of a new tower shall be 120 feet above pre-construction ground level, unless it can be proven that such height would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service in the intended service area. The one 120-foot maximum permitted height is not as-of-right height, but rather the maximum permitted height, absent proof of the technological need for a greater height. 
d.  Notwithstanding the 120-foot maximum permitted height, telecommunications towers and facilities shall be no taller than the minimum height technologically necessary to enable the provision of wireless service coverage or capacity as needed within the city and only within the city. 
e.  Spacing or the distance between towers shall be such that the service may be provided without exceeding the maximum permitted height. 
4)  Security. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
5)  Lighting. 
a.  No illumination is allowed on wireless telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency or competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. 
b.  If lighting is required or necessary, the community development director may review the available lighting alternative and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
6)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this section are met. 
7)  Visual impact. 
a.  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely comparable with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by city council or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained, in accordance with section 104.03.25.N.1. 
8)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
a.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. The site plan/landscape plan shall be approved by the community development director prior to any land disturbance. 
b.  The community development director may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes; for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms; or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the community development director. 
9)  Maintenance impacts. 
a.  Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. 
b.  Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
10)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed, but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or placed on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
11)  Lot size and setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities; provided, however, that the community development director may reduce the standard setback requirements of this subsection if the goals of this section would be better served thereby: 
a.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
b.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
c.  Telecommunications facilities must be set back from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 104.03.25.M. 
d.  For an antenna attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a one-to-one (1:1) setback ratio (example: A ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires a ten-foot setback from the edge of the roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
12)  Additional requirements for towers. 
a.  Telecommunications facility site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunications towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
b.  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
c.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
d.  Towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable per subsection i. of this subsection. 
e.  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
f.  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a zoning district. 
g.  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by city council or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
h.  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing, not less than six feet in height, and shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access, in accordance with section 104.02.01B.9. 
i.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot may be allowed provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures if one fails. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.03.26 - Other requirements. 
A.  Keeping of animals. No livestock shall be kept or maintained in any residential zone except that for each dwelling unit the occupant may keep for his personal use domestic pets (dogs, cats, and horses, etc.) so long as they are not kept or used for commercial or breeding purposes, or as to create a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.04.00 - Temporary uses. 
104.04.01 - Allowed uses, generally. 
A.  The community development director is hereby authorized to issue a temporary certificate of zoning compliance for temporary uses, as follows: 
1)  Circus, fair, or carnival, for a period not to exceed 14 days, and shall only be permitted once every six months; 
2)  Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure for a period not to exceed 14 days, and shall be permitted once every six months; 
3)  Christmas tree sales on an open lot, fruit and vegetables, and other harvested products in the commercial and industrial districts for a period not to exceed 45 days; 
4)  Real estate sales office, in any district, for a period not to exceed one year, provided no sleeping accommodations are maintained in the structure; 
5)  Contractor's office and equipment sheds, in any district, for a period of one year, provided that such office be placed on the property to which it is appurtenant; 
6)  Mobile food services, in any commercial/office or industrial zoning district, for a period of one year, in accordance with section 104.04.02; 
7)  Roadside vendors, in any commercial/office or industrial zoning district, for a period of one year, in accordance with section 104.04.03; and 
B.  All temporary certificates of zoning compliance may be renewed provided that it is determined that said use is clearly of a temporary nature, will cause no increased traffic congestion and will not create a nuisance to surrounding uses. 
C.  Where provisions of this section and those of chapter 18 article III, Peddlers (Canton Code of Ordinances) specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
D.  Exemptions. Yard sales conducted in accordance with the provisions of this UDC shall not be required to apply for a temporary certificate of zoning compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.04.02 - Mobile food services. 
A.  Mobile food services are permissible on the following properties in accordance with this section: 
1)  Vacant lots in commercial, office and industrial zoning districts; 
2)  Vacant lots in residential developments while the development is actively under construction; 
3)  On lots containing a business in the commercial, office and industrial zoning districts; or 
4)  On lots containing a business in a mixed use zoning district subject to master plan approval. 
B.  The applicant for a temporary use permit shall have written permission of the property owner to conduct food services. 
C.  The applicant shall possess a valid occupational license and a valid food service permit from the environmental health department. 
D.  Mobile food services shall not be located within: 
1)  The public right-of-way; 
2)  Any required setback area or buffer area; 
3)  Any driveway or access way, or in such a manner as to block a driveway or access way; or 
4)  Any designated fire lane or in such a manner as to block a fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.04.03 - Roadside vendors (transient merchants). 
A.  Roadside vendors conducting retail sales are permissible on vacant lots or on lots containing a business in commercial or industrial zoning districts in accordance with the standards of this section. 
B.  The applicant shall have written permission of the property owner to conduct retail sales. 
C.  The applicant shall possess both a valid occupational license and a peddler's permit in accordance with the City of Canton Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Roadside vendors shall not be located within: 
1)  The public right-of-way; 
2)  Any required setback area or required buffer area; 
3)  Any required parking space; 
4)  Any driveway or access way, or in such a manner as to block a driveway or access way; or 
5)  Any designated fire lane or in such a manner as to block a fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.04.04 - Seasonal sales. 
A.  Seasonal sales include periodic events of a temporary nature that are typically outdoors (e.g. legal fireworks sales, Christmas tree sales, etc.). 
B.  The following standards shall apply to seasonal sales: 
1)  A temporary use permit is required according to the procedures set forth in this UDC. 
2)  The area devoted to seasonal sales shall not be located on any required setbacks, buffers, rights-of-way, or required fire lanes; 
3)  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided to support the seasonal sales activity; 
4)  The applicant shall ensure the provision of adequate garbage and refuse disposal; 
5)  The applicant shall receive approval from the fire marshal prior to erecting a tent; and 
6)  The applicant shall demonstrate conformance with all applicable building, health, and other federal, state or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
104.04.05 - Yard sales. 
A.  Yard sales shall be limited to three consecutive-day periods. 
B.  No more than one such sale shall be held at the same address within any three months. 
C.  Signs shall be installed in accordance with the standards for yard sale signs in the temporary signs section of chapter 103. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 105 - DEVELOPMENT CODE ADMINISTRATION 

105.01.00 - Generally. 
The purpose of chapter 105 is to describe the committees and boards that are established for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this UDC; to set forth the provisions for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for rezoning, variance, master plan, conditional uses and annexation; to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this UDC; and to set forth the requirements for appealing decisions and for enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.02.00 - Planning commission. 
The word "commission" when used in this chapter shall mean the planning commission. 
105.02.01 - Establishment, membership and officers. 
A.  There is hereby established the Planning Commission of the City of Canton. 
B.  Membership on the planning commission shall be accepted as a public service. 
C.  The planning commission shall consist of seven members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by city council. Four members shall be appointed to serve an initial three-year term. Three members shall be appointed to serve an initial two-year term. After the initial term of appointment, terms of appointment shall thereafter be three-year terms of appointment. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
D.  Planning commission members shall receive a per diem, as determined by city council, for attending meetings of the planning commission. 
E.  Members shall be removable for cause by city council upon written charges and after a public hearing; provided however, that any member who fails to attend three consecutive meetings, without cause, may be removed by city council without a public hearing. 
F.  At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, the planning commission shall elect one of its appointed members as chairman who shall serve for one year or until he or she is re-elected or his or her successor is elected. The planning commission shall elect one appointed member as vice-chairman who shall serve for one year or until he or she is re-elected or his or her successor is elected. 
G.  At least four members must be present and voting to constitute a quorum. 
H.  The chairman shall preside over all meetings and hearings of the planning commission. The chairman shall execute all official documents and letters on behalf of the planning commission. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall act as chair and shall have all the powers of the chairman. In the absence of the chairman and the vice-chairman, a quorum of the planning commission may select an additional member to preside over the meeting and/or hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.02.02 - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall make recommendations to city council on matters specified in this section. The planning commission shall: 
A.  Advise city council on matters relating to the physical and environmental development of the City of Canton. Its recommendations shall consider the impact which such development have on the physical, social, economic and environmental condition of Canton. 
B.  Furnish city council reports and recommendations on ordinances, ordinance amendments, annexations, zoning changes, subdivisions, resolutions, any other matters required by law, or any other matters requested by city council or deemed important by the planning commission. 
C.  Prepare and update a comprehensive plan in accordance with the requirements of the State of Georgia as a guide for the development of Canton. 
D.  Review and act on matters such as site plans or conditional uses or any other matter as provided by ordinance and required by ordinance. 
E.  Promote public understanding and awareness of planning, the comprehensive plan, and other activities of the planning commission. 
F.  On an annual basis, provide city council with a written report concerning the planning commission's operations and the status of planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by city council related to planning and development. Recommendations and reports provided to city council under subsections A and B above may be relied on in satisfying this annual reporting requirement. 
G.  The planning commission conducts hearings on annexations, rezonings, master plan approval and other matters as required by law. These hearings on matters are brought by property owners or their authorized representatives to determine whether or not the subject property in question should be approved for the action requested by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.02.03 - Policies and procedures. 
A.  The planning commission shall meet as needed at a regularly scheduled date and time. This meeting will include all public hearings to be heard by the planning commission scheduled for the month. 
B.  The planning commission, by policy, intends to limit the length of meetings to a reasonable time. Therefore, no agenda item will be taken up by the planning commission after 10:00 p.m., except by consent of five planning commissioners present. In those cases where agenda items are not completed, they will be put forward to the next regular meeting of the planning commission and placed, in order, first on the agenda. 
C.  Special meetings may be called by the planning commission subject to the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Canton and the provisions of this chapter. By policy, the planning commission intends to limit special meetings to discussion of long range planning, policy development or ordinance review/amendment issues. Development review and approval (including special approval, rezoning, annexations, site plans, etc.) is not considered cause for calling a special meeting. From time to time, the planning commission may find it necessary to discuss matters of personnel or litigation pertaining to the business of the Canton Planning Commission and shall enter into executive session to do so. When an executive session is allowed subject to the laws of the State of Georgia and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Canton, the following rules shall apply: 
1)  The planning commission shall enter into executive session only from a regularly convened meeting. 
2)  The motion to enter into executive session must carry a majority vote of planning commission members in attendance. 
3)  No action may be taken in executive session. 
4)  After leaving an executive session, the chair shall reconvene the regularly scheduled meeting so that all scheduled items, including any considered in executive session, may be disposed of and the meeting may be properly adjourned. 
D.  For all meetings of the planning commission, the following shall be observed: 
1)  The public shall receive proper legal notice as to time and location of public hearings as required by law. 
2)  The planning commission shall develop and maintain "participation guidelines" for public hearings and work session meetings. The participation guidelines shall be made available at each meeting of the planning commission. 
3)  All subject matter shall be limited to the topic under consideration and shall be in accordance with the "Planning Commission Participation Guidelines." 
4)  Planning commission response to public and applicant comments shall be confined to clarification of presented facts. 
5)  At the discretion of a majority of members present, public hearings may be continued to another date. 
6)  Planning commission meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Canton and this chapter. 
7)  By a written showing of reasonable cause received in the community development department by 4:00 p.m. at least eight calendar days before a scheduled meeting, an applicant may request postponement of a case. Upon finding the cause to be reasonable, the community development department shall remove the case from the agenda, and reschedule the case to the next regular meeting. If the community development department does not find the cause given is reasonable, or a longer postponement is requested, planning commission approval is required. Applicants must confirm whether the community development department has approved a postponement. No more than two postponements may be requested and approved. Should the applicant fail to appear on the date of the scheduled meeting the planning commission may table the matter until the next regularly scheduled meeting or recommend denial of the application. The applicant shall be responsible for any monetary expenditures required due to failure to show. These fees shall be remitted to the city two weeks prior to the next meeting at which the application is to be heard. 
8)  The planning commission may hear and decide any case that is not postponed, and except for unforeseen emergencies and/or unique situations, will hear and decide cases no later than the third meeting for which they are scheduled, with or without the applicant present. In its discretion, the planning commission may decide the case on the merits or may dismiss the case for lack of progress/presentation. 
9)  By requesting postponement, an applicant agrees to pay postponement fees based on costs of republication, re-notification, copying and other expenditures of time, money and materials by the City of Canton that result from rescheduling. Applicants whose cases are dismissed for lack of progress/presentation shall receive no credit or refund of fees paid in connection with that case. 
E.  Persons wishing to address written communications to the planning commission or community development department are invited to do so. All written communications regarding items before the planning commission may be made a part of the official record subject to disclosure. Communications should be sent with sufficient time to ensure their due consideration prior to any action by the planning commission. 
F.  The planning commission may provide time for the public to address the planning commission on specific planning-related topics under "all else." Remarks shall be limited to five minutes per person. 
G.  Agendas, files and related information on items before the planning commission shall be available to the public at the community development department during normal business hours. 
H.  Whenever possible, the community development department shall advise persons known to be involved in a particular matter of any changes in procedure or scheduling which occur after preparation of the agenda. 
I.  Except by unanimous consent of the members present, the planning commission shall not consider, discuss or take any action on matters not appearing on the planning commission's prepared agenda. 
J.  On matters requiring public hearing, the planning commission may take action during the same meeting, or the matter may be deferred by a majority of the members present. 
K.  The planning commission shall maintain public records of its resolutions, transactions, findings, determinations, decisions and meetings. Files, minutes and records shall be located in the community development department and open to the public during normal community development department hours. 
L.  The planning commission requires constructive, periodic reports regarding the status of planning matters under consideration from the community development department. 
M.  The planning commission expects the community development department to communicate its position to city council and to provide assistance to the planning commission at other times as requested. 
N.  The community development department is expected to prepare studies, reports and reviews as necessary to adequately address issues before the planning commission or anticipated for planning commission review or action. 
O.  The community development department shall ensure that all applicants submitting requests to be considered by the planning commission will grant temporary access to the subject property during the time period that the request is being considered to allow the planning commissioners and community development department staff to review and inspect the subject property in person prior to a decision being made by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-1019, 10-19-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
105.02.04 - Behavior and ethics. 
A.  Planning commission members shall not: 
1)  Disclose confidential information acquired by reason of his/her official position or use such information to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself/herself or others. 
2)  Use or attempt to use his/her official position to secure special privileges for himself/herself or others. 
3)  Knowingly receive, accept, take, seek to solicit, directly or indirectly, any gift or loan for himself/herself or another if the gift or loan tends to influence him/her in the discharge of his/her official duties, but this subsection does not apply to an occasional non-pecuniary gift having a value of less than $50.00, an award publicly presented, any bona-fide loan made in the ordinary course of business or political campaign contributions actually used in a political campaign. 
4)  Participate in any planning commission action which may result in a private benefit. The private benefit may be direct or indirect, create a material, personal gain or provide an advantage to relations or to friends, or to groups and associations which hold some share of the person's loyalty. However, mere membership itself in a group or organization shall not be considered a conflict of interest as to planning commission action concerning such group or association unless a reasonable person would conclude that such membership in itself would prevent an objective consideration of the matter. 
B.  The planning commission recognizes that in the performance of its duties, matters will be presented and considered upon which one or more members may have or perceive that they have a conflict of interest due to economic, personal or other reasons, the existence of which will or may be perceived by other members of the planning commission or general public as having the potential for interfering or influencing the member's unbiased consideration and vote. It is the policy of the planning commission to require and encourage a full and accurate disclosure of such conflicts or potential conflicts at the earliest possible time so that the planning commission may determine whether a member may or should abstain from participation and voting. 
C.  Consistent with this policy, each member has a duty to disclose any conflicts or potential conflicts and the relevant facts to the extent it does not violate a confidence, to the planning commission at the first meeting at which the matter creating the potential conflict is considered. The member's disclosure shall include an indication of whether the potential conflict disclosed will interfere or influence their consideration and vote and whether the member wishes to be permitted to abstain from voting. 
D.  After a disclosure or potential conflict is made by a member and discussed by the planning commission, whether the member may or shall abstain from discussion and voting shall be decided by motion and majority vote of the members in attendance at the meeting. 
E.  If a majority of the planning commission votes to allow the planning commissioner disclosing the potential conflict to abstain from the discussion and voting, the planning commissioner disclosing the potential conflict shall leave the room in which the meeting is taking place until such time as the planning commission has completed discussion and voting on the matter related to the potential conflict. 
F.  Any questions or claims that a member has failed to disclose a potential conflict of interest shall be presented at the first meeting when the matter alleged to create the conflict is considered by the planning commission. If such questions or claims are made, and after the member with the alleged conflict has had the opportunity to respond, which shall include a statement on whether they wish to vote or abstain, the planning commission shall resolve the claim and the member's voting rights by motion to permit or require the member to abstain from consideration and voting. If the member has indicated a desire to participate and vote on the matter, a concurring vote of at least five members of the planning commission is required to prohibit said participation and voting. 
G.  A planning commission member shall not personally appear before the planning commission as an applicant or as a representative of an applicant during the member's term of office. 
H.  With the exception of the chairperson, a planning commission member shall not indicate representation of the planning commission when speaking to individuals, groups or organizations on general planning commission matters unless authorized by the planning commission to do so. When speaking for personal purposes on matters which may come before the planning commission, the planning commission member shall indicate that the stated opinions and beliefs are not necessarily the opinions and beliefs of the planning commission as a whole. 
I.  The planning commission, or its members, shall not intrude into the management of the community development department or into those matters which are best handled administratively within the department. 
J.  Planning commission shall conduct themselves at planning commission meetings in a fair, courteous, and understanding manner. Planning commission members shall avoid interchanges involving personality differences. 
K.  A planning commission member shall not engage in ex parte communications with an applicant or with a representative of an applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.02.05 - Meeting procedures and decorum. 
A.  The planning commission is a recommending body only and the city council of canton makes the final determination concerning the application. 
B.  The planning commission reviews each application presented and makes a determination as to whether the application conforms to the laws of the State of Georgia and the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Canton. Further, the planning commission makes a determination as to whether or not the application is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Canton and the Future Development Map of the City of Canton. 
C.  The planning commission expects its meetings to be conducted in a businesslike manner and has promulgated the following rules of procedure and decorum for all speakers on matters before the planning commission: 
1)  All persons attending a planning commission hearing are required to sign the sign-in sheet confirming attendance at the meeting. Opponents of an application are required by Georgia law to fill out a disclosure form relating to campaign contributions prior to voicing their opposition to any application. 
2)  The planning commission conducts its meetings in a businesslike manner and will not tolerate verbal outbursts, clapping, cheering, heckling, side comments, etc. All comments concerning the application are to be addressed to the planning commission and not to the applicant or other interested party. 
3)  Signs, placards, posters, etc. are not permitted within the meeting room and must be left outside. Display boards reflecting matters and plans that are a part of the application may be used by the applicant and referred to by other speakers. 
4)  The proponents and the opponents of an application are limited to ten minutes for presentation of their respective viewpoints, unless more time is allowed by a vote of the planning commission, in which case equal additional time shall be allowed for each side. As such, in the event that more than one person desires to address a particular position, applicants and/or opponents are encouraged to designate spokespersons to present their positions concerning the application. Those persons that reside within the incorporated limits of the City of Canton shall be given the opportunity to speak before those persons that reside outside of the incorporated limits of the City of Canton. 
5)  While public opinion is encouraged as to applications, it is not necessary to state the same position or fact more than once to the planning commission. The chairperson of the planning commission may limit a presentation if the same positions and facts are made by subsequent speakers. 
6)  Once the chairperson of the planning commission declares the public hearing closed, there will be no more comments accepted from any member of the audience unless a member of the planning commission asks a specific question of a specific person. All comments and side comments are to cease at the time while the planning commission goes into deliberations concerning the application. 
7)  Any person violating any of these rules of procedure and decorum will be requested by the chairperson of the planning commission to cease such activity upon a verbal warning. If it is necessary to issue another warning, any person or persons are subject to removal from the meeting by the City of Canton Police. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.03.00 - Board of zoning appeals. 
105.03.01 - Establishment and membership. 
A.  The board of zoning appeals (BZA) is hereby established. 
B.  The BZA shall consist of seven members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by city council. Four members shall be appointed to serve an initial three-year term. Three members shall be appointed to serve an initial two-year term. After the initial term of appointment, terms of appointment shall thereafter be three-year terms of appointment. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
C.  Each member shall receive a per diem, as determined by city council, for attending meetings of the BZA. 
D.  Members shall be removable for cause by city council upon written charges and after a public hearing; provided however, that any member who fails to attend three consecutive meetings, without cause, may be removed by city council without a public hearing. 
E.  At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, the BZA shall elect one of its appointed members as chairman who shall serve for one year or until he or she is re-elected or his or her successor is elected. The BZA shall elect one appointed member as vice-chairman who shall serve for one year or until he or she is re-elected or his or her successor is elected. 
F.  At least four members must be present to constitute a quorum. Any action shall require the affirmative vote of at least three members. 
G.  The chairman shall preside over all meetings and hearings of the BZA. The chairman shall execute all official documents and letters on behalf of the BZA. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall act as chair and shall have all the powers of the chairman. In the absence of the chairman and the vice-chairman, a quorum of the BZA may select an additional member to preside over the meeting and/or hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.03.02 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The BZA in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards shall have the following powers: 
1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the community development director in the enforcement or application of this UDC. The appeals process is identified in section 105.14.00 of this UDC. 
2)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases a variance from the terms of this UDC, in accordance with section 105.11.00. 
B.  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the BZA may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the community development director, or to decide in favor of the appellant or applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass, or to effect any variation from the strict application of the provisions of this UDC. 
C.  To defray a portion of the costs occasioned thereby, no appeal from the decision of the community development director and no application for an exception, variance or other matter shall be entered on the docket of, heard by or ruled on by the BZA until there has been paid to the community development department by the appellant or applicant the published filing fee. 
D.  No fee shall be required for an interpretation of this UDC when there is a variance between the street layout on the ground and the street layout as shown on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.03.03 - Policies and procedures. 
A.  The board of zoning appeals shall meet as needed at a regularly scheduled date and time. This meeting will include all public hearings to be heard by the board of zoning appeals scheduled for the month. 
B.  The BZA, by policy, intends to limit the length of meetings to a reasonable time. Therefore, no agenda item will be taken up by the BZA after 9:00 p.m., except by consent of five BZA members present. In those cases where agenda items are not completed, they will be put forward to the next regular meeting of the BZA and placed, in order, first on the agenda. 
C.  For all meetings of the BZA, the following shall be observed: 
1)  The public shall receive proper legal notice as to time and location of public hearings as required by law. 
2)  The BZA shall develop and maintain "participation guidelines" for public hearings and work session meetings. The participation guidelines shall be made available at each meeting of the BZA. 
3)  All subject matter shall be limited to the topic under consideration and shall be in accordance with the "Board of Zoning Appeals Participation Guidelines." 
4)  BZA response to public and applicant comments shall be confined to clarification of presented facts. 
5)  At the discretion of a majority of members present, public hearings may be continued to another date. 
6)  BZA meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Canton and this chapter. 
7)  By a written showing of reasonable cause received in the community development department by 4:00 p.m. at least eight calendar days before a scheduled meeting, an applicant may request postponement of a case. Upon finding the cause to be reasonable, the community development department shall remove the case from the agenda, and reschedule the case to the next regular meeting. If the community development department does not find the cause given is reasonable, or a longer postponement is requested, BZA approval is required. Applicants must confirm whether the community development department has approved a postponement. No more than two postponements may be requested and approved. 
8)  The BZA may hear and decide any case that is not postponed, and except for unforeseen emergencies and/or unique situations, will hear and decide cases no later than the third meeting for which they are scheduled, with or without the applicant present. In its discretion, the BZA may decide the case on the merits or may dismiss the case for lack of progress/presentation. 
9)  By requesting postponement, an applicant agrees to pay postponement fees based on costs of republication, re-notification, copying and other expenditures of time, money and materials by the City of Canton that result from rescheduling. Applicants whose cases are dismissed for lack of progress/presentation shall receive no credit or refund of fees paid in connection with that case. 
D.  Persons wishing to address written communications to the BZA or community development department are invited to do so. All written communications regarding items before the BZA may be made a part of the official record subject to disclosure. Communications should be sent with sufficient time to ensure their due consideration prior to any action by the BZA. 
E.  The BZA may provide time for the public to address the BZA on specific planning-related topics under "all else." Remarks shall be limited to five minutes per person. 
F.  Agendas, files and related information on items before the BZA shall be available to the public at the community development department during normal business hours. 
G.  Whenever possible, the community development department shall advise persons known to be involved in a particular matter of any changes in procedure or scheduling which occur after preparation of the agenda. 
H.  Except by unanimous consent of the members present, the BZA shall not consider, discuss or take any action on matters not appearing on the BZA's prepared agenda. 
I.  On matters requiring public hearing, the BZA may take action during the same meeting, or the matter may be deferred by a majority of the members present. 
J.  The BZA shall maintain public records of its resolutions, transactions, findings, determinations, decisions and meetings. Files, minutes and records shall be located in the community development department and open to the public during normal community development department hours. 
K.  The community development department shall ensure that all applicants submitting requests to be considered by the BZA will grant temporary access to the subject property during the time period that the request is being considered to allow the BZA members and community development department staff to review and inspect the subject property in person prior to a decision being made by the BZA. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
105.03.04 - Behavior and ethics. 
A.  BZA members shall not: 
1)  Disclose confidential information acquired by reason of his/her official position or use such information to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself/herself or others. 
2)  Use or attempt to use his/her official position to secure special privileges for himself/herself or others. 
3)  Knowingly receive, accept, take, seek to solicit, directly or indirectly, any gift or loan for himself/herself or another if the gift or loan tends to influence him/her in the discharge of his/her official duties, but this subsection does not apply to an occasional non-pecuniary gift having a value of less than $50.00, an award publicly presented, any bona-fide loan made in the ordinary course of business or political campaign contributions actually used in a political campaign. 
4)  Participate in any BZA action which may result in a private benefit. The private benefit may be direct or indirect, create a material, personal gain or provide an advantage to relations or to friends, or to groups and associations which hold some share of the person's loyalty. However, mere membership itself in a group or organization shall not be considered a conflict of interest as to BZA action concerning such group or association unless a reasonable person would conclude that such membership in itself would prevent an objective consideration of the matter. 
B.  The BZA recognizes that in the performance of its duties, matters will be presented and considered upon which one or more members may have or perceive that they have a conflict of interest due to economic, personal or other reasons, the existence of which will or may be perceived by other members of the BZA or general public as having the potential for interfering or influencing the member's unbiased consideration and vote. It is the policy of the BZA to require and encourage a full and accurate disclosure of such conflicts or potential conflicts at the earliest possible time so that the BZA may determine whether a member may or should abstain from participation and voting. 
C.  Consistent with this policy, each member has a duty to disclose any conflicts or potential conflicts and the relevant facts to the extent it does not violate a confidence, to the BZA at the first meeting at which the matter creating the potential conflict is considered. The member's disclosure shall include an indication of whether the potential conflict disclosed will interfere or influence their consideration and vote and whether the member wishes to be permitted to abstain from voting. 
D.  After a disclosure or potential conflict is made by a member and discussed by the BZA, whether the member may or shall abstain from discussion and voting shall be decided by motion and majority vote of the members in attendance at the meeting. 
E.  If a majority of the BZA votes to allow the BZA member disclosing the potential conflict to abstain from the discussion and voting, the BZA member disclosing the potential conflict shall leave the room in which the meeting is taking place until such time as the BZA has completed discussion and voting on the matter related to the potential conflict. 
F.  Any questions or claims that a member has failed to disclose a potential conflict of interest shall be presented at the first meeting when the matter alleged to create the conflict is considered by the BZA. If such questions or claims are made, and after the member with the alleged conflict has had the opportunity to respond, which shall include a statement on whether they wish to vote or abstain, the BZA shall resolve the claim and the member's voting rights by motion to permit or require the member to abstain from consideration and voting. If the member has indicated a desire to participate and vote on the matter, a concurring vote of at least five members of the BZA is required to prohibit said participation and voting. 
G.  A BZA member shall not personally appear before the BZA as an applicant or as a representative of an applicant during the member's term of office. 
H.  With the exception of the chairperson, a BZA member shall not indicate representation of the BZA when speaking to individuals, groups or organizations on general BZA matters unless authorized by the BZA to do so. When speaking for personal purposes on matters that may come before the BZA, the BZA member shall indicate that the stated opinions and beliefs are not necessarily the opinions and beliefs of the BZA as a whole. 
I.  The BZA, or its members, shall not intrude into the management of the community development department or into those matters which are best handled administratively within the department. 
J.  BZA members shall conduct themselves at BZA meetings in a fair, courteous, and understanding manner. BZA members shall avoid interchanges involving personality differences. 
K.  A BZA member shall not engage in ex parte communications with an applicant or with a representative of an applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.03.05 - Meeting procedures and decorum. 
A.  The BZA conducts hearings to decide appeals related to the enforcement or application of this UDC by the community development director or to authorize upon appeal a variance from the terms of this UDC. These hearings on matters are brought by property owners or their authorized representatives to determine whether or not the subject property in question should be approved for the action requested by the applicant. 
B.  The BZA utilizes "Roberts Rules of Order" for conducting its meetings. 
C.  The BZA expects its meetings to be conducted in a businesslike manner and has promulgated the following rules of procedure and decorum for all speakers on matters before the BZA: 
1)  All persons attending a BZA hearing are required to sign the sign-in sheet confirming attendance at the meeting. Opponents of an application are required by Georgia law to fill out a disclosure form relating to campaign contributions prior to voicing their opposition to any application. 
2)  The BZA conducts its meetings in a businesslike manner and will not tolerate verbal outbursts, clapping, cheering, heckling, side comments, etc. All comments concerning the application are to be addressed to the BZA and not to the applicant or other interested party. 
3)  Signs, placards, posters, etc. are not permitted within the meeting room and must be left outside. Display boards reflecting matters and plans that are a part of the application may be used by the applicant and referred to by other speakers. 
4)  The proponents and the opponents of an application are limited to ten minutes for presentation of their respective viewpoints, unless more time is allowed by a vote of the BZA, in which case equal additional time shall be allowed for each side. As such, in the event that more than one person desires to address a particular position, applicants and/or opponents are encouraged to designate spokespersons to present their positions concerning the application. Those persons that reside within the incorporated limits of the City of Canton shall be given the opportunity to speak before those persons that reside outside of the incorporated limits of the City of Canton. 
5)  While public opinion is encouraged as to applications, it is not necessary to state the same position or fact more than once to the BZA. The chairperson of the BZA may limit a presentation if the same positions and facts are made by subsequent speakers. 
6)  Once the chairperson of the BZA declares the public hearing closed, there will be no more comments accepted from any member of the audience unless a member of the BZA asks a specific question of a specific person. All comments and side comments are to cease at the time while the BZA goes into deliberations concerning the application. 
7)  Any person violating any of these rules of procedure and decorum will be requested by the chairperson of the BZA to cease such activity upon a verbal warning. If it is necessary to issue another warning, any person or persons are subject to removal from the meeting by the City of Canton Police. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.03.06 - Revision of duties, policies and procedures. 
A.  These duties, policies and procedures as described in section 105.03.00 may be amended or revised during a regular meeting of the BZA by at least six members of the BZA. Notice of proposed changes must be given to the BZA at a preceding regular meeting. 
B.  The provisions of section 105.03.00 shall be reviewed annually at the work session in January. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.04.00 - Board of construction adjustment and appeals. 
The word "board" when used in this section shall mean the board of construction adjustment and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.04.01 - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the board of construction adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members. The city council shall appoint the board. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.04.02 - Membership and terms. 
A.  The board of construction adjustment and appeals shall consist of seven members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by city council. Four members shall be appointed to serve an initial three-year term. Three members shall be appointed to serve an initial two-year term. After the initial term of appointment, terms of appointment shall thereafter be three-year terms of appointment. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
B.  Each member shall receive a per diem, as determined by city council, for attending meetings of the board. 
C.  Members shall be removable for cause by city council upon written charges and after a public hearing; provided however, that any member who fails to attend three consecutive meetings, without cause, may be removed by city council without a public hearing. 
D.  At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, the board of construction adjustment and appeals shall elect one of its appointed members as chairman who shall serve for one year or until he or she is re-elected or his or her successor is elected. The board shall elect one appointed member as vice-chairman who shall serve for one year or until he or she is re-elected or his or her successor is elected. At least four members must be present and voting to constitute a quorum. 
E.  The chairman shall preside over all meetings and hearings of the board of construction adjustment and appeals. The chairman shall execute all official documents and letters on behalf of the board. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall act as chair and shall have all the powers of the chairman. In the absence of the chairman and the vice-chairman, a quorum of the board may select an additional member to preside over the meeting and/or hearing. 
F.  A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. 
G.  The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.04.03 - Powers. 
The board of construction adjustment and appeals shall have the powers to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official in accordance with section 105.14.04 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.04.04 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. 
B.  The board shall meet on call of the chairman or the community development director. 
C.  The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.04.05 - Decisions. 
A.  The board of construction adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
B.  Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. 
C.  If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
D.  Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. 
E.  A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept in the office of the building official. 
F.  Every decision of the Board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.05.00 - Building division of the community development department. 
105.05.01 - Generally. 
A.  There is hereby established a department to be called the building division and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The City of Canton shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
B.  The word "department" when used in this section shall be construed to mean the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.05.02 - Restrictions on employees. 
An officer or employee connected with the department shall not financially be interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work within the City of Canton, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.05.03 - Records. 
The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.05.04 - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.05.05 - Reports. 
The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He/she may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.05.06 - Powers and duties of the building official. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  The building official is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the state minimum standard codes for construction ("construction codes") in accordance with section 105.15.00 of this UDC. 
2)  The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
3)  The building official is further authorized to administer the construction codes, which are further described in chapter 108 of this UDC. 
B.  Review of alternate materials and methods. 
1)  The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. 
2)  The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
3)  The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.06.00 - Code enforcement division of the community development department. 
105.06.01 - Generally. 
A.  The enforcement of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code as amended by Canton ("property maintenance") code shall be the responsibility of the Canton Code Enforcement Division as assigned by the city manager, and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. 
B.  The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of Canton. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
105.06.02 - Liability. 
A.  The code official or employee charged with the enforcement of the property maintenance code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith in the discharge of the duties required by the property maintenance code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
B.  Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of the property maintenance code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
C.  The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the property maintenance code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.06.03 - Powers and duties of the code official. 
A.  Enforcement. 
1)  The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the property maintenance code in accordance with section 105.15.00 of this UDC. 
2)  The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the property maintenance code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. 
3)  In accordance with the prescribed procedures of Canton and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint deputy code officials, inspectors and other related technical officers as needed. Such employees shall have power to enforce any provision of the property maintenance code. 
B.  Inspections. 
1)  The code official shall make, or cause to be made, all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. 
2)  All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. 
3)  The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise. 
4)  The code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by the property maintenance code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. 
a.  If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. 
b.  If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
5)  The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under the property maintenance code. 
C.  Notice and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with the property maintenance code. 
D.  Department records. The code official shall keep official records of business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of the property maintenance code. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. 
E.  Approval. 
1)  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the property maintenance code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the property maintenance code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. 
2)  Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of the property maintenance code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by the property maintenance code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the property maintenance code. 
3)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the property maintenance code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the City of Canton. 
4)  Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in the property maintenance code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. 
5)  Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records. 
6)  Used material and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of the property maintenance code for new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the code official. 
7)  Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
8)  Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in the property maintenance code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.07.00 - Zoning procedures and standards. 
105.07.01 - Authority. 
A.  From time to time, city council may amend the zoning requirements in this UDC and the official zoning map of the City of Canton, Georgia in a manner hereinafter specified; however, no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review, consideration and recommendation, provided however, city council may determine it is necessary to take action in accordance with section 105.08.05 without prior planning commission review. 
B.  For the purpose of this UDC, a "zoning decision" means any final action by city council resulting in the following: 
1)  The adoption of zoning requirements within this UDC; 
2)  The adoption of an amendment to this UDC which changes the text of the zoning requirements 
3)  The adoption of an amendment to the official zoning map which rezones property from one zoning classification to another or which zones property to be annexed into the city; 
4)  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning requirements in this UDC which otherwise rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
5)  The grant of a permit relating to a conditional use of a property; 
6)  The approval of changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning or conditional use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.07.02 - Standards for zoning decisions. 
A.  The planning commission in their review and the city council in their decision shall consider the following standards in exercising its zoning power: 
1)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
2)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
3)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
4)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
5)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan and future development map; 
6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
B.  In addition to the above-referenced standards the planning commission and city council shall also take into consideration the following when making a zoning decision: 
1)  A planning and zoning technical report that may include conditions which may be considered by the planning commission during planning commission deliberations and said conditions may be communicated to the applicant after presentation to the planning commission supplied by the director; 
2)  Any additional information considered to be relevant to the proposed amendment by the director. 
3)  A concept plan shall also be submitted. This plan shall provide enough detail so that the planning commission and mayor and city Council can ascertain the scope of the project. This plan may be made a condition of zoning if so approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
105.07.03 - Zoning of annexed properties. 
A.  Where the corporate boundaries may change due to annexation or some other means, the zoning of properties annexed into the city limits shall follow the procedures as outlined in state law. 
B.  In any event, when city council shall deny a request to annex property into the city limits, such property shall not be subject to an annexation request for annexation into the city limits until a minimum of 12 months from the effective date of such denial. 
C.  In any event, when the boundaries of the city's corporate limits change, they shall be reflected on the official zoning map within seven days of approval by city council. 
D.  Application and public hearing requirements for annexation requests shall follow the requirements and procedures of sections 105.08.00 and 105.10.00 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.07.04 - Change in conditions of conditional zoning approval. 
Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval or master plan previously established by the city council through action on a zoning change (i.e. rezoning or conditional use approval) shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth for a rezoning or conditional use under this chapter. Any such proposed change to a condition of approval is considered a zoning change and is therefore subject to all procedures and provisions of this chapter regarding the approval of zoning changes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.07.05 - Developments of regional impact (DRI). 
Any rezoning, conditional use approval or other governmental action requested by a private party related to a proposed development project that meets or exceeds any of the development thresholds adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs' DRI Alternative Requirements for the Atlanta Regional Commission (effective March 1, 2013) shall be considered a DRI and shall follow the procedures of said alternative requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.08.00 - Amendments. 
105.08.01 - Initiation. 
A.  Amendments to the official zoning map may be proposed by the city council, the planning commission or the owner or authorized agent of property within the area proposed for change. 
B.  Amendments to the text of this UDC may be initiated by any citizen of the city, any owner or authorized agent of property within the city, the planning commission, or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.08.02 - Application procedure. 
A.  Amendments which would cause change to the official zoning map and result in a rezoning of property shall be submitted on rezoning application forms which are available in the community development department. 
B.  Each application shall be filed with the community development director at least 30 days prior to the date on which it is to be heard by the planning commission, and in accordance with submittal deadlines established and posted by the community development department. 
C.  Each application shall include the published filing fee and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city clerk attesting that the property taxes on the subject parcel are current. Applications fees are non-refundable. A fee shall not be charged if an official government agency files the application. 
D.  Each application shall be accompanied by the following information in accordance with community development department application checklists and supporting documents guides: 
1)  Current deed showing title of property owners; 
2)  Current legal description; 
3)  Current boundary survey; 
4)  Copy of current paid tax receipt; 
5)  Letter of intent; 
6)  Location map of subject property; 
7)  Other information required by the city and as indicated on supporting application checklists and supporting documents guides; and 
8)  Proposed site plan. 
E.  Applications shall not be accepted unless a submittal meeting with a community development department representative is scheduled, the application is complete and is accompanied by all required supporting documents, and all application fees and property taxes on the subject parcel are paid in full. 
F.  The director shall post on an annual basis the public hearing calendar in which application deadline dates are declared with accompanying public hearing dates. 
G.  An application for an amendment affecting the same property shall not be submitted more often than once every six months. Should an application for amendment result in a denial of request, an amendment shall not be filed or submitted more often than once every 12 months from the date of denial. The established waiting period shall not be applied to the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.08.03 - Planning commission review and action. 
A.  The planning commission shall review each application as submitted to the community development department together with the planning analysis as prepared by the director. 
B.  The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing and shall review and act upon each application with a recommendation to the city council. 
C.  The planning commission in their review shall use the standards for zoning decisions as set forth in this chapter. The recommendation of the planning commission along with the minutes of their meeting reflecting their review of the case as well as the written planning analysis and recommendation from the director shall be forwarded to city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.08.04 - Planning commission review period. 
A.  Once an application has been received by the planning commission and assigned a public hearing date, the planning commission shall have a maximum of 90 days to make a recommendation to the city council. 
B.  Upon failure to make a recommendation within the specified period, the applicant may if he chooses take his application request directly to the city council without a recommendation from the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.08.05 - Action by the city council. 
The city council at the city council work session following the planning commission meeting shall conduct a public hearing on all matters coming to city council from the planning commission meeting and then shall take appropriate action on the application not later than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting subsequent to the receipt thereof. However, upon motion duly made, seconded and passed by the vote of city council, said application may be tabled at the second regularly scheduled meeting for an additional 30 days (or until the next regularly scheduled mayor and council meeting) for study by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-1220-04, 12-20-2018) 
105.08.06 - Conflicts of interest. 
No member of the planning commission or the mayor or city council shall rule or preside on a matter in which he or she has a monetary interest, directly or indirectly. Should such a matter occur, the affected member shall recuse themselves from the proceedings and such recusal shall be made part of the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.08.07 - Map amendments. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of this UDC, changes made to the district boundaries or other information portrayed on the official zoning map shall be made on the official zoning map within seven days from the date of such amendment has been approved by city council, together with numerical entry on the official zoning map referring to the application on file which states the date of the official action and description of the nature of the changes. No amendment to this regulation which involves matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on said map. 
B.  No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this UDC. Any unauthorized change of any kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this UDC and is punishable as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.09.00 - Conditional uses (conditional use permits). 
105.09.01 - Standards for conditional use decisions. 
A.  Conditional uses shall be permitted subject to a determination by the city council and shall conform to the following: 
1)  The proposed conditional use shall comply with all regulations of the applicable zoning district as set forth in chapter 102 of this UDC; site planning and project design standards as set forth in chapter 103 of this UDC; and any applicable standards for specific land uses as set forth in chapter 104 of this UDC. 
2)  The proposed conditional use shall conform to the character of the neighborhood within the same zoning district in which it is located. The proposal as submitted or modified shall have no more adverse effects on health, safety, or comfort of persons living or working in the neighborhood, or shall be no more injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood than would any other use generally permitted in the same district. In making such a determination, consideration shall be given to: 
a.  The location, type, and height of buildings or structures; 
b.  The type and extent of landscaping and screening on the site; and 
c.  Whether the proposed use is consistent with any policy of the comprehensive plan that encourages mixed uses and/or densities. 
3)  The proposed conditional use shall comply with applicable resource management provisions as set forth in chapter 107 of this UDC. 
4)  Adequate utilities shall be provided as set forth in chapters 109, 110 and 111 of this UDC. 
5)  Adequate measures shall be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic hazards and to minimize traffic congestion on the public roads. 
6)  The proposed use shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, or gas. 
7)  The proposed use shall not injure the use and enjoyment of the property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor substantially diminish or impair the property values within the neighborhood. 
8)  The proposed use shall not impede the orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted within the zoning district. 
9)  The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the proposed use shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare. 
10)  The public interest and welfare supporting the proposed use shall be sufficient to outweigh the individual interests that are adversely affected by the establishment of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.09.02 - Application requirements. 
Applications for permission to build, erect, or locate a conditional use shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this UDC and will follow the same process as established for rezoning applications, prior to the issuance of any permits. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.10.00 - Public hearings. 
105.10.01 - Public notification. 
A.  The director shall establish the public hearing date for which a zoning, variance, master plan, conditional use permit and/or annexation action is to be heard. Said date will be taken from the annually published list of deadline dates for filing zoning, variance, master plan, conditional use permit and/or annexation requests and the accompanying public hearing date. 
B.  The director shall cause a public notice to appear in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Canton with the public hearing date advertised. 
1)  Proposed zoning actions, variance requests, conditional use permits, and annexation requests shall be advertised not less than 15 days and no more than 45 days from the date of the public hearing. 
2)  Those proposed actions pertaining to annexation of territory into the City of Canton shall be advertised for not less than three consecutive weeks immediately preceding the public hearing. 
C.  For all annexation, zoning, variance, master plan, and conditional use permit cases the community development department shall post a public hearing notice, on or near the right-of-way of the nearest public street no less than 15 days and no more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. Community development department staff shall inspect the subject property to verify that signs are posted throughout the advertising period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.10.02 - Conduct of public hearing. 
Rules governing the public hearing shall be made available as part of the application materials and again made available for the public at the site of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.10.03 - Citizen participation policy statement. 
The City Council of the City of Canton hereby recognizes the importance of informing the public of changes that result from growth and development. In an effort to better inform the public on matters of annexation, rezoning, master plan applications, master plan modifications, and variances, the applicant of any such request shall contact contiguous property owners and their respective homeowner's association and notify them of their intent. This policy is intended to provide an avenue of open dialogue and discussion between the applicant and the contiguous property owners and their respective established homeowner's association. 
A.  Such notification shall be forwarded to all contiguous property owners and their respective homeowner's association utilizing the City of Canton formatted notification letter available from the community development department. 
B.  A list of all contiguous property owners and their respective homeowner's association shall be provided within the City of Canton Public Hearing Application. 
C.  The City of Canton Department of Planning and Zoning will be responsible for confirming that each contiguous property owner and their respective homeowner's association is listed and hence notified. 
D.  One copy of each forwarded notification letter and one copy of a certified certificate of mailing form from the United States Postal Service shall be required to be submitted to the City of Canton Department of Planning and Zoning no less than 15 days prior to the meeting scheduled by the City of Canton Planning Commission/Board of Appeals in which the particular request is to be heard. In turn, the City of Canton Planning Commission/Board of Appeals shall make note of this information and communicate it within the text of their written recommendation for consideration by the city council for their meeting in which final action is to take place. 
E.  In the event this policy is not satisfied, the request will be tabled until the next regularly scheduled planning commission/board of appeals meeting. Additional advertisement fees shall apply where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.10.04 - Public school policy statement. 
The city council hereby recognize that growth and development can, at times, have an effect on school capacity within the county and therefore recognize the need to share information on developments that have regional impact. In an effort to cooperate with the Cherokee County School Board and share information on residential rezoning requests, master plan applications, and land use modifications to the comprehensive land use plan, the city council hereby encourage open dialogue and meeting between the applicant and the appropriate school board representative. 
A.  Therefore, developers whose projects consist of 25 or more residential units shall contact the Cherokee County School Board and communicate with a school board representative to discuss their intent. 
B.  This communication between the applicant and the school board shall take place, at a minimum, prior to the planning commission meeting in which the application is scheduled to be heard. 
C.  The applicant should be prepared to address such communication if requested by city council at the meeting in which final action is to be taken. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.11.00 - Variances. 
105.11.01 - Board of zoning appeal action. 
The board of zoning appeals (BZA) may authorize upon appeal in specific cases a variance from the terms of this UDC such as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this UDC will result in unnecessary hardship, but where the intent of this UDC shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
A.  Such special conditions shall be limited to exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property existing at the time of the enactment of this UDC, or exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property as would result in peculiar, extraordinary and practical difficulties. 
B.  However, the granting of the variance shall not allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such structure or use, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. No variance shall be authorized unless the BZA finds all of the following conditions exist: 
1)  That the special circumstances or conditions applying to the building or land in question are peculiar to such premises and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity. 
2)  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right and not merely to serve as a convenience to the applicant. 
3)  That the condition from which relief or a variance is sought did not result from action by the applicant. 
4)  That the authorizing of the variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or imperil the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding areas, or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
C.  Application procedures shall follow the applicable requirements of section 105.08.02 of this UDC. 
D.  Public hearing procedures shall follow the requirements of section 105.10.00 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.11.02 - Administrative action (administrative variance). 
A.  The community development director shall be authorized to reduce specific site design and development standards of this UDC where the intent of the UDC can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a waiver of standards. The authority to grant a waiver shall be limited to the following: 
1)  A reduction in the minimum setback requirements for front yards, side yards, corner side yards and rear yards. 
2)  An increase in the maximum height requirements for building construction on real property. 
3)  A reduction in the minimum off-street parking and loading regulations. 
4)  A reduction in the minimum square footage requirements for planted or undisturbed buffers. 
B.  The community development director is hereby vested with the power and authority to allow in his/her sole discretion a variance to the provisions of this UDC as specified in this section which shall not exceed 20 percent from the minimum or maximum required standards provided for in this UDC upon the following conditions being complied with by the applicant for such variance: 
1)  The applicant desiring an administrative variance shall file with the community development department an application for administrative variance upon a standard form, which will be supplied by the community development department upon request. 
2)  The application shall be completed in its entirety by the applicant and shall be attached thereto before the community development department will accept the same for filing and review. 
3)  Payment of the published filing fee shall be required before the community development department will accept the application for filing and review. 
4)  The community development director shall render a final decision on any application for administrative variance on or before ten days following the filing acceptance date. 
5)  Upon the director's determining that the requested variance does not exceed a 20 percent deviation, and in the event the director determines that such variation if approved will not substantially violate the general requirements of this UDC as set forth in section 101.03.00 of this UDC, then in the director's sole discretion said application for administrative variance may be approved by the director and such approval shall be binding upon the city. 
6)  In the event the requested administrative variance exceeds a 20 percent deviation from the required minimum/maximum standards of this UDC, the director shall have no authority to approve such request but shall be required to deny the same. 
7)  Upon the director's denial of any application for administrative variance, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial to the BZA under the procedures set forth in section 105.14.00. 
C.  Upon the director's approving any application for administrative variance, the applicant shall receive and possess a certificate of approval of the variance, signed by the director, and said certificate shall be made part of and recorded with any title change or request for any additional permits. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.11.03 - Board of construction adjustments and appeals action. 
A.  The board of construction adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  In granting the variance, the board of construction adjustments and appeals may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board of construction adjustments and appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
C.  Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.12.00 - Non-conforming uses, structures, and parcels. 
105.12.01 - Purpose. 
A.  This section provides regulations for nonconforming land uses, structures, and parcels that were lawful before the adoption, or amendment of this UDC, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the current terms of this UDC or an amendment that changed the applicable requirements. 
B.  It is the intent of this UDC to discourage the long term continuance of nonconformities other than residential uses, generally providing for their eventual elimination, while allowing them to exist under the limited conditions identified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.12.02 - Nonconforming uses of land. 
A nonconforming land use may be continued, including through a transfer of ownership; provided, its continuation shall comply with all requirements contained within section 105.12.00 and: 
A.  The use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor be extended to occupy a greater area of land than it lawfully occupied before becoming nonconforming. 
B.  A nonconforming land use within a conforming structure may be expanded or replaced with a similar use upon approval by the director, as follows: 
1)  A nonconforming use within a portion of a structure may be extended throughout the structure; and 
2)  A nonconforming use within a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same type, or a use that is required by this UDC to have less parking; except that if a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, no nonconforming use may be established thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.12.03 - Nonconforming structures. 
A nonconforming structure may be continued, including through a transfer of ownership; provided, its continuation shall comply with all requirements contained in section 105.12.00 and: 
A.  A nonconforming nonresidential or multi-family structure may be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or relocated on the site upon approval by the director, if the changes comply with all applicable provisions of this UDC; provided that the director first finds that the additional work is compatible with neighboring uses and would not adversely impact neighboring properties; and 
B.  A single dwelling, including its garage, that is nonconforming with respect to setback requirements, height limits, or other development standards may undergo interior modifications in compliance with building code requirements without limitation by this chapter. Exterior modifications that go beyond the prior structure footprint may be allowed as follows: 
1)  The director may approve an addition to a nonconforming single-family dwelling where the addition complies with applicable setback requirements; and 
2)  An addition that encroaches into a required setback no further than an existing nonconforming portion of the structure may be allowed upon approval of the director; provided, the addition is less than 25 percent of the total floor area of the existing structure; it complies with building code requirements; and the director first determines that the addition will not adversely affect any neighboring property. 
C.  Within a residential district, a nonconforming accessory structure within a rear yard may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit, and a nonconforming residential structure within a rear yard may be rehabilitated and expanded; provided, that: 
1)  The height of the structure does not exceed one story; 
2)  The conversion and/or expansion complies with subparagraph B.2, above; and 
3)  The converted second unit complies with the standards for accessory dwellings identified in chapter 104 of this UDC. 
D.  A nonconforming structure may undergo ordinary maintenance and repair. 
E.  A nonconforming structure may undergo alterations, reconstruction, or repair to comply with building code requirements; provided, the work is exclusively to comply with the building code, and does not change the structure's footprint or height. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.12.04 - Residential exceptions. 
A.  An involuntarily damaged or destroyed single- or multi-unit nonconforming dwelling may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure with the same footprint, height, and number of dwelling units, in compliance with current building and fire code requirements. 
B.  Substantial expansion, rehabilitation, or renovation of an existing dwelling unit in a district where residences are a nonconforming use may be allowed with plan review approval, in compliance with this UDC. Substantial expansion, rehabilitation, or renovation occurs when at least 25 percent of the floor area of the existing residential structure is proposed to be added to the structure and/or a building permit for construction valued at 50 percent or more of the assessed value of the structure before expansion, rehabilitation, or renovation is requested. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.12.05 - Loss of nonconforming status. 
A.  Termination by discontinuance. 
1)  If a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a continuous period of six months or more, all rights to legal nonconforming status shall terminate. 
2)  The director shall base a determination of discontinuance on evidence including the removal of equipment, furniture, machinery, structures, or other components of the nonconforming use, disconnected or discontinued utilities, or no business records to document continued operation. 
3)  The director may grant an extension of the six-month period for a period not to exceed an additional six months if the director finds that circumstances of a significant or unusual nature prevent or have prevented the timely reestablishment of the use or structure. 
4)  Once the rights to a legal nonconforming status have terminated, any further use of the site or structure shall comply with the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this UDC. 
B.  Termination by destruction. 
1)  Residential uses. See section 105.12.04.A. 
2)  Non-residential uses. Nonconforming status shall terminate if a nonconforming structure, or a conforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use, is involuntarily damaged or destroyed, with the exception that a structure may be restored to no more than the same size and use, and the use continued if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The cost of repairing or replacing the damaged portion of the structure is 50 percent or less of the assessed value of the structure immediately before damage; and 
b.  The restoration is started within six months following the date of damage and is diligently pursued to completion. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.12.06 - Nonconforming parcels. 
A.  A nonconforming parcel that does not comply with the applicable area, width, or depth requirements of this UDC shall be considered a legal building site if it meets at least one of the following criteria, as documented to the satisfaction of the director by evidence furnished by the applicant: 
1)  The parcel was created by a recorded subdivision; 
2)  The parcel is under one ownership and was legally created by a recorded deed before the effective date of the amendment that made the parcel nonconforming; 
3)  The parcel was approved through the variance procedure or resulted from a lot line adjustment; or 
4)  The parcel was created in compliance with the provisions of this UDC, but was made nonconforming when a portion was acquired by a governmental entity so that the parcel size is decreased not more than 20 percent and the yard facing a public right-of-way was decreased not more than five percent. 
B.  No subdivision shall be approved that would increase the nonconformity of an existing parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.13.00 - Permits required. 
105.13.01 - Land disturbance, building, and sign permits required. 
A.  No building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered, and no land-disturbing activity performed, without a permit therefor, issued by the community development director. 
B.  No such permits shall be issued by the community development director except in conformity with the provisions of this UDC, unless the applicant receives a variance as provided by this UDC. 
C.  It shall be further stipulated that all sign permits shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of the building code or other laws in effect. Unlawful signs shall be made to comply with all regulations or shall be removed in accordance with the appropriate provisions set forth in the building code or this UDC. 
D.  No permit required for work that is regulated by the construction codes shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of chapter 108 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.13.02 - Application for permits. 
A.  All applications for land use permits, sign permits, and temporary certificates of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing: 
1)  The actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; 
2)  The exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; 
3)  Location of all trees of five inches or larger in caliper measure at diameter breast height; and 
4)  The location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. 
B.  The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the community development director, including: 
1)  Existing or proposed building or alteration; 
2)  Existing or proposed uses of the building and land; 
3)  The number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; 
4)  Conditions existing on the lot; and 
5)  Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this UDC. 
C.  One copy of said plans shall be returned to the applicant by the community development director, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The original copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.13.03 - Certificate of occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building, or premises, or both, or parts thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefor by the building official stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this UDC and other codes and ordinances adopted by the City of Canton. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.13.04 - Expiration of permit. 
If work described in any permit has not begun within a six-month period from the date of issuance of said permit, it shall be considered expired. Said permit shall be canceled by the community development director and shall be committed to writing notifying the permittee of said cancellation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.14.00 - Appeals. 
105.14.01 - Appeal from community development director decision. 
Should any party find themselves adversely affected by the decision of the director, said party shall first commit their rebuttal in writing to the director for his review. In the event the decisions remains the same and unchanged for a period of 30 days from the date of the submissions of the rebuttal, the aggrieved party may then appeal said decision to the Canton Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA). 
A.  Such appeal must be submitted within the later of: (i) 60 days from the party's submission of the rebuttal or (ii) within 30 days from the director's written response to the party's rebuttal, by filing with the director and with the BZA a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
B.  The director shall forthwith transmit to the BZA all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the director certifies to the BZA, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the BZA or by a court of record on application or notice to the director and on due cause shown. 
C.  The BZA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal taken within the time specified herein, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to all adjacent property owners, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing of such appeal, any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.14.02 - Appeal from Canton Board of Zoning Appeals decision. 
A.  Any judgement or decision of the BZA is conclusive insofar as the individual appeal decided or the decision rendered may not be reappealed to the BZA. 
B.  Any party aggrieved by any decision of the BZA may take an appeal to the Cherokee County Superior Court by writ of certiorari within 30 days after the decision of the BZA is rendered. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Public hearing for appeal. When hearing an appeal, the city council shall conduct a public hearing to receive oral or written evidence from the appellant, from the affected property owners, and from other interested parties as determined by the city council in its discretion. The city council shall confine the evidence to matters set forth in the decision of the BZA, the minutes of the BZA, and the applicant's notice of appeal. The proceedings shall be recorded and shall be open to the public. 
E.  Decision of city council. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall consider the matter(s) under appeal and its action concerning the decision being reviewed. The city council's decision shall be announced in a public meeting, either following the hearing or at any other scheduled meeting. The decision of the city council shall be in writing and shall: (a) affirm the decision of the BZA, (b) return the matter to the BZA for reconsideration, with or without direction, or (c) take such action by way of relief to the applicant as the city council deems appropriate and lawful. The decision of the city council shall be included in its meeting minutes and a written report thereof shall be sent to the appellant. Upon conclusion of the case or application, the record and all matters adduced at the city council shall be retained by the community development director. 
F.  Appeal to superior court. Appeal of a decision of the city council shall be to the Superior Court of Cherokee County by writ of certiorari within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-0615-01, 6-15-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
105.14.03 - Appeal from Canton Board of Construction Adjustment and Appeals. 
The word "board" when used in this section shall mean the board of construction adjustment and appeals. 
A.  Any judgement or decision of the board is final and may not be reconsidered by the board. 
B.  Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Board may take an appeal to the Cherokee County Superior Court by writ of certiorari within 30 days after the decision of the board is rendered. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Public hearing for appeal. When hearing an appeal, the city council shall conduct a public hearing to receive oral or written evidence from the appellant, from affected property owners, and from other interested parties as determined by the city council in its discretion. The city council shall confine the evidence to matters set forth in the decision of the board, the minutes of the board, and the applicant's notice of appeal. The proceedings shall be recorded and shall be open to the public. 
E.  Decision of the city council. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall consider the matter(s) under appeal and its action concerning the decision being reviewed. The city councils decision shall be announced in a public meeting, either following the hearing or at any other scheduled meeting. The decision of the city council shall be in writing and shall: (a) affirm the decision of the board, (b) return the matter to the board for reconsideration, with or without direction, or (c) take such action by way of relief to the applicant as the city council deems appropriate and lawful. The decision of the city council shall be included in its meeting minutes and a written report shall be sent to the appellant. Upon conclusion of the case or application, the record and all matters adduced at the city council shall be retained by the community development director. 
F.  Appeal to superior court. Appeal of a decision by the city council shall be to the Superior Court of Cherokee County by writ of certiorari within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-0615-01, 6-15-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
105.14.04 - Appeal from mayor, city council, and/or municipal judge decision. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision or determination by the mayor and city council and/or the municipal judge of the City of Canton in the enforcement of this UDC may take an appeal directly to the Cherokee County Superior Court within 30 days after said decision is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.14.05 - Appeal from building official decision. 
A.  The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
B.  Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.15.00 - Enforcement. 
105.15.01 - Authority. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the community development director to enforce the provisions of this UDC. The director is further authorized to ensure compliance of this UDC and to prevent violation of its provisions. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the codes official to enforce the provisions of the property maintenance codes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.15.02 - Violation. 
A.  Violation of unified development code. 
1)  Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by the regulations of this UDC as the same exist or as they may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by these regulations as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended is hereby declared to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the UDC is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by law. 
2)  If the director shall find that any of the provisions of this UDC are being violated he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation(s), indicating the nature of the violation(s) and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
B.  Violation of construction codes. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
1)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. 
a.  If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
b.  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
2)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. 
a.  Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
b.  If a person cannot be located the notice may be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
c.  The stop work order posted shall serve as written notice. 
d.  Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
3)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
C.  Violation of property maintenance code. 
1)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the property maintenance code. 
2)  Shared responsibility. Whenever the property maintenance code places responsibility or makes a requirement upon an occupant, tenant, lessee, renter, etc., the failure on their part to correct the violation(s) shall cause the responsibility to become that of the property owner and the owner may be issued notices and/or issued citations as prescribed in this section. 
3)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of the property maintenance code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition in violation of the property maintenance code, the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by the property maintenance code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
4)  Notice of violation, order, or citation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation, an order or a citation in accordance with this chapter or as otherwise prescribed in state law or city ordinance. 
a.  Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of the property maintenance code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in this UDC (or other state laws and local ordinances) to the person responsible for the violation. Whenever the property maintenance code places responsibility or makes a requirement upon an occupant, tenant, leasee, renter, etc., the failure on their part to correct the violation(s) shall cause the responsibility to become that of the property owner and the owner may be issued notice and/or issued citations as prescribed herein. 
b.  Form. Such notice shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
i.  Be in writing. 
ii.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
iii.  Include a statement of the violation or violations as to why the notice is being issued. 
iv.  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time (as determined by the code official or stated elsewhere in this code) to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of the property maintenance code. 
c.  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
i.  Delivered personally; or 
ii.  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
iii.  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice; or 
iv.  As prescribed by other state laws or local ordinances. 
d.  Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from the code official. 
e.  Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in this section. 
f.  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
5)  Unsafe structures and equipment. When a structure is found by the code official to be unsafe or unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be posted as "unfit for human occupancy" pursuant to the provisions of this section. When equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe such equipment shall be posted pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
a.  Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. When a structure is found by the building official to be unsafe, or unfit for human occupancy or is found unlawful, such structure shall be posted and shall be remedied by demolition or repair. 
b.  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. When equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such equipment shall not be in service or in use pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
c.  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the building official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities, or the proper connection to an electrical power source supplying at least 60 amperes of electricity to the main panel, or a proper connection to a source of potable water, or other essential equipment required by the property maintenance code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
i.  The required electric and water source shall not come from adjoining properties under a different ownership, but shall always be supplied from a public or private utility or a source derived on the site of the building, residence or structure being served. 
ii.  All connections to electric and/or potable water sources must also meet the requirements of the National Electric Code and the International Plumbing Code in force at the time such connections were made, or the current adopted version of these codes. 
d.  Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this UDC, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
e.  Dangerous structure or premises. For the purpose of this UDC, any structure or premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous: 
i.  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings. 
ii.  The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress. 
iii.  Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged. 
iv.  Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads. 
v.  The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way. 
vi.  The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and occupancy. 
vii.  The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act. 
viii.  Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved building, electrical, plumbing, fuel gas, mechanical, life safety or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety. 
ix.  A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
x.  Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health. 
xi.  Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
6)  Record. The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition. 
D.  Remedies for unified development code violations. 
1)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this UDC, the community development director, city attorney or other appropriate authority of the city or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedy, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
2)  Where a violation of this UDC exists with respect to a structure or land, the community development director may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and city service departments of such violation and request that service be withheld there from until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of these regulations. 
3)  The director shall have the authority to order a discontinuance of any illegal use of land, buildings, or structures, removal of illegal buildings or structures or of any illegal additions, alterations, structural changes, or any other illegal work on site. 
E.  Remedies for construction codes violations. 
1)  The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
2)  The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
3)  All unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
F.  Remedies for property maintenance code violations. 
1)  Generally. 
a.  Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with this chapter or other state law or local ordinances shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
b.  Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
c.  Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises. 
2)  Remedies, unsafe structures and equipment. 
a.  Notice. Whenever the building official has deemed equipment to be unsafe under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the equipment affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person responsible for the equipment in accordance with section 105.15.02.C.f of this UDC. 
b.  Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the building official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word(s) "unsafe," or "unfit for use," or "unfit for human habitation" and shall include a statement of the unlawfulness for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. 
i.  Placard removal. The building official shall remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and/or placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the building official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this UDC as well as with other city ordinances and state laws. 
ii.  Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure placarded by the code official or the building official shall be vacated. 
iii.  Official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall allow anyone to occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this UDC. 
c.  Closing of vacant structures. 
i.  If the structure deemed by the building official unfit for human habitation and occupancy, the code official is authorized to post a placard of "unfit for human habitation" on the premises and order the structure repaired and/or closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. 
ii.  Upon failure of the owner to repair and/or close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be repaired and/or closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
iii.  Unless specifically approved by the canton city council and/or the city manager, the closing and securing of any particular property shall not be accomplished by the boarding up of windows, doors or walls instead of repairing and locking them. Also, boarding may not be done in lieu of complying with any other section of this UDC or other city ordinance unless specifically approved by the Canton City Council and/or city manager and unless done in the manner prescribed by them. 
d.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. 
i.  The code official, upon written recommendation of the building official, shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the property maintenance code and the referenced codes and standards therein in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without proper approval. 
ii.  The code official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building structure or service system shall be notified as soon as practical thereafter. 
e.  Abatement methods. The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the code official or the building official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
105.15.03 - Cumulative remedy. 
The remedies herein provided shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 106 - GLOSSARY 

106.01.00 - Acronyms and definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this UDC shall have their customary dictionary definitions. The following terms are defined for the purposes of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
106.01.01 - Acronyms. 
ADA —Americans with Disabilities Act. 
AASHTO —American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ADAAG —Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Design Guidelines. 
ADT —Average daily traffic. 
ANSI —American National Standards Institute. 
APA —American Planning Association. 
ARC —Atlanta Regional Commission. 
ASTM —American Society for Testing and Materials. 
ATS —Automatic transfer switch. 
AWWA —American Water Works Association. 
BFPD —Backflow prevention device. 
BMP —Best management practices. 
BZA —City of Canton Board of Zoning Appeals. 
CABO —Council of American Building Officials. 
CBD —Central Business District. 
CLOMA —Conditional letter of map amendment. 
CLOMR —Conditional letter of map revision. 
CMP —Corrugated metal pipe. 
CPESC —Certified professional in erosion and sediment control. 
CRZ —Critical root zone. 
CUP —Conditional use permit. 
DBH —Diameter at breast height. 
DBS —Direct broadcast satellites. 
DCA —Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
DCVA —Double check valve assembly. 
DHR —Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
DIP —Ductile iron pipe. 
DNR —Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
DOT —Georgia Department of Transportation. 
DRI —Development of regional impact. 
DRT —Development review team. 
DU —Dwelling units. 
DUA —Dwelling units per acre. 
EDF —Existing density factor. 
EPA —Environmental Protection Agency. 
EPD —Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
EPPC —Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council. 
FAA —Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC —Federal Communications Commission. 
FEMA —Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
FHBM —Flood hazard boundary map. 
FIFO —First-in, first-out. 
FIRM —Flood insurance rate map. 
FIS —Flood insurance study. 
FPS —Feet per second. 
GC —General commercial district. 
GDOT —Georgia Department of Transportation. 
GFA —Gross floor area. 
GIS —Geographic information system. 
GSMM —Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
GSWCC —Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
HPDE —High density poly-ethylene. 
HVAC —Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. 
IBC —International Building Code. 
ICC —International Code Council. 
IR —Impervious area rate. 
ITE —Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
IU —Impervious runoff unit. 
L-I —Light industrial district. 
LCD —Liquid crystal diodes. 
LDP —Land disturbance permits. 
LED —Light emitting diodes. 
LCI —Livable centers initiative. 
LFE —Lowest floor elevation. 
LIA —Local issuing authority. 
LOMR —Final letter of map revision. 
MHP —Manufactured home park district. 
MMDS —Multichannel multipoint distribution providers. 
MRPA —Metropolitan River Protection Act. 
NAVD —North American Vertical Datum. 
NEC —National Electric Code. 
NFPA —National Fire Protection Association. 
NGVD —National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
NIER —Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
NOI —Notice of intent. 
NOT —Notice of termination. 
NPDES —National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
NSFR —Non-single-family residential. 
NTU —Nephelometric turbidity units. 
NWI —National Wetlands Inventory. 
OCGA —Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O-RT —Office residential transition district. 
PD —Planned development. 
PSI —Pounds per square inch. 
PVC —Polyvinyl chloride. 
PWS —Personal wireless service. 
PTS —Personal telecommunications service. 
R-4 —Single-family residential district (4,000 sq. ft.). 
R-10 —Single-family residential district (10,000 sq. ft.). 
R-15 —Single-family residential district (15,000 sq. ft.). 
R-20 —Single-family residential district (20,000 sq. ft.). 
R-40 —Single-family residential district (40,000 sq. ft.). 
RA-6 —Residential attached district (six dua). 
RA-8 —Single-family residential district (eight dua). 
RCP —Reinforced concrete pipe. 
RDF —Replacement density factor. 
RF —Radio frequency. 
RM-15 —Multiple-family residential district (15 dua). 
ROW —Right-of-way. 
RPZ —Reduced-pressure zone. 
RTI —Remote terminal unit. 
RV —Recreational vehicle. 
SCADA —Supervisory control and data acquisition. 
SFR —Single-family residential. 
TUBS —Television broadcast stations. 
TVRO —Television reception only. 
UDC —City of Canton Unified Development Code. 
ULI —Urban Land Institute. 
USACE —United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
USGS —United States Geological Survey. 
WEDS —Weekend directional sign. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
106.01.02 - Definitions. 
A 
AASHTO Standards. Standards set forth by the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials. 
Abandonment. To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of vacation or seasonal closure. 
Abutting. Having property or district lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley or easement. Properties opposite rights-of-way shall be considered abutting properties. 
Acceleration lane. An added roadway lane which permits integration and merging of slower moving vehicles into the main vehicular stream. 
Access. A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Accessory structure. A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure. 
Accessory dwelling unit. See "Dwelling, accessory." 
Accessory use. A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal use. 
Acre. A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet. 
Acre-foot. The volume (as of irrigation water) that would cover one acre to a depth of one foot. 
Addition. Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Administrator. The City Manager of Canton, Georgia, or the city manager's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of chapter 113, Development Impact Fees. 
Adjoining land, lot, or parcel. A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common boundary line with another lot or parcel of land. 
Adult-oriented business. See "Sexually-oriented business." 
Aesthetic. The perception of artistic elements or elements in the natural or created environment that are pleasing to the eye. 
Agriculture (see also "Farm"). The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, or pasturage agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities. 
Air gap. An unobstructed vertical distance between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Air rights. The ownership or control of all land, property, and that area of space at and above a horizontal plane over the ground surface of land used for railroad or expressway purposes. The horizontal plane shall be at a height that is reasonably necessary or legally required for the full and free use of the ground surface. 
Airport. A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with a runway, hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and an airport control tower. 
Aisle. The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. 
Alley. A public or private way which affords and serves as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building, and modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in occupancy use, or movement of a building from one location to another. 
Amenity. A natural or manmade feature which enhances or makes more attractive or satisfying a particular property. 
Amphitheater. A permanent structure, whether open or under a roof with no walls, including a stage and tiered and/or sloped seating. 
Amusement or theme park. A facility, primarily outdoors, that may include structures and buildings where there are a variety of attractions, such as mechanical rides, water rides, games, shows, theme exhibits, refreshment stands, and picnic grounds. 
Animal and pet services. Establishments that provide animal and pet care services (except veterinary), such as boarding, grooming, sitting, and training. 
Animal production. An establishment that raise or fatten animals for the sale of animals or animal products. Establishments that keep, graze, breed, or feed animals in ranches, farms, or feedlots. 
Annexation. The incorporation of a land area into existing corporate limits of a community with a resulting change in the boundaries of a community. 
Antique shops, flea market (indoor). An establishment that primarily sells a general line of used goods in an enclosed building. Examples of these establishments include antique shops, flea markets, and thrift stores. 
Apartment. A room or suite of two or more rooms, which is designed or intended for occupancy by or which is occupied by one family doing its own cooking therein. 
Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or developed or his legally appointed representative, including any employee, agent, consultant or contractor acting on behalf of an applicant that has applied for a permit to do work under this UDC. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises on all applications. 
Archery or shooting range. A totally enclosed facility that is designed to offer a controlled indoor sport shooting environment that includes impenetrable walls, floor and ceiling, and acoustical treatment for sound attenuation suitable for the range's use. Includes the term "gun range." 
Appropriate state approved professional. A professional, currently registered in the State of Georgia, who is approved by state law to provide such design documents and plans as required in this UDC. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FIRM floodplain management. 
Aquifer. Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or providing water for a well. 
Art dealers, supplies, sales and service. An establishment classified as "retail sales — other consumer goods" that sells original and limited edition art works, and offers art supplies and services to consumers. 
Assisted-living services. These services are provided by board-and-care establishments, such as adult foster care homes and adult care group homes (personal care homes) in accordance with the Rules of Georgia Department of Community Health, Healthcare Facility Regulation chapter 111-8-62. Services include daily activity assistance, such as dressing, grooming, and bathing for ambulatory adults. Homes cited herein are categorized as follows: ;p1 Family personal care home. A home for adults in a residence, non- institutional in character, which offers care to two to six persons. 
Group personal care home. A home for adults in a residence, or compatible building type that is non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven to 15 persons. 
Congregate personal care home. A home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Automobile. A self-propelled free moving vehicle, with four or more wheels, primarily for conveyance on a street or roadway. 
Automobile parking facilities. Any public or private area designed and used for parking motor vehicles, including surface parking (open or covered); multi-storied parking structure with ramps; underground parking structure with ramps; and rooftop parking. Does not include private driveways. 
Automobile repair and service. A specialized structure for auto repair and service, including service garages and other structures that have bays for automobile service. 
Average daily trips (ADT). The total number of vehicle movements both entering and exiting the designated study site on an average weekday. ADT for various land uses will be determined using the most current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers' (ITE) Trip Generation Manual. 
Awning. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable. 
B 
Backflow prevention device (BFPD). A device or means to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. 
Banquet hall. A facility, smaller than an exhibition, convention or conference structure, that maintains an on-site catering staff and hosts events such as: trade shows, graduation parties, wedding receptions, and business or retirement luncheons. 
Bar or drinking place. An establishment that primarily prepares and serves alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption. These establishments may also provide limited food and entertainment (primarily music) services. These establishments are also known as bars, taverns, nightclubs or drinking places. 
Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation. The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement. A level within a building having at least ½ of its height on one side below grade. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Basin. An area drained by the main stream and tributaries of said stream. 
Bed and breakfast inn (B&B). A private home with one or more bedrooms that are rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided subject to applicable City codes and Environmental Health Department regulations. The operator of the inn shall live on the premises or in adjacent premises. 
Bedroom. Any room used principally for sleeping purposes, an all-purpose room, a study, or a den, provided that no room having less than 100 square feet of floor area shall be considered a bedroom. 
Beer, wine, and liquor store. An establishment that sells packaged alcoholic beverages, such as ale, beer, wine, and liquor for off-premises consumption. 
Berm. A mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. 
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Block. A tract of land entirely surrounded by streets (other than alleys), railroads or other rights-of-way, or boundaries of the development within which the block is located. 
Board. The board of natural resources. 
Board of zoning appeals. The body established by these regulations composed of or appointed by the city council which has original jurisdiction to take action on appeals, variances and other determination as herein established. Includes the term "City of Canton Board of Zoning Appeals." 
Book, magazine, music and stationary stores. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — durable goods" that offers items such as: books; newspapers; magazines (and other periodicals); stationery; school and office supplies; novelty merchandise; souvenirs; greeting cards; seasonal and holiday decorations; curios; sheet music; prerecorded audio and video tapes; compact discs (CDs); or phonograph records. 
Borrow pit. Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other material is removed below the grade of surrounding land for any purpose other than that necessary and incidental to site grading or building construction. 
Brewery. An establishment that manufactures malt liquor. 
Buffer, replanted. A buffer where boundaries are established and the allowance to plant a vegetated screen which will attain a height of eight feet within three years from the date of planting will occur. In such a buffer, it is understood and permitted that the natural topography will be altered to accomplish such vegetative screening. 
Buffer, undisturbed. That area within the boundaries of an established buffer which is free from any grading or site development work which would change or alter the natural topography of said site. However, where said buffer is sparsely vegetated, the replanting of vegetation only may occur. 
Buffer. A landscaped open space and/or screen located between incompatible land uses for the purpose of visibly separating uses through distance and to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances. See also "Zoning buffer." The following meanings shall also apply: 
With respect to the stream buffer section of chapter 107, Resource Management, a buffer shall mean a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by the land development requirements subsection in the stream buffer section), lying adjacent to the stream. 
With respect to the river corridor section of chapter 107, Resource Management, a buffer shall mean a natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to and within a protected river corridor and containing flora native to that area. 
With respect to the water supply watershed protection section of chapter 107, Resource Management, a buffer shall mean a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no land disturbances except as may be specifically permitted within a buffer, located adjacent to water supply reservoirs or perennial streams within water supply watersheds. 
With respect to the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section of chapter 107, Resource Management, a buffer shall mean the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. Buildable area. The portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area or buffer, or required easement; that portion of a lot wherein a building or accessory structure may be located. 

Building. Any structure attached to the ground having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property. 
Building, accessory (see also "Accessory structure"). A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
Building, height of. The vertical distance measured from the average grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck lines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Grade is defined as the average elevation of the ground on all sides of a building. 
Building, principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the plot on which same is situated. 
Building coverage. See "Lot coverage." 
Building envelope. The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot; it is defined by maximum height regulations and minimum yard setbacks. 
Building footprint. The area within the perimeter of a building measured at the foundation but shall not include driveways, parking lots, open uncovered patios, decks, unroofed structures and unroofed stoops or stairs or roof projections. It shall include all porches, roofed areas and any cantilevered portions of the building. 
Building pad. The horizontal limits of the area defined by the building foundation and as required by the hillside and ridgeline protection section of chapter 107, Resource Management. 
Building official. The Chief Building Inspector of the City of Canton, or his/her representative. 
Building permit. The permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
Building setback line. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of the building and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. Covered porches, whether enclosed or not, shall be considered as a part of the building and shall not project into the required yard. Includes the term "building line." 
Bus or truck maintenance facility. A specialized structure for bus or truck repair and service, including service garages and other structures that have bays for automobile service. 
Bus stop shelter. A small, roofed structure, usually having three walls, located near a street and designed primarily for the protection and convenience of bus passengers. 
C 
Caliper. A method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk for the purpose of size grading or classification. The caliper of the trunk is measured at diameter breast height (DBH). 
Camera and photographic supplies store. An establishments classified as "Retail sales — Durable goods" that offers cameras, photographic equipment, and photographic supplies. Repair services and film developing may also be provided. 
Campground/RV park. A site where one or more lots are used, or are intended to be used, by campers and their equipment, including tents, tent trailers, travel trailers, and recreational vehicles. These establishments may provide facilities and services, such as cabins, washrooms, food services, recreational facilities and equipment, and organized recreational activities. 
Capital improvement. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the term shall mean an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element. That portion of the Canton Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the city council. 
Car rental. See "Vehicle rental." 
Car wash. An establishment that engages in cleaning, washing, and/or waxing automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and trailers. 
Catering business. An establishment that provides single event-based food services, transporting food via equipment and vehicles to events or prepare food at an off-premise site. 
Cellar. A level within a building having more than one-half of its height on all sides below grade. 
Cellular telephone store. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Durable goods" that offers cellular telephones and accessories. Software upgrading and bill payment services may also be provided. 
Cemetery. Property used for the interment of the dead. A cemetery may include: a burial park for earth interments; a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments; a columbarium with niches for urns; and a chapel. Types of cemeteries include: the monument cemetery, the lawn cemetery, and the garden memorial park. 
Centerline of street. The line surveyed and monumented, or, if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Certificate of occupancy. A legal statement or document issued by the building official indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
Certified personnel. As applies to the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Charter bus terminal. Any premises for the storage or parking of motor-driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers. The terminal may include ticket purchase facilities and restrooms. 
Chattel. Personal property as contrasted with real estate. 
Child day care. Establishments that are licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources to care for infants and preschool children for less than 24 hours of day without transfer of legal custody. Some offer pre-kindergarten education programs or provide care services for older children. Child day care facilities are classified as follows: 
Family day care home. A private residence operated as day care for up to six children. 
Group day care home. Any place operated as day care for not less than seven or more than 18 children. 
Child day care center. Any place operated as day care for 19 or more children. 
City. Canton, a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
City council. The City Council of Canton, Georgia. 
City engineer. The Engineer of the City of Canton, or his/her authorized representative. 
City manager. The individual designated by the mayor and council who is responsible for the general supervision of all city departments, including the city water and wastewater systems. When "city manager" is referred to in the cross-connection control program, it shall mean the city manager or his/her designee. 
Clear-cutting. The indiscriminate and broad removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for nonagricultural development purposes. Includes root mat and topsoil removal. This definition shall not include the selective removal of nonnative tree and shrub species when the soil is left relatively undisturbed; removal of dead trees; or normal moving operations (See also "Clearing"). 
Clearing. The selective removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
Clothing, jewelry, luggage, shoe store. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Durable goods" that retail new clothing and clothing accessories merchandise from fixed point-of-sale locations. Establishments are primarily engaged in retailing clothing, footwear, jewelry, sterling and plated silverware, watches and clocks, luggage and leather goods, and sewing supplies. They may also provide repair services. 
Cluster development. A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
Coastal marshlands. Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Colleges and universities. Junior colleges, colleges, universities, and professional schools. These establishments furnish academic or technical courses and grant degrees, certificates, or diplomas at the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate levels. The requirement for admission is at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic training. 
Commencement of construction. For private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
Communications and information. Establishments that produce or distribute information. These establishments include publishing (newspapers, magazines and other periodicals, books, databases, calendars, greeting cards, maps and similar works, as well as computer software); motion pictures and sound recording (production, publishing, and distribution); telecommunications and broadcasting (excluding wireless telecommunication facilities); Internet access and service providers; library or archive services; and news syndicates. 
Community development director. The Community Development Director of the City of Canton, or his/her authorized representative. 
Compatibility. The characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include: intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled, and such environmental effects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution or radiation. 
Comprehensive plan. The official development policy and implementation guide for the City of Canton to coordinate and direct physical and economic development, related public investment, and, to provide reasonable regulations for the development of private property in the interest of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. The plan shall be adopted or amended in accordance with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A § 50-8-1 et seq.) and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Includes the term "City of Canton Comprehensive Plan." 
Computer and software store. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Durable goods" that offers computers, computer peripherals, and prepackaged computer software without retailing other consumer-type electronic products or office equipment, office furniture and office supplies. An establishment may also offer repair, support, and training services. 
Conditional use. A use that would not be appropriate without restriction throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the area for which it is sought, would not be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted only in zoning districts which are specified in this UDC and are subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the city council. 
Conditional zoning. The granting or adoption of zoning for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the governing body to negate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. 
Condominium. A building containing individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas as defined by laws of the State of Georgia. 
Conservation areas. Environmentally sensitive and valuable lands protected from any activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance, or character, except in cases of overriding public interest. Conservation areas include freshwater marshes, shallow grassy ponds, hardwood swamps, cypress swamps, natural shorelines (other than natural beaches or dunes), sand pine scrub communities, and other areas of significant biological productivity or uniqueness. 
Conservation easement. An easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominately in their natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition; retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife; or maintaining existing land uses. 
Construction related businesses (onsite storage or equipment or materials). Establishments that either build buildings or structures, or perform additions, alterations, reconstruction, installation, and repairs. They may also provide building demolition or wrecking services. Establishments engaged in blasting, test drilling, landfill, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage, and other land preparation are included as well. 
Construction, on-site. Construction, by conventional means, of a dwelling unit on the site where it is to be occupied. This form of construction may include prefabrication of certain building components as well as panelized construction of walls but should not be interpreted to include the on-site assemblage of modular units or incidental hookups associated with mobile homes. The extent to which prefabrication is permitted shall be determined by the planning and zoning administrator with approval by the planning commission and the Canton City Council. 
Contractor. The individual, firm or corporation undertaking the execution of the work under the terms of the contract and acting through its agents and employees. 
Contractor's establishment. An establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities including but not limited to plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such contracting activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
Convenience store, with or without fuel pumps. An establishment that primarily sells a limited line of goods that generally includes milk, bread, soda, snacks, newspapers and magazines, and a limited amount of freshly prepared foods for off-premises consumption. 
Conversion. Any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
Correctional facility. A public or privately operated facility housing persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense, such as: jails; penitentiaries; and detention centers. 
Corrective action. As used in the mass grading and clearing section of chapter 107, Resource Management, means that all soil disturbing activities at the site have been halted and that for unpaved areas not covered by permanent structures, at least 80 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation or equivalent measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches, or geotextiles). 
Corridor. As used in the water supply watershed protection section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to water supply reservoirs or perennial streams within water supply watersheds and within other setback areas specified in this Code. 
Courier and messenger services. Establishments that provide air, surface, or combined courier delivery services of parcels and messages within or between metropolitan areas or urban centers. These establishments may form a network including local, and point-to point pickup and delivery. 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by, EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Critical root zone (CRZ). The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The CRZ will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and one-half times the number of inches of the trunk diameter (at diameter breast height). 
Crop production. Establishments that grow crops, including: grains and oilseeds; wheat; corn; rice; soybean and oilseed; dry peas, beans and lentils; root and tuber crops, or edible plants; fruit or tree nuts; tobacco; cotton; sugarcane; hay, alfalfa, clover or mixed hay; and peanuts. These establishments may also produce seeds of the crops identified herein. 
Cross-connection control program. Definitions related to the cross connection control program (chapter 110, Design Standards: Water System) are: 
Cross-connection control program administrator or program administrator. Authorized representative of the City Manager of the City of Canton who shall administer the cross-connection control program. 
Cross-connection. A physical connection between two otherwise separate piping systems or vessels, one of which contains potable water and the other does not. 
Cross-connection (nonpressure type). A low inlet installation where a potable water supply pipe is connected or extended below the overflow rim of a receptacle, 01' an environment, that does not contain potable water and which is at atmospheric pressure. 
Cross-connection (pressure type). An installation where a potable water supply pipe is connected to a closed vessel, or a piping system, that does not contain potable water and which is above atmospheric pressure. 
Customer. Any and all persons, including any individual firm or associations, and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country having a service connection to the public water supply. 
Crosswalk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded. It is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads and lots. 
Cul-de-sac. A local street, one end of which is closed and consists of a circular turnaround. 
Curb break. Any interruption or break in the line of a street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
D 
Dam break flood zone. That area within the flood contour elevations subject to flooding as designated by the city engineer based on information obtained from the U.S. Corps of Engineers or other federal, state, or county agencies, or local hydraulic studies which occur from any seepage or failure of any dam. 
Dam. Any artificial barrier, including appurtenance works which impounds or diverts water, and which either: 
1)  Is 25 feet or more in height from the natural bed of the stream or watercourse measured at the downstream tow of the barrier, or from the lowest elevation on the outside limit of the barrier if it is not across the stream channel or watercourse, to the maximum water storage elevation; or 
2)  Has an impounding capacity at maximum storage elevation of 50 acre-feet or more, except that the term shall not include: 
a.  Any artificial barrier which is not in excess of six feet in height, regardless of storage capacity, or which has a storage at maximum water storage elevation not in excess of 15 acre-feet, regardless of height; 
b.  Any artificial barrier constructed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Tennessee Valley Authority, the United States Soil Conservation Service, or any other department or agency of the United States government when such department or agency has designed or approved plans, has supervised construction, maintained the program of inspection, provided that this exception shall cease when the supervising federal agency relinquishes authority for the operation of maintenance of such artificial barrier; 
c.  Any artificial barrier licensed by the federal energy regulatory commission; or for which a license application is pending with the federal energy regulatory commission; or 
d.  Any artificial barrier classified by the state soil and water conservation committee as a dam where improper operation or dam failure would not be expected to result in loss of human life. 
Day. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the term shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Deciduous. Plants that annually lose their leaves. 
Density. The number of dwelling units permitted per acre of land. For the purpose of the tree protection section in chapter 103, Site Planning and Project Design Standards, "density" shall mean the quantity of trees required on each acre. 
Density, gross. Calculation of density based on the entire area within the boundaries of a specific site. For the purpose of chapter 102, Zoning Districts and Land Uses, "density" shall mean "gross density" unless otherwise indicated in the development standards table in chapter 102. 
Density, net. Calculation of density based on developable areas only, excluding streets, easements, water areas, lands with environmental constraints, parklands and required open space, and other undevelopable lands. 
Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Department store, warehouse club or superstore. An establishment that offers a large variety of goods from a single location. Products may include: apparel; furniture appliances and home furnishings paint hardware toiletries cosmetics photographic equipment jewelry, toys, and sporting goods; and groceries. 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: Engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Developer. Any person, corporation or duly authorized agent who undertakes development or the subdivision of land as defined in this UDC. 
Development approval. Written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee. The payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Development inspector. The city inspector responsible for inspections in the field throughout the development phase of a specific development. 
Development. All structures and other modifications of the natural landscape above and below ground or water, on a particular site. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the term shall mean: any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
Diameter breast height (DBH). The tree trunk diameter (in inches) at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
Display area. See "Outdoor display." 
District. The Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division. The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Domestic animals: See "Household pet. " 
Double check valve assembly (DCVA). An assembly of at least two independently acting check valves. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drainage. Surface water runoff; the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for preserving the water supply and the prevention of alleviation of flooding. 
Drainage area. That area in which all of the surface runoff resulting from precipitation is concentrated into particular streams. 
Drainage district. A district established by a governmental unit to build and operate facilities for drainage. 
DRASTIC. The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: The DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility.) 
Drip line. A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips to the ground. 
Drive-in theater. An outdoor movie theater, where motion pictures are projected upon a screen for viewing by patrons seated in automobiles. 
Duplex. See "Dwelling, duplex." 
Dwelling, accessory. A second dwelling unit that is added to an existing lot for use as a complete and independent facility. The dwelling unit may be established within the principal building or in a separate building on the same lot as the principal building. Includes the terms "carriage house," "guest house," "second unit," "granny flat" and "accessory apartment." 
Dwelling, duplex. A two-dwelling unit building that is divided horizontally, and each dwelling unit has a separate entrance from the outside or through a common vestibule. 
Dwelling, multi-family. A building designed and constructed or altered which contains three or more living units which connected by walls, ceiling or floor. Individual units may be accessed by an interior corridor or external walkway. 
Dwelling, quad-plex. A building containing four living units which are connected by one or two common, shared wall(s). Each unit shall have a minimum of two exposed exterior walls. Access to each unit may be gained through a front or back entrance. The living units are not to be stacked. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. A standard single-family residential building; a detached building containing one dwelling unit. A modular home shall be considered a single-family detached unit. 
Dwelling, townhouse. A building that has three or more separate dwelling units divided vertically, and each unit has separate entrances to a front and rear yard. 
Dwelling, tri-plex. A building containing three living units which are connected by one or two common, shared wall(s). Each unit shall have a minimum of two exposed exterior walls. Access to each unit may be gained through a front or back entrance. The living units are not to be stacked. 
Dwelling unit. A room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping facilities, sanitary facilities and not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied for one household on a long-term basis. 
E 
Easement. A nonpossessor interest in land; a grant by property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or person, of a portion of land for specified purpose or purposes. 
Egress. An exit. 
Electronics and appliances stores. An establishment classified as "Retail sales - Heavy consumer goods" that offers electronics and appliance merchandise from point-of-sale locations and may offer maintenance and repair services. Products sold at these establishments include household-type appliances, cameras, televisions, stereos, and other electronic goods. These establishments often sell computer hardware and software along with other lines of merchandise. Does not include "computer and software stores," "camera and photographic supplies stores," and "cellular telephone stores." 
Elevated building. A nonbasement building which has its lowest floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Encumber. To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Canton, Georgia. 
Environmental health department. The Cherokee County Environmental Health Department. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control section of chapter 107, Resource Management. 
Evergreen (conifers). Plants that retain foliage throughout the year. 
Exhibition, convention, or conference structure. A facility designed to accommodate special events that require an exhibition hall, meeting rooms, an auditorium and/or kitchen and banquet facilities. Trade shows, public shows, conventions, food functions, receptions, dances, banquets, assemblies, and other activities are typically hosted in these structures. 
Excess capacity. That portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Existing construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 14, 1998. 
Existing density factor (EDF). The tree density units awarded for the preservation of existing trees which will remain on site to be protected during construction. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 14, 1998. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
F 
Façade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. 
Family. An individual; or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, limited to the occupant, his or her spouse, and their parents and children; or a group of not more than three persons, excluding servants, who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together in a dwelling unit. 
Farm. An area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
Fast food. Food that is prepared/cooked prior to being ordered or food that takes a minimal amount of time to prepare when ordered. Fast food may be take out or consumed on premise. 
Fee simple. The owner is entitled to the entire property with unconditional power of disposition during his life and which descends to his or her heirs and legal representatives upon his death intestate. 
Feepayor. That person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by chapter 113, Development Impact Fees has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Fence. A structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation, presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituent's members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final plat. A plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of this UDC for recording in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished floor elevation. The top surface of the lowest inhabitable level of an enclosed area in a building, including the basement. This could be the top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Fitness, gym or athletic club. An indoor recreational facility which provides services for fitness or recreational sports teams, clubs, or individual activities. The facility may include any of the following: sauna, spa or hot tub facilities, exercise rooms, indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, and other indoor sports and fitness activities. Does not include sexually oriented businesses. 
Flea market. See "Antique shops." 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood, future conditions. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Floor area, gross. The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics, and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy, or any floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this UDC, or by such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and ventilating equipment. It shall include the horizontal area at each floor level devoted to stairwells and elevator shafts. 
Flood elevation, future-conditions. The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM. An official map of a community, issued, by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS. The official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodplain, future-conditions. Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or Regulatory floodway. The channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Floor area ratio. Determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the area of that lot. 
Floor area. The gross horizontal areas of all floors, including penthouses (but excluding such areas within a building which are used for parking) measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of a building. Basements and cellars shall not be included in the gross floor area. 
Florist. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Other consumer goods" that sells cut flowers, floral arrangements, and potted plants purchased from others. These establishments usually prepare the arrangements they sell. 
Front yard. See "Yard, front." 
Frontage. The width of a lot as measured where it abuts the street right-of-way. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Funeral home. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the diseased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation. A funeral home may contain assembly rooms; rooms for embalming, caskets, showing and other functions; cremation facilities; and sleeping quarters for employees. 
Furniture or home furnishing store. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Heavy consumer goods" that offers furnishings such as: baby furniture: outdoor furniture; office furniture (except those sold in combination with office supplies and equipment): floor coverings (rugs, carpets, vinyl floor coverings, and floor tile not only ceramic or wood); and window treatments (curtains, drapes, blinds, and shades). Some of these items may be sold in combination with major appliances or home electronics, or in combination with installation and repair services. 
Future-conditions flood. See "Flood, future-conditions." 
Future-conditions flood elevation. The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain. See "Floodplain, future-conditions." 
Future-conditions hydrology. The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
G 
Gas station. Structures that are specialized for selling gasoline with storage tanks, often underground or hidden. They may have bays for car washes. 
Generalized wetlands map. A map of wetlands provided in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map showing wetlands within the local jurisdiction. 
Glare. A sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Golf course. A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf that may include a clubhouse, snack bars, pro shop, and practice facilities. A golf course may comprise dining facilities and other recreational facilities that are known as country clubs. These establishments often provide food and beverage services, equipment rental services, and golf instruction services. 
Golf driving range. A stand-alone golf practice facility that operates outside of a golf course. 
Governing body. The Mayor and Council of the City of Canton, duly elected by the citizens within the jurisdiction. 
Grade schools. Public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level that are licensed by the State of Georgia and meet state requirements for education. 
Grade. The average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Grade, average. The average elevation of the ground on all sides of a building or structure. 
Grade, finished. The final elevation of the ground surface after development. 
Grade, highest adjacent. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Includes the term "natural grade." 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this shall include stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or a combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenhouse, nursery, and floriculture. An establishment that grows food crops of any kind under cover or grows nursery stock (including shrubbery, bulbs, fruit stock, and sod) and flowers. "Under cover" is generally defined as greenhouses, cold frames, cloth houses, and lath houses. The crops grown are removed at various stages of maturity and have annual and perennial life cycles. The nursery stock includes short rotation woody crops that have growth cycles of ten years or less. 
Grocery store, supermarket, bakery, or specialty food store. An establishment that primarily sells a general line of food products for off-premises preparation and consumption. These establishments include meat and seafood markets, delicatessen-type establishments, establishments retailing baked goods (not for immediate consumption and made off-premises); and specialty food stores. 
Gross leasable area. The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
Ground coverage. See "Lot coverage." 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Grubbing. The removal of stumps or roots from a site. 
H 
Hardware store or home center. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Heavy consumer goods" that offers materials and supplies for home building or repairs. They also sell other products, such as lumber, plumbing goods, electrical goods, tools, house wares, hardware, and, sometimes, lawn and garden supplies. 
Hazardous material. Any substance defined as hazardous material by the state department of natural resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
Hazardous waste. Includes those solid and liquid wastes or combinations thereof that may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or which pose a substantial threat to human health when improperly handled. 
Health department. The Cherokee County Health Department. 
Health and human services, medical. Establishments that provide health care services outside of a hospital, such as: Ambulatory or outpatient care services; clinical offices for physicians, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, etc.; outpatient care centers or clinics; medical and diagnostic laboratories; and, blood and organ banks. These establishments require workers with the appropriate expertise for such services, and are bound to the regulations and oversight of local, state, and federal health and human services departments. 
Health and human services, non-medical. Establishments that provide social assistance and associated services, such as: Social assistance, welfare, and charitable services; child and youth services (non-day care), community food services, emergency and relief services, elderly and persons with disabilities services (outside of home); other family services such as hotline centers, suicide crisis centers, and self-help organizations; veterans affairs; and vocational rehabilitation. These establishments require workers with the appropriate expertise for such services, and are bound to the regulations and oversight of local, state, and federal health and human services departments. 
Health and personal care store (excluding personal services). An establishment that sells health and personal care merchandise from a fixed point-of-sale location. These establishments include pharmacy or drug stores, cosmetic and beauty supply stores, and optical stores. Does not include "Personal services." 
Heating and plumbing equipment sales. An establishment that sells heating and plumbing equipment. Does not include heating and plumbing contractors that retail and install or service equipment (see "Construction related business"). 
Height. The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs: to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the curb level if the building is not more than ten feet from the front lot line or from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure in all cases. 
Historic area. A district or zone designated by local authority, state or federal government within which the buildings, structures, appurtenances and places are of basic and vital importance because of their association with history, or because of their unique architectural style and scale, including color, proportion, form and architectural detail, or because of their being a part of or related to a square, park, or area, the design or general arrangement of which should be preserved and/or developed according to a fixed plan based on cultural, historical or architectural motives or purpose. 
Historic preservation. The protection, rehabilitation, and restorations of districts, sites, buildings, structures and artifacts significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, or culture. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Home occupation. Any use, occupation or activity conducted entirely within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwellings for residence purposes and does not change the character thereof. 
Homeowners' association. A formally constituted nonprofit association or corporation made up of the property owners and/or residents of a fixed area; may take permanent responsibility for costs and upkeep of semiprivate community facilities. 
Hospital. Hospitals provide medical, diagnostic, and treatment services. These establishments often offer physician, nursing and specialized accommodation services for inpatient care. 
Hotel, motel, or tourist court. A facility with guest rooms or suites, with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging. These establishments include resort hotels that do not have gambling services. They may also offer food services, recreational services, convention hosting services, laundry services, etc. and may provide accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc. 
Household pet. An animal which is customarily kept for company or pleasure within a home or yard which is not exhibited to the public, nor raised for commercial purposes. Household pets include domestic canines, felines, tropical birds, fish, rabbits, rodents and other animals customarily sold in pet stores. 
Hydrologic Atlas 18. A map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1989, which identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of Georgia as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils." 
Hydrologic Atlas 20. A multicolored map of Georgia at a scale of one-to-five hundred thousand (1:500,000), prepared by the Georgia DNR using the DRASTIC methodology and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1992, which shows areas of high, average (or medium), and low susceptibility of groundwater to pollution in Georgia. This map is also commonly known as the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia. 
Hydrology, future conditions. The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
I 
Impervious surface. Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. Includes the term "impervious cover." 
Improvements. Refers to such sidewalks, street work and utilities and other facilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the developer to be used for public or private streets, highways, and easements, as are necessary. 
Individual assessment study. The engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a fee payer or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Individual assessment determination. A finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Indoor games or recreation facility. An establishment that provides indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including bowling alleys, ice skating and roller skating, pool and billiard rooms as primary uses, coin-operated amusement arcades, electronic game arcades (video games, pinball, etc.) and dance halls, clubs and ballrooms. 
Industry, light. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials. 
Ingress. Access or entry. 
Inoperable vehicle. Any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled incapable of immediately being driven. Any motorized vehicle without a current vehicle registration tag shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. 
Institution. A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use. 
Island. A land area totally surrounded by water; in parking lot design, built-up structures, usually curbed, placed at the end of parking rows as a guide to traffic and also used for landscaping, signing or lighting. 
Isolation. Installation of an appropriate device at the source of a cross-connection on premises to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. 
J 
Junk. Dilapidated, scrap or abandoned metal, paper, building material and equipment, bottles, glass, appliances, furniture, beds and bedding, rags, rubber, motor vehicles, and parts thereof. 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination. A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
K 
Kitchen. See International Building Code, as amended. Pertaining to a dwelling unit, a kitchen is a space required to contain the following minimum facilities: 
1)  Food preparation surfaces impervious to liquids. 
2)  Shelving, cabinets or drawers for the storage of food and cooking and eating utensils. 
3)  Freestanding or permanently installed cookstove. 
4)  Mechanical refrigeration equipment for the storage of perishable foodstuffs. 
5)  A sink supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
6)  At least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. 
L 
Laboratory or specialized industrial facility. A laboratory or unique and specialized light industrial structure Testing laboratories perform physical, chemical, and other analytical testing services, such as acoustics or vibration testing, assaying, biological testing (except medical and veterinary), calibration testing, electrical and electronic testing, geotechnical testing, mechanical testing, nondestructive testing, or thermal testing. 
Land clearing. Removal of all trees and/or vegetation from the land surface. 
Land development. Any land change including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity. Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance. Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance permit. Any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing, grubbing, excavating, filling or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be clearing, clearing and grubbing, or development permit as defined and authorized under this UDC. 
Land-disturbing act. Any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; any other alteration of land which causes soil and streambank erosion or the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state; any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure. As used in the stream buffer section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall also include grubbing, stripping, dredging, and transporting and filling of land; in addition, land-disturbing acts shall not be defined as involving construction, paving, or any other installation of impervious cover. As used in the river corridor protection section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations; yard and grounds maintenance; individual home gardens; repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family residence; or the cutting of firewood for personal use. As used in the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall not include agricultural practices as described in the exemptions subsection. Includes the terms "land disturbance," "land disturbance activity" and "land-disturbing activity." 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 107.09.01.E. 
Landscape plan. A component of a development, site or other plan required by this UDC and the landscape ordinance on which is shown those details required by the city landscape ordinance. 
Landscaping. An expanse of natural scenery; any combination of natural and man-planted and maintained features including lawns, trees, shrubs, other plants, decorative or natural ground cover, exposed rock, mulch, wood chips, water features, sculpture, paths, etc. 
Landslide. Abrupt downslope movement of a mass of soil or rock. 
Larger common plan of development or sale. As used in the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section of chapter 107, Resource Management and in chapter 108, Plans, Plats, Permits and Inspections, the term shall mean a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Large water supply watershed. A watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Level of service. A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Canton, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Lawn and garden supply store. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Heavy consumer goods" that offers specialized products and services for lawn and garden. They come in two variations: a) Some sell new outdoor power equipment which may or may not be accompanied with repair services and replacement parts. b) Others sell nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod, that are predominantly grown elsewhere (these establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves). 
LCI district. An area described by geographic boundaries for the purpose of creating an overlay zone. See also the Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) Overlay District section in chapter 102, Zoning Districts and Land Uses. 
LCI master plan. A drawing or map to measurable scale upon which is presented a description and definition of the way in which the design requirements of the established LCI district are to be met and intended. 
Library building. A public or privately operated facility containing books and print and digital media for reading, study, and research. 
Life care services. Services are typically provided by church or social welfare organizations in housing facilities, such as: endowment facilities; founders care facilities; and continuing care retirement centers. Services include personal care, convenience care, and some health care. 
Liquefaction. A process in which soil loses strength and behaves like a liquid. 
Liquid product (non water) storage. Tanks that primarily store fuel, oil, and other liquid products 
(except water). Includes the term "tank farm." 
Litter. Any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51(6). 
Livable centers initiative (LCI). A program of the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) that awards planning grants on a competitive basis to local governments and nonprofit organizations to prepare plans for the enhancement of existing centers and corridors consistent with regional development policies. 
Loading space. A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Lot. A platted parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a use, building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
Lot area. The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through front, side, and rear lot lines. 
Lot coverage. The area of a site covered by buildings, roofed areas, or parking and driveways, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, gazeboes, sidewalks, patios, decks and similar features. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
Lot line, front. The front property line coincident with a street right-of-way line. 
Lot line, rear. That lot line which is opposite to the front property line; Where the side property lines of a lot meet in a point. 
Lot line, side. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. 
Lot line. The boundary line of a lot. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the clerk of superior court of Cherokee County; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the same office as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this UDC is derived. 
Lot width. The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. 

Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage. Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets. 
Lot, flag. A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor. 
Lot, interior. An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot, nonconforming. See "Nonconforming parcel." 
Lot, through. A lot having its front and rear yards each abutting on a street. 
Lumber yard and building materials sales. An establishment that stores (including outside storage), distributes and sells finished or rough-cut lumber and lumber products, as well as other heavy building materials. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section in chapter 107, Resources Management. 
M 
Mail order or direct selling establishment. An establishment that offers services through sales staff that may go to the customers' location (e.g., door-to-door sales, home parties), or may utilize mail or electronic media, such as interactive television or computer. Examples of these establishments include: home delivery newspaper routes; home delivery of heating oil, liquefied petroleum gas, and other fuels; and establishments retailing from catalogue showrooms of mail-order houses. Does not include vending machine sales. 
Major street. An existing or proposed street or highway designated as a major street on the official zoning map of the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Major thoroughfare plan. A comprehensive plan or program for the development of the system of arterial, collector and local streets and roads for all or a portion of the City of Canton. 
Manufactured home park. A parcel of land or any portion thereof under which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property. 
Manufactured home. A factory fabricated dwelling unit transportable in one or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and is installed with or without a permanent foundation, and which bears a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standard Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401, et. seq.), which became effective June 15, 1976. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall include any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture, and shall also include parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property but does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufacturing. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials. 
Manufacturing—Chemicals, metals, machinery and electronics. Manufacturing establishments that transform or refine chemicals or metals, and manufacture products from chemicals or metals. These establishments manufacture: petroleum and coal products (by transforming crude petroleum and coal into usable products); chemicals, plastics, and rubber products; nonmetallic mineral products such as bricks, refractories, ceramics, glass, cement, concrete, lime, gypsum, abrasives, ceramic plumbing fixtures, statuary, cut stone products, and mineral wool (by transforming nonmetallic minerals, such as sand, gravel, stone, clay, and refractory materials); basic metal products, such as ingot, billet, sheets, strips, bars, rods, wires, and castings, or finished products (by smelting/refining and transforming metal); products that apply mechanical force, such as machinery for agriculture, construction, mining, ventilation, industrial/commercial heating and cooling, and metalworking; electrical equipment, appliance, and components manufacturing, such as computers, computer peripherals, communications equipment, audio equipment, lighting equipment, batteries, motors, and other products that generate, distribute and use electrical power; and equipment for transporting people and goods, such as automobiles. 
Manufacturing—Food, textiles and related products. Manufacturing establishments that produce or manufacture: food products for intermediate or final consumption in a process that primarily uses raw materials from livestock or agricultural products; nonalcoholic and fermented and distilled alcoholic beverages (excluding malt liquor); ice; tobacco products; textiles and apparel; and leather and leather substitute (such as rubber, plastics or textiles) products. 
Manufacturing—Miscellaneous. Manufacturing establishments that manufacture products not classified elsewhere, such as: jewelry and silverware; dolls, toys, games and musical instruments; office supplies (excluding paper); and signs. 
Manufacturing—Wood, paper and printing products. Manufacturing establishments that manufacture: wood and paper products, such as lumber, plywood, veneers, wood containers, wood flooring, wood trusses, and prefabricated wood buildings; paper, pulp or converted paper products, such as paper bags; printed materials, such as newspapers, books, periodicals, and greeting cards; and furniture and related articles, such as mattresses, windows blinds, cabinets, fixtures, furniture parts, and frames. 
Mass grading. The movement of earth by mechanical means to alter the gross topographic features, including elevation and slope, to prepare a site for final grading and construction of facilities, including buildings, parking lots, and roads. 
Mean sea level. The datum to which base flood elevations shown a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section in chapter 107, Resource Management, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Metes and bounds. A system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Miniature golf. Indoor or outdoor novelty golf game played on a miniature course. These establishments are distinct from golf courses and country clubs. 
Mining and extracting establishments. These establishments extract natural mineral solids (coal and ores), liquid minerals (crude petroleum), and gases (natural gas). Mining includes quarrying, well operations, beneficiating (e.g., crushing, screening, washing, and flotation), and other preparations customarily performed at the mine site, or as a part of mining activity. 
Mobile food services. Any motorized or non-motorized vehicle designed and used to portion, prepare and handle any foods not received and handed to customers in sealed packages. For the purpose of this definition, a "motorized vehicle" is further defined as an enclosed, road-worthy, wheel mounted vehicle that is not a tractor trailer. A "motorized vehicle" shall include the term "food truck." A "non-motorized vehicle" is further defined as any rubber-wheeled pushcart, and includes the term "food cart." 
Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the travelling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Modular home. A factory fabricated dwelling unit built in one or more sections designed to fit together on a permanent foundation but which usually does not originally have wheels for movement and which is constructed in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and which bears the seal of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Includes the term "industrialized housing." 
Movie theater. A specialized indoor theater for showing movies or motion pictures. 
Multi-family dwelling. See "Dwelling, multi-family." 
Multi-storied parking structure with ramps. A building or structure consisting of more than one level and used for the parking of vehicles. 
Museum, exhibition, or similar facility. Establishments that present displays of natural, historic, educational, or cultural interest such as: exhibitions and art galleries; planetariums; aquariums; and outdoor facilities without a major structure. 
N 
Natural features. Trees or other living vegetation, rocks, and other landscape features that were created by natural processes. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Natural vegetated area. An undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include the following: 
1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife. 
2)  Outdoor recreational activities including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting, education, scientific research and nature trails. 
3)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the previous nature of the land shall be minimized. 
4)  Limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the uses permissible in the area as provided in this definition. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
Net acre. An acre of land less the public improvements. 
New construction. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 14, 1998 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 14, 1998. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EDP to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Nonconforming lot. A lot of record whose area, width, depth or other dimensions were lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this UDC, but which, by such adoption or amendment, no longer meets the requirements of this UDC. Any parcel or lot which was subsequently annexed into the Canton city limits which does not meet the requirements of the particular zoning district shall also be considered to be nonconforming. Includes the term "nonconforming parcel." 
Nonconforming structure. Any building or structure whose size, dimensions, location on a property or other features were lawful prior to adoption or amendment of this UDC, but which, by such adoption or amendment, no longer meets or conforms to one or more such requirements of this UDC. 
Nonconforming use. Any use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the adoption or amendment to this UDC, but which, by reason of such adoption or amendment, is no longer a use or activity allowed by right or no longer meets or conforms to requirements of this UDC. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD). Of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Nuisance. Anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses. 
Nursing home. See "Skilled-nursing services." 
O 
Office building over storefronts. A type of mixed use development; a building that contains a variety of complementary and integrated uses, such as office and retail in a compact urban form. 
Office or bank building. A building constructed for office-type use, such as: finance and insurance establishments (including bank, credit union, or savings institution; credit and finance establishment; investment banking, securities, and brokerage establishment; insurance-related establishment; and, fund, trust, or other financial establishment); real estate and property management services; business, professional, scientific, and technical services (including legal services; accounting, tax, bookkeeping, payroll services; architectural, engineering, and related services; graphic, industrial, and interior design services; consulting services; research and development services; advertising, media and photography services); and, administrative services (including facilities support services; employment agency; business support services; collection agency; travel arrangement and reservation services; investigation and security services. Does not include "Services to buildings and dwellings." 
Office or bank building, with drive-through facility. An office building with drive-in windows to serve customers in automobiles. 
Office or store building with residence on top. A type of mixed use development; a building that contains a variety of complementary and integrated uses, such as office, retail and residential in a compact urban form. 
Official zoning map. The map that delineates the geographic location of the boundaries of zoning districts established in this UDC in relation to natural features, manmade features and/or property uses. 
Open space, landscaped. That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, parking, access and service areas, that is designed to enhance privacy and the amenity of the development by providing landscaping features, screening and buffering for the benefit of the occupants or those in neighboring areas, or a general appearance of openness. 
Open space. An area that is intended to provide light and air and is designed for either environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots, or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular travel. As used in the conservation subdivision/open space development section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection; activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
Operator. The party or parties that have (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outdoor display. An area located outside of a building used for display of merchandise or goods that are available for purchase from the business that is located on the premises. 
Outdoor recreational sports facility. A facility providing various outdoor sports for fitness or recreational sports teams, clubs or individual activities, where the facilities are oriented more toward participants than spectators, such as: athletic/sports fields (baseball, football, softball, soccer, track and field, etc.); skateboard parks, swimming pools, and court sports (basketball, handball, squash, tennis, volleyball, racquetball, etc.) Does not include equestrian facilities or archery or shooting ranges. 
Outdoor retail sales. Use of property for the display and sales of products primarily outside of a building, including but not limited to manufactured homes, burial monuments, swimming pools, portable storage sheds, playground equipment, etc. Typically a building/structure is located on-site in which the sale of the displayed items is finalized. 
Outdoor storage. The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any inventory, goods, junk, materials, merchandise, or commercial vehicles (includes raw, semi-finished and finished materials) in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overlay zone. A set of zoning requirements that is described in the ordinance text is mapped and is imposed in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. Developments within the overlay zone must conform to the requirements of both the district and the overlay zone or the more restrictive of the two. Includes the term "overlay district." 
Oversight committee. A committee comprised of the mayor, the community development director and the zoning administrator that is responsible for reviewing proposed community design plans in accordance with the design guidelines and standards section of chapter 103, Site Planning and Project Design Standards. 
Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
P 
Parcel. A piece or area of land formally described and recorded with block and lot numbers, by metes and bounds, by ownership, or in such a manner as to specifically identify the dimensions and/or boundaries. 
Park. An outdoor recreation area that may provide a variety of recreational opportunities including playground equipment and open space areas for passive recreation and picnicking. 
Parking area. An open, unoccupied space used or required for parking of vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or vehicular accessories are sold or no other business is conducted and no fees are charged. 
Parking lot. An open area used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold and fees charged, but no vehicles are to be equipped, repaired, rented or sold. 
Parking space. An area to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for a private motor vehicle. 
Parking, shared. The development and use of parking areas on two or more separate properties for joint use by the business on those properties. 
Pedestrian walkway. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, having a minimum of ten feet in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded. 
Perennial river. A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Perennial stream. A stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated by a solid blue line on a United States Geological Survey Quadrangle map. 
Performance bond/guarantee. Any security accepted by the City of Canton in the form of cash, certified check, performance bond, surety bond, or certificate of deposit endorsed to the City of Canton. Includes the term "maintenance guarantee." 
Performance theater. An indoor facility with fixed seats that are arranged on a sloped or stepped floor and are oriented toward a performance stage. Includes the term "concert hall." 
Perimeter. The boundaries or borders of a lot, tract, or parcel of land. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this UDC. 
Permit holder. The individual, partnership, or corporation who has received an approved permit. 
Permitted use. A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal care home. See "Assisted-living services." 
Personal services. Establishments providing non-medical services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel. These establishments include: barber and beauty shops; tailor and dressmaker shops; shoe repair; coin-operated laundromats; dry cleaning pick-up stores; massage therapy services that are licensed in accordance with the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act; locksmiths; clothing rental stores; and tanning salons that are registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 38. 
Personal services—Restricted. Personal services that may tend to have a potentially offensive effect upon surrounding areas and which may need to be dispersed to minimize their adverse impacts. Examples of these services include: bail bonds, check cashing and cash advancing businesses; title loan businesses; fortune tellers, psychics, and palm, tarot and card readers; tattoo and body piercing services licensed in accordance with the North Georgia Health District 1-2, Rules and Regulations of Body Art Studios and Tattoo/Body Piercing Artists; and pawn shops. 
Pervious surface. All that area of land that can be landscaped or planted, allows natural passage through by water, and is not covered by manmade materials or structures such as buildings or paving. 
Pet or pet supply store. An establishment that sells pets, pet foods, and other pet supplies. Does not include the sale of animals for farming purposes. 
Phase or phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Phasing. As used in the mass grading and clearing section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean the clearing or grading a parcel of land in distinct phases with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing or grading of the next. 
Plans. As used in chapters 108 and 111 this UDC, those drawings that show the character and scope of work and shall include all drawings identified in the contract documents. 
Planning commission. The Canton Planning Commission as established in this UDC. 
Planned development. An area of a minimum contiguous size that allows a combination of uses and is planned and developed in accordance with an approved master plan. 
Planned shopping center. A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property and related in its location, size and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. Includes the term "commercial shopping center." 
Plat. A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets; a map of a subdivision or site plan. 
Plat, final. The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site plan which is presented to the proper review authority for final approval. 
Plat, preliminary. A preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the proper review authority for consideration and preliminary approval. 
Pollutant. A nontoxic substance that is introduced into the potable water supply would be objectionable but would not create a health hazard. 
Pollution susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Each significant recharge area shown on Hydrologic Atlas 18 is classified on Hydrologic Atlas 20 as high, medium, or low, and these classifications are relevant in this UDC. 
Postal services. Establishments that operate the national postal service. Establishments that perform one or more postal services, such as sorting, routing, and delivery on a contract basis (except the bulk transportation of mail), are included in this definition. 
Premises. A lot together with all buildings and structures existing thereon. 
Present value. The current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
Principal building. A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
Principal use. The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the term shall mean a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location; with regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the following definition shall apply: Site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Canton, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
Properly designed. As used in the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Property owner. That person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share. That portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Protected mountain area. All land area 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level, that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally and includes crests, summits and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher. 
Protected river. Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. 
Protection area or stream protection area. With respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Public facilities. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the term shall mean: 
1)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
2)  Public safety facilities, including police and fire protection facilities; and 
3)  Road improvements. 
Public improvements. Any drainage, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvements or other facility for which local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. All such improvements shall be properly bonded. 
Public notice. The advertisement of a public hearing in a paper of general circulation in the area, and through other media sources, indicating the time, place and nature of the public hearing. 
Public or private property. As used in the litter control section of chapter 107, Resource Management, shall mean the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
Public safety-related facility. A facility used exclusively for public safety purposes by any department or branch of government, such as: fire and rescue stations; police stations; and emergency operation centers. 
Public use. Any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, State of Georgia, Cherokee County or other county, the City of Canton or other municipality, or any authorized, agency, board or commission of the above governments, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: government administrative buildings; police and fire stations; public health facilities and hospitals; public works camps; parks and community centers; public roads and streets; airports; water and sanitary sewerage storage; intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities; public housing facilities; jails and correctional centers. 
Public water supply. The City of Canton Water System. 
Q 
Quadrangle map. A one-to-twenty-four thousand (1:24,000), 7.5 minute topographic map published by the United States Geological Survey. 
Quadrant. The most recently published U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute topographic map prepared at a scale of one-to-twenty-four thousand (1:24,000). 
R 
Racetrack. A circuit or course used for vehicular sports including automobile racing, dirt racing, motorcycle racing, and other cross country type events. 
Railroad facility (excluding train station). A railroad switching facility, railroad shed, or other support structures. 
Recharge area. Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
1)  Built on a single chassis; 
2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Reduced-pressure zone backflow-prevention assembly (RPZ). A device that consists of two springloaded independently acting check valves with an intermediate, reduced pressure zone draining to the atmosphere by an independently acting relief valve. The unit operates on the principle that water will not flow from a zone of lower pressure to a zone of higher pressure. 
Recyclable material wholesaler. An establishment engaged in the merchant wholesale distribution of automotive scrap, industrial scrap, and other recyclable materials. These establishments include auto wreckers engaged in dismantling motor vehicles for the purpose of wholesaling scrap. 
Regulated activity. Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Religious facility. Church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other facility that is designed for worship, ceremonies, and rituals pertaining to a particular system of beliefs. 
Repetitive loss. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Replacement density factor (RDF). The minimum number of tree density units which must be achieved on a property after calculating tree density units for existing trees (EDF) which will remain on site to be protected during construction. 
Reservoir boundary. The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Restaurant, fast food. A restaurant building where food or drink are served for consumption, either on or off the premises, by order from or service to persons either over an interior counter, outside the structure or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window, or by delivery. 
Restaurant, with drive-through facility. A restaurant building that serves food for customers for consumption on or off premises and that has drive-in windows to service customers in automobiles. 
Restaurant, without drive-through facility. A restaurant building that serves food for customers for consumption on or off premises. 
Retail sales—Durable goods. Establishments engaged in a sales and service use in which household or personal items are rented or sold. These items are generally smaller than those offered by "Retail sales — Heavy consumer goods" establishments. Examples of "Retail sales — Durable goods" establishments include: computer and software stores; camera and photographic supplies stores; cellular telephone stores; clothing, jewelry, luggage and shoe stores; sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments stores; and, books, magazines, and music and stationary stores. 
Retail sales — Heavy consumer goods. Establishments engaged in a heavy sales and service use in which large household items are rented or sold, and home delivery by truck may be required. Examples include: furniture or home furnishing store; hardware store or home center; lawn and garden supply store; and electronics and appliances stores. These establishments may provide outdoor areas to conduct business where there is a service or retail need, and outdoor sales or storage areas are an integral part of the use. 
Retail sales — Other consumer goods. Establishments that sell merchandise for household and personal use (except groceries or health items) not included in the definitions for "Retail sales — Heavy consumer goods" and "Retail sales — Durable consumer goods." Examples of these establishments are florists, art stores, and tobacco stores. 
Rezoning. An amendment to or a change in the official zoning map. 
Right-of-way. That public or private area, distinguished from an easement, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles and utilities. 
Riparian. Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Riverbank. The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor. All land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. Because stream channels move due to natural processes, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purpose of the river corridor protection section in chapter 107, Resource Management, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the time of adoption of the river corridor protection plan. Any shift in the location after that time will require a revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of comprehensive plan review by the state department of community affairs. 
River corridor protection plan. That part of the local comprehensive plan which deals with the river corridor protection requirements specified in this article. 
Road, private. (See also "Right-of-way" and "Street.") A way open to vehicular ingress and egress established as a separate tract for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties. This definition shall not apply to driveways. 
Road, public. (See also "Right-of-way" and "Street.") All public property reserved or dedicated for street traffic. 
Rooftop parking facility. A parking area on the roof of a building, typically a commercial building or mixed use development. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rooming and boarding. Temporary accommodations that serve a specific group or membership, such as a dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or workers' camp and that may offer housekeeping, meals, and laundry services. 
S 
Satellite dish antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbital based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVRO's (television reception only satellite dish antennas), and satellite microwave antennas. 
Scenic corridor. Those roadways that have a view of unusual natural significance in the city. 
Scenic easement. An easement, the purpose of which is to limit development in order to preserve a view or scenic area. 
Screen. A method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fence, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation or other means. 
Seating capacity. The actual seating capacity of an area based upon the number of seats or one seat per 18 inches of bench or pew length. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sediment basin. A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at suitable locations to retain sediment. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Sensitive natural areas. Any area, as identified by the state department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
1)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
2)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
3)  Significant land forms, hydro forms or geological features; or 
4)  Other areas so designated by the state department of natural resources and which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Service area. As used in chapter 113, Development Impact Fees, the term shall mean a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
Services to buildings and dwellings. Establishments that primarily provide services associated with building maintenance and that may require use of a vehicle fleet. Examples of these establishments include pest control and extermination services; janitorial services for building and transportation equipment interiors, as well as windows; landscaping services; carpet and upholstery cleaning; and packing, crating and convention trade show services, which package client owned materials and organize, promote, and manage events such as business and trade shows, conventions, conferences, and meetings. 

Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a street, alley, or the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear, or side lines of a building located on that lot. As used in the stream buffer section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean the area established by the land development requirements subsection extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. As used in the river corridor section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean the measurement for buffer areas which shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbank, usually marked by a break in the slope. 
Front setback. See "Yard, front." 
Rear setback. See "Yard, rear." 
Side setback. See "Yard, side." 
Sexually-oriented business (also known as "adult-oriented business"). Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel/motel, adult modeling studio, adult theater; any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct sells or distributes or offers for sale or distribution sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as a regular and substantial course of conduct when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1)  The area devoted to adult merchandise and/or sexually oriented materials exceeds more than 20 percent of the total display or floor space area open to the public; 
2)  The business establishment or concern presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas at least four times in any one month; 
3)  The regular and substantial course of conduct of the business consists of or involves the sale, trade, display, or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
The following terms and phrases are defined for the purposes of the additional requirements for allowed uses section (sexually oriented businesses subsection) in chapter 104, Standards for Specific Uses: 
Adult arcade. Any business establishment or concern containing one or more coin or slug operated or manually or electronically controlled still or motion picture projectors, video machines, projector or similar image-producing devices, that are maintained to display images to an individual or group of individuals when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store. Any establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented merchandise, sexually oriented material, books, periodicals, magazines, or other printed materials, or photographs, drawings, sculptures, films, motion pictures, videos, discs, cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas (see "Adult-oriented business" for definition of regular and substantial course of conduct). 
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant, or similar business establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, computer generated images, videos, discs, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dance studio. Any business establishment or concern which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel/motel. A hotel, motel, or other similar business establishment or concern offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videos, discs, slides, other photographic reproductions, or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 12-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than once in a 24-hour period. 
Adult modeling studio. Any business or premises where there is furnished, provided, or procured, a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas where the model(s) is being observed or viewed by any person for the purpose of being sketched, photographed, painted, drawn, sculpted, filmed, or videotaped or otherwise depicted for a fee, compensation, gratuity, or other thing of value as consideration for the right or opportunity to so observe the model(s) or to remain on the premises. "Adult modeling studio" does not include any live art class or any studio or classroom which is operated buy any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree in compliance with standards set by the state board of education or the state board of regents. 
Adult theater. A business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents live entertainment performances, motion pictures, videos, computer generated images, slide photographs, or other pictures or visual or audio representations or reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult-oriented business operator. A person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. This term shall hereinafter be referred to as "operator." 
Applicant. A person who is required to file an application for a permit under this UDC, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an Adult-Oriented Business. 
Bar. Any commercial establishment licensed by the City of Canton and the State of Georgia to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. Shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by the phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character or theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina (1981) Cal.App.3d 151. 
Employ, employee, and employment. Describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Entertainer. Any person who dances, models, entertains, and/or performs specified sexual activities or displays specified areas in an adult-oriented business. 
Establishment of an adult-oriented business. Shall mean and include any of the following: The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business; the conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein; the addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or the relocation of any adult-oriented business. 
Figure model. Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire, or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted. 
Hearing officer. An independent attorney licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Influential interest. Means any of the following: 
a.  The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business; or 
b.  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Live art class. Any premises on which all of the following occur: There is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing, or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical areas; instruction is offered in a series of at least two classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and pre-registration is required at least 24 hours in advance of participation in the class. 
Nudity or a state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the aerola. 
Operate an adult-oriented business. The supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business. 
Permitee. The person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
Sexual device shop. A commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in the term "sexual device shop" shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall the term "sexual device shop" be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to their premises by reason of age. 
School. Any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the Georgia Board of Education (Georgia Education Code) and maintained in compliance with the standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education or an institution of higher education including a community or junior college, vocational/technical college, college, or university. 
Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center. Any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble, or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Sexually oriented material. Any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, disc, computer generated image, or other written, oral, or visual representation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Sexually oriented merchandise. Sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia, including but not limited to dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery or electrically operated vaginas or penises, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Specified anatomical areas. Shall mean and include any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human: (1) genitals or pubic region; (2) buttocks; and/or (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
c.  Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in Subparagraphs a. or b., above. 
Specified sexual activities. Shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other cover: 
a.  The relocation of any adult-oriented business; 
b.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship, ant of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: Analingus, bestiality, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pdeerastuy, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; 
c.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
d.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
e.  Fondling, or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; 
f.  Masochism, erotic, or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; 
g.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal, or anal irrigation; or 
h.  The presence of any person who performs, or appears in a state of nudity or semi nude. 
Shooting range. See "Archery or shooting range." 
Shrub. Prostrate or upright woody plants, either evergreen or deciduous with a mature height usually less than ten feet. 
Sidewalk café. An area adjacent to and directly in front of a street-level eating or drinking establishment located within the sidewalk area of the public right-of-way exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation. The encroachment area of a sidewalk cafe may be separated from the remainder of the sidewalk by railings, fencing, or landscaping planter boxes or a combination thereof. 
Sidewalk. A paved surface or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used for pedestrian traffic and/or movement. 
Sign. Any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. 
The following terms and phrases are defined for the purposes of the signs section in chapter 103, Site Planning and Project Design Standards: 
A-frame sign. Any single or double faced sign which may readily be moved from place to place, and which is intended to be used on a sidewalk or pedestrian way. Includes the term "sandwich board sign." 
Abandoned sign. Any permanent sign that is located on property which becomes vacant or is unoccupied for a period of 60 days or more, or any temporary sign that pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies. 
Accessory sign. A sign made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or projections and which may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, or any political or non-political message, except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, or sexual conduct, nor can they display nudity as defined in this chapter, nor advertise any activity illegal under the laws of Georgia or the United States. 
Advertising bench. A sign painted on, located on, or attached to any part of the surface of a bench, seat, or chair placed on or adjacent to a public place or roadway. 
Animated sign. Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 

Awning sign. Any sign that is part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. Includes the term "canopy sign." 
Banner. A sign either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted so as to allow movement caused by the atmosphere. Flags of governmental jurisdictions are not banners. 
Changeable copy. Letters, numerals, or other copy that may be manually or mechanically affixed to and/or removed from a sign. Examples of manual changeable copy include boards with changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels. Mechanical changeable copy shall mean an electronic sign. 
Directional sign. A sign dedicated to providing traffic direction such as enter, exit, drive through, etc. 
Double-faced sign. A sign which has two display areas against each other, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Electronic sign. A sign whose message may be changed at intervals by computer controller, microprocessor controller or by remote control, and whose message is displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma or other similar type of panels or screens. 
Freestanding sign. A sign supported by any structure or support placed in or anchored in the ground and not attached to any building or structure. 
Ground sign. See "Monument sign." 
Historic sign. Any sign designated as historic by the City of Canton Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with the criteria of an adopted historic preservation ordinance. Extensions, additions or embellishments are not considered part of a historic sign. 
Illuminated sign, external. A sign illuminated by an external light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes or alternates. 
Illuminated sign, internal. A sign illuminated by an internal light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes or alternates. 
Inflatable sign. Any sign inflated or supported internally by wind, air, or pneumatic noncombustible pressure. 
LCD sign. An electronically controlled sign utilizing liquid crystal diodes to form some or all of the sign message. 
LED sign. An electronically controlled sign utilizing light-emitting diodes to form some or all of the sign message. 
Official flag. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground and not attached to or part of or supported by a building and designed in such a manner that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting solid base which is flush with the ground. The base shall be at least as wide as the sign. 
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind as a means of attracting attention. Flags of governmental jurisdictions are not pennants. Includes the term "streamer." 
Permanent sign. Any sign that is not temporary. 
Pole or pylon sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, pylon, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
Portable sign. Any sign whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. Even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a portable sign. In addition, the following shall be deemed a portable sign: a sign mounted or painted upon a parked vehicle that is positioned for the primary purpose of acting as a sign exposed to the public and is not in use in the ordinary course of carrying out its transportation function. 
Projecting sign. A double faced sign suspended from an awning or similar type structure; or affixed to a bracket-mount to the building or structure. Includes the term "swinging sign." 
Real estate sign. A temporary sign erected by the owner, or agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease, or sale. 
Roof sign. A sign erected upon or above a roof structure and wholly or partially supported by the roof. "Roof signs" shall also constitute any signage placed upon sloped building fascia intended to appear as or actually be roof elements of the building. 
Sign area. The area within a continuous perimeter of a sign which encloses the limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 

Sign face. The message-carrying portion of the sign that can be used to display content, including any area that can display or does display words, pictures or other communicative elements of the sign, including the background color. 
Swinging sign. See "Projecting sign." 
Temporary sign. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or other permanent structure and designed to be displayed for a limited time. 

Tri-vision sign. A sign designed with a series of triangular slats or columns that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. 
Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. Includes the term "painted sign." 
Weekend directional sign. A temporary sign erected for the duration of a specific, time-limited weekend place or event. 
Window sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass, either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the building. Yard sale sign. A temporary sign erected by the owner of the property on which the sale is conducted. 
Significant recharge areas. Those areas mapped by the Georgia DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the City of Canton. Each significant recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on Hydrologic Atlas 20. 
Silt. Finely divided particles of soil or rock, often carried in cloudy suspension in water and eventually deposited as sediment. 
Single-family detached unit. A standard single-family residential building; a detached building containing one dwelling unit. A modular home shall be considered a single-family detached unit. 
Site density factor (SDF). The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property after development. (Twenty units per acre, exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer and any trees required to be preserved or planted in a zoning buffer.) 
Site. Any tract, lot, or parcel or land in combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land which are in one ownership or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project; the parcel of land being development, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located; all contiguous land and bodies of water in one ownership, graded or proposed for grading or development as a unit, although not necessarily at one time; regarding historic properties, a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Site plan. A document or group of documents containing sketches, text, drawings, maps, photographs, and other material intended to present and explain certain elements of a proposed development, including physical design, siting of buildings and structures, interior vehicular and pedestrian access, the provision of improvements, and the interrelationship of these elements. 
Skilled-nursing services. Twenty-four-hour skilled nursing care that is provided in nursing homes and convalescent hospitals for the elderly. 
Slope. An inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. In the hillside and ridgeline section of chapter 107, Resource Management, slopes are generally expressed as a percentage; percentage of slope refers to a given rise in elevation over a given run in distance. A 50 percent slope, for example, refers to a 100-foot rise in elevation over a distance of 200 feet. A 50 percent slope is expressed in engineering terms as a two-to-one (2:1) slope. 
Social club, civic or fraternal. Establishments primarily engaged in promoting the civic and social interests of their members. Establishments may operate bars and restaurants for their members. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Solid waste landfill facility. A landfill used for the disposal of nonhazardous solid waste. These may locally collect or haul nonhazardous waste materials along with landfill operation. These establishments also manage recycling and resource recovery facilities that operate in conjunction with landfills. 
Sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments stores. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Durable goods" that offers the following items: sporting goods (specialized clothing, equipment and accessories for sport and recreational activities), such as bicycles and bicycle parts, camping equipment, exercise and fitness equipment, athletic uniforms, specialty sports footwear, and similar equipment and accessories; toys, games, and hobby and craft supplies; or musical instruments and related supplies and services, including music instruction and instrument rental or repair. 
Sports stadium or arena. An enclosed area for the presentation of sports events and entertainment such as circuses, ice shows, indoor soccer, hockey games, horse shows, and music concerts. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Stabilized. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice of gravity. 
Standard design specifications. Standards and specifications prepared by the city engineer and adopted by the mayor and council shall apply to the physical improvements required to be provided and installed by a subdivider in a subdivision. 
Start of construction. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any UDC requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Statement of intent. A document that accompanies the master plan application which describes, in detail, the type of development the master plan includes. 
Storage facility. Rental mini-warehouses and self-storage units, which provide space (i.e., rooms, compartments, lockers, or containers) where clients store and retrieve goods. 
Stormwater utility. Definitions related to the City of Canton's Stormwater Utility (see chapter 109, Design Standards: Streets and Stormwater Systems) are: 
Credit. A conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owners, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
Customers. All persons, properties, and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public storm water management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater storm water systems, facilities and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Detached dwelling unit. Developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associates with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings or the presence of a commercial impervious area such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar non-residential uses. Detached dwelling units shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple-unit residential properties. 
Developed land. Property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of impervious surfaces as defined below and in the stormwater utility section of chapter 109 of this UDC. 
Duplexes. Developed land containing two (duplex) attached residential dwelling units located on one or more parcels of land. 
Impervious runoff unit (IU) or impervious area. The unit of impervious coverage of detached dwelling units properties in the City of Canton as determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties or classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other properties. Single-family residential (SFR) shall be one impervious runoff unit up to 3,999 square feet of impervious area, with a cap of two units. Non-single-family residential (NSFR) shall be based on total square feet of impervious area for the impervious runoff unit. 
Impervious area rate (IR). The rate in U.S. dollars as determined and levied by the city, and used as a basis for determining stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties or classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other properties. This rate shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council of the City of Canton. 
Hydrologic response. The manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent upon several factors including but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions, and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surfaces. Those surfaces which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Multiple dwelling units residential properties. Developed land whereon three or more attached residential dwelling units are located and shall include, but are not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers and other structures in which two or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple dwelling unit properties shall be treated as other developed lands. 
Other developed land. The term shall mean, but shall not be limited to, multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home, mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings, and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants. 
Service charges. The stormwater management service charge or charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the City of Canton stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. Service charges will be based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of services and facilities, and may include but are not necessarily limited to the amount of impervious area and gross area on each parcel of developed land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges for development plan review, inspection or development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater services above those normally provided by the city. 
Single-family residential (SFR). A developed property that contains one residential dwelling unit designated for that use. A SFR property shall be classified as residential and shall not be multi-family residential (MFR), commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, religious, municipal, or recreational. 
Non-single-family residential (NSFR). A developed property that contains structures utilized for purposes other than residential dwelling unit. Examples of NSFR properties include those classified as MFR, commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, religious, municipal, and recreational. 
Stormwater management system. The issues of drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs through improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the collection, retention, detention, and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage. 
Undeveloped land. Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 

Story. That portion of a building compromised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. The first floor of a two or multistory building shall be deemed the story that has: a) no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy or b) a floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy but has at least one-half of its height on one side below grade (see also "Basement"). Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively. 
Story, half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
Stream. Any stream, beginning at: 
1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; 
2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the local permitting authority may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream, perennial. See "Perennial stream." 
Stream, trout. See "Trout streams." 
Stream bank. The sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream buffer. A natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by the stream buffer protection section in chapter 107, Resource Management) lying adjacent to the stream. 
Stream channel. The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. Street. A right-of-way for vehicular traffic referred to as a street, highway parkway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place or otherwise. As used in this UDC, includes the terms "road" and "roadway." 
Specific functional classifications of streets, from highest to lowest, are: 
1)  Street, freeway. A multi-lane, limited access street designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic, with control over access to abutting property. 
2)  Street, arterial. A street designed for rapid, continuous movement of all types of traffic but with less control over the access points from streets and adjacent property than freeways. 
3)  Street, collector. Conducts and distributes traffic between local streets and higher-order streets (arterials and freeways). Its function is to promote free traffic flow and access to individual properties. On-street parking should be limited. 
4)  Street, local. The lowest order street, providing frontage for access to private lots. Designed to carry traffic at slowest speed. Local streets include residential 1 and 2 and non-residential streets. 
Streetscape theme. A planting strip along a roadway frontage incorporating some or all aspects of the following: connecting sidewalks, fences, trees, jogging trails, and bike paths. 
Stripping. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of topsoil. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Structure, historic. See "Historic structure." 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. Includes the term "Erosion and sedimentation control." 
Structural panel. As used in the design guidelines and standards section of chapter 103, Site Planning and Project Design Standards, structural panels are insulated metal wall panels for exterior use for metal building construction. 
Subdivider. Any person, corporation or duly authorized agent, planner, designer, land surveyor, landscape architect, architect or engineer, who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivisions and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land area subdivided. 
Subdivision, major. A subdivision of land which results in the creation of five or more lots. 
Subdivision, minor. A subdivision of land which results in the creation of two to four lots and does not result in the creation of any public or private streets. 
Subdivision, non-residential. A subdivision developed in an office, commercial or industrial zoning district, where the intended use is primarily non-residential. 
Subdivision, residential. A subdivision developed in a residential, PD-mixed use or PD-traditional neighborhood development zoning district, where the intended use is primarily residential. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes "Repetitive loss." 
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
System improvement costs. Costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements. Capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
T 
Taxi and limousine service. An establishments that provides passenger transportation by automobile or van, not over regular routes or regular schedules. Taxicab owner/operators, taxicab fleet operators, and taxicab organizations are included. Also included are limousine and luxury sedan establishments, which may provide an array of specialty and luxury passenger transportation services. 
Technical, trade, and other specialty schools. Schools that offer vocational and technical training in a variety of technical subjects and trades, such as: barbering, hair styling or cosmetic arts; business management; computer training; driving education; fine and performing arts education; flight training; and sports and recreation education. The training often leads to job-specific certification. 
Temporary use. A prospective use, intended for limited duration, to be located in a zoning district not permitting such use, and not continuing a nonconforming use or building. 
Timber. Harvestable trees; wooded areas. 
Tobacco or tobacconist establishment. An establishment classified as "Retail sales — Other consumer goods" that sells cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, tobacco pipes, and other tobacco supplies. 
Towing and other road and ground services. Establishments that tow light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance. These establishments may provide incidental services, such as storage and emergency road repair services. 
Townhouse. See "Dwelling, townhouse." 
Trail. A cleared way for pedestrians, bicycles, and/or equestrians that may or may not be improved. 
Train station. Any premises for the loading and unloading of passengers, as well as accessory uses such as ticket purchase facilities and restrooms. 
Transfer of development rights. The conveyance of development rights by deed, easement, or other legal instrument authorized by local law to another parcel of land and the recording of that conveyance. 
Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which normally obtains a trunk diameter of at least twp inches and a height of at least ten feet, and typically has a main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree, canopy. Those tress that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Tree, hardwood. Any tree that is not coniferous (cone-bearing). 
Tree, overstory. Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Tree, shade. Typically means a deciduous overstory tree planted primarily for its height crown of foliage or overhead canopy. 
Tree, softwood. Any coniferous (cone-bearing) tree. This definition is based on the colloquialism and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Tree, specimen. Any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, species or historic relevance as established by this UDC. 
Tree, street. A tree which is located within the public right-of-way. 
Tree, understory. Those trees that grow beneath the overstory and will generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet. 
Tree density standard. The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property after development. 
Tree density unit. A credit assigned to a tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in accordance with tables contained in the site planning and project design standards chapter of this UDC. 
Tree diameter. The cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at four and one-half feet above the ground. If the tree has more than one trunk, only the largest trunk shall be used to establish the diameter for the tree. 
Tree protection area. Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be retained in order to comply with the requirements of the site planning and project design standards chapter of this UDC. The tree protection areas shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the drip line of the tree; plus any additional area encompassing the critical root zone of a tree or group of trees collectively. 
Tree protection plan. A plan that identifies tree protection areas, existing trees to be retained and proposed trees to be planted on a property to meet minimum requirements, as well as, methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree protection zone for Interstate 575. That area which runs parallel along Highway 575 which has a maximum width of 75 feet and a minimum (where designated) of 25 feet and is established as an undisturbed buffer to further enhance the parkway image as created along the Highway 575 corridor. 
Tree protection zone. All lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel required to remain in open space, or all areas required as landscaping strips or buffers according to the site planning and project design standards chapter of this UDC, conditions of zoning approval, conditions to master plan approval, or provisions of this UDC or other related ordinances. 
Tree removal. Any act which causes a tree to die within three years after commission of the act, including, but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system or trunk as a result of: 
1)  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
2)  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
3)  Soil compaction; 
4)  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four inches of soil; 
5)  Pruning judged to be excessive by the city LA or not in accordance with the standards set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); 
6)  Paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; and 
7)  Application of herbicides or defoliates to any trees without first obtaining a permit. 
Tree save area. An area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Tree thinning. Selective cutting or thinning of trees for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construed as clear cutting. 
Tri-plex. See "Dwelling, tri-plex." 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Truck, trailer, RV rental. Establishments that rent or lease trucks, truck tractors or buses, semi-trailers, utility trailers, or RVs (recreational vehicles). Drivers or operators are not provided. 
Truck and freight transportation services. Establishments that provide over-the-road transportation of cargo using motor vehicles, such as trucks and tractor trailers. 
U 
Underground parking structure with ramps. A structure used for the parking of vehicles that is constructed underground, typically located beneath a multi-storied parking structure, a commercial building, a mixed-use development, or multi-family dwellings. 
Unit of development. As used in the development impact fees chapter of this UDC, the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
Unused or excess impact fee. Any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of the development impact fees chapter of this UDC. 
Utility substation. An assembly of equipment in an electric power system through which electrical energy is passed for transmission, distribution, interconnection, transformation, conversion, or switching. 
Utilities. Public and private services provided to residential and non-residential subdivisions. These services for the purposes of the UDC chapters containing the design standards for streets and stormwater systems, water systems, and sewer systems include: Roads, stormwater systems, water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. As used in the river corridor section and the water supply watershed protection section of chapter 107, Resource Management, utilities are public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
V 
Vacuum breaker. A general term applied to a backsiphonage prevention device that introduces air into the potable water system. 
Vacuum breaker (atmospheric type). A vacuum breaker designed for use under flow conditions only, not to exceed 24 consecutive hours, and where it will be subject to no static pressure and no back pressure. 
Vacuum breaker (hose type). A vacuum breaker designed for hose connections only. It is not approved for continuous pressure, static or flowing. 
Vacuum breaker (pressure type). A vacuum breaker designed to operate under continuous pressure, static or flowing, but no backpressure. 
Variance. A method of alleviating unnecessary hardship. A dispensation, minimum relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulation as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. A variance shall in no way make null the standard design specifications or zoning regulations of this UDC. 
Vegetation. Shall grasses, legumes, ground cover, trees, and shrubs. 
Vegetation, native. Any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the state. Plant species which have been introduced to a region by man are not native vegetation. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vehicle rental. An establishment that rents or leases passenger vehicles without drivers. 
Vehicle and marine craft sales. Establishments that sell new or used motor vehicles and marine craft, including: Compact automobiles and light trucks (sold at car dealerships); buses, recreational vehicles (RVs), manufactured homes, and trucks not sold at car dealerships; motorcycles, motor scooters, motor bikes, mopeds, and off-road terrain vehicles (ATV's); boats, personal watercraft, outboard motors, and boat trailers. These establishments may have showrooms or open lots for selling vehicles and may provide repair and maintenance services. 
Veterinary services. Establishments with licensed practitioners of veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for animals; also included are establishments that provide testing services for licensed veterinary practitioners. 
Violation. The failure of a structure, building, site or other development to comply with this UDC. As used in the floodplain management/flood damage prevention section of chapter 107, Resource Management, the term shall mean a structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in the section is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
W 
Water supply reservoir. A governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed. The area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed, small. A watershed that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed protection map. A map prepared for the local jurisdiction which identifies water supply watersheds and water supply reservoirs, which are the subject of this UDC. The watershed protection map also identifies public water supply intake points and perennial streams within the watershed that are upstream of water supply intake points or water supply reservoirs, and the seven-mile radius line from each water intake or water supply reservoir boundary. 
Watershed. The land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Warehouse storage (indoor, warehouse products). Establishments that operate warehouse and storage facilities for general merchandise, refrigerated goods, and other warehouse products. These establishments provide the facilities to store goods but do not sell the goods they handle. They may also provide a range of services related to the distribution of goods, such as labeling, breaking bulk, inventory control and management, light assembly, order entry and fulfillment, packaging, pick and pack, price marking and ticketing, and transportation arrangement. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wetlands, jurisdictional. See "Jurisdictional wetlands." 
Wholesale trade establishment—Durable goods. A wholesale trade establishment that sells or arranges the purchase or sale of capital or durable goods to other businesses. These establishments include wholesale products, such as motor vehicles, furniture, construction materials, machinery and equipment (including household-type appliances), metals and minerals (except petroleum), sporting goods, toys and hobby goods, recyclable materials, and parts. Durable goods generally have life expectancy of at least three years. 
Wholesale trade establishment—Nondurable goods. A wholesale trade establishment that sells or arranges the purchase or sale of nondurable goods to other businesses. These establishments include wholesale products, such as paper products, chemicals, drugs, textiles, apparel, footwear, groceries, farm products, petroleum products, alcoholic beverages, books, magazines, newspapers, flowers, and tobacco products. Nondurable goods generally have a life expectancy of less than three years. 
Wholesale trade establishment. An establishment that either sell s or arranges the purchase of goods to other businesses and normally operates from a warehouse or office building. 
Wireless telecommunications facility. A facility for the provision of personal wireless service. Facilities may include antenna, towers, and related equipment and network components (transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and accessory equipment), as well as DAS and small-cell facilities used for the provision of personal wireless services. Includes the term "personal wireless service facility." 
The following terms and phrases are defined for the purposes of the wireless telecommunications facilities section of chapter 104: 
Accessory equipment. Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility or wireless support structure and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets, and storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures. 
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits, receives or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communication services. 
Base station . A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this Glossary or any equipment associated with a tower. 
1)  The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
2)  The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks). 
3)  The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City of Canton under the provisions of chapter 104 of this UDC, supports or houses equipment described under 1) and 2) of this definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. 
4)  The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City of Canton under the provisions of chapter 104 of this UDC, does not support or house equipment described under 1) and 2) of this definition. 
Camouflage ( or stealth or stealth technology). Disguising a tower or wireless telecommunications facility so as to make it less visually obtrusive and not recognizable to the average person as a wireless telecommunications facility. 
Collocation or collocate. The placement or installation of new wireless facilities on previously approved and constructed wireless support structures, including monopoles and towers, both self-supporting and guyed, in a manner that negates the need to construct a new freestanding wireless support structure. Such term includes the placement of accessory equipment within an existing equipment compound. 
Commercial impracticability or commercially impracticable. The inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce; the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a financial return on investment or profit deemed satisfactory by an applicant may be considered, but, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be "commercial impracticable" and shall not in and of itself render an act or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable." 
Distributive antenna system (DAS) . A technology using an antenna combining technology allowing for multiple carriers or wireless service providers to use the same set of antennas. 
Eligible support structure. 1) Any base station as defined in this glossary or 2) any tower built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. Eligible support structures are further defined as existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City of Canton under chapter 104 of this UDC. 
Equipment compound. An area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless support structure within which accessory equipment is located. 
Height. When referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device. 
Modification or modify. The improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound, provided such improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement does not: i) increase the overall height or width of the wireless support structure to which the wireless facilities are to be attached or ii) increase the dimensions of the equipment compound initially approved by the city. 
Need. Anything that is technically required for the wireless service to be provided primarily and essentially within the City of Canton and creates the least physical and visual impact. This does not necessarily mean the internal design standards of the applicant, as companies' standards can vary greatly and normally reflect preferences. Rather, need relates to the ability of the user-equipment to function as designed. 
Personal wireless services (PWS) or personal telecommunications service (PTS). Shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
Repairs and maintenance. The replacement or repair of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the visible appearance of the facility as originally permitted. 
Registry. Any official list, record, or register maintained by a local governing authority of wireless facilities, equipment compounds, or wireless support structures. 
Stealth or stealth technology. See "Camouflage." 
Substantial change. A modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an "eligible support structure" as defined in this glossary if it meets any of the following criteria: 
1)  For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater; (Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act.) 
2)  For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet; 
3)  For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
4)  It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
5)  It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or 
6)  It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections 1) through 4) of this definition. 
Telecommunications. The transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
Transmission equipment. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
Utility. Any person, corporation, municipality, county, or other entity, or department thereof or entity related or subordinate thereto, providing retail or wholesale electric, data, cable, or telecommunications services. 
Wireless support structure. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or suitable existing or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. Includes the term "tower." 
Woodlands, existing. Tree and shrubs of a number, size and species that accomplish the same general function as new plantings. 
Work. As used in the UDC chapters containing the design standards for water and sewer systems, means labor, material, equipment, skills, transportation, tools, machinery, and other equipment and things useful and necessary to complete the contract. 
X 
Y 
Yard. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, corner. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and a public right-of-way or private street and extending from front yard setback to the rear yard setback. 
Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the minimum front building line setback. Where a corner lot exists, the front yard shall be determined by that portion of the lot with the shortest road frontage. 
Yard, rear. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and sideline of the lot and extending from the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the sidelines of the lot. 
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 


Yard sale. The sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined in this definition, by a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. Includes the terms "garage sales," "carport sales," and similar types of sales or events. 
Z 
Zero lot line. The location of a freestanding building on a lot in such a manner that one building side will have no side building setback and rests directly on a side lot line. 
Zoning buffer. A buffer, as required by this UDC or as a condition of zoning, special exception, or variance approval for a specific property. 
Zoning. A police power measure in which the community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted uses, and in some cases conditional uses, are established as well as regulations governing lot size, bulk, height and other development requirements. 
Zoning regulations. Adopted procedures and zones or districts within the City of Canton which regulate the uses and development standards of property within such zones or districts. The term also includes adopted zoning which shows the zones and districts and zoning classifications of property therein. 
Zoos, botanical gardens, arboreta. Establishments that preserve and exhibit live plant and animal life displays, including those in natural areas or settings (as in the case of national parks). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
Chapter 107 - RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 

107.01.00 - Generally. 
The provisions set forth in chapter 107 are intended to protect the natural features and natural resources within the City of Canton, and to implement policies in the City of Canton Comprehensive Plan. The natural features and natural resources included in chapter 107 are streams, floodplain areas, the Etowah River, groundwater recharge areas, water supply watersheds, wetlands, hillsides and ridgelines, sediment control, and open space. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.02.00 - Stream buffer protection. 
107.02.01 - Findings. 
The city council finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
A.  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
B.  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
C.  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
D.  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
E.  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
F.  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
G.  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
H.  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
I.  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
J.  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
K.  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of green space. 
L.  storing water and maintaining groundwater levels and maintain stream base flow during low flow periods. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.02.02 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
A.  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
B.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.02.03 - Applicability. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  This section shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area, defined as the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
2)  These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
3)  This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
B.  Grandfather provisions. This section shall not apply to the following activities: 
1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this UDC. 
2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this UDC. 
4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this UDC. 
C.  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this section. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property: 
1)  Activities for the purpose of building or maintaining one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
2)  Public sewer and water line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 1) above. 
3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this section takes effect or approved under the terms of this section. 
4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this UDC takes effect or approved under the terms of this section, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the review and permitting authority on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the review and permitting authority to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
a.  After the effective date of this UDC, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
b.  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 107.02.04.B below. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.02.04 - Land development requirements. 
A.  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this section shall meet the following requirements: 
1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. Slopes shall not be steeper than a three to one (3:1) ratio, horizontal to vertical. 
3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
B.  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to April 7, 2005 and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this section, the board of zoning appeals may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
2)  Except as provided above, the board of zoning appeals shall grant no variance from any provision of this section without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance in accordance with the public hearings section in chapter 105 of this UDC and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the BZA. 
3)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this UDC prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this section would create an extreme hardship. 
4)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this UDC, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
5)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures, improvements and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation for the intrusion. 
6)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
C.  Information requirements for proposed development. 
1)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
a.  A site plan showing: 
i.  The location of all streams on the property; 
ii.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
iii.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than two-foot contour intervals; 
iv.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
v.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
b.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
c.  Any other documentation that the review and permitting authority may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
2)  All buffer and setback areas must be delineated on all prepared plans and plats of the property following plan approval. 
D.  Responsibility. Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this section shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
E.  Inspection. 
1)  The review and permitting authority may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. 
2)  The permittee shall assist the review and permitting authority in making such inspections. 
3)  The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
4)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
F.  Violations, enforcement and penalties. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this section or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
1)  Notice of violation. 
a.  If the review and permitting authority determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this section, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. 
b.  Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site, and shall result in an immediate stop work order. 
c.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
i.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
ii.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
iii.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
iv.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this UDC and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
v.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
vi.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the review and permitting authority by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
2)  Penalties. 
a.  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
b.  Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the review and permitting authority shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
c.  In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the review and permitting authority may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
i.  Stop work order. The review and permitting authority may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
ii.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The review and permitting authority may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
iii.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The review and permitting authority may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the review and permitting authority may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
iv.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the review and permitting authority shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the review and permitting authority has taken one or more of the actions described above, the review and permitting authority may impose a financial penalty in an amount permitted by municipal charter or state law for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
v.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the review and permitting authority may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the appropriate municipal, magistrate or recorders court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as permitted by municipal charter or state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
G.  Administrative appeal and judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the community development department shall follow the procedures in the appeals section of chapter 105 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.00 - Floodplain management/flood damage prevention. 
107.03.01 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this section is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
A.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
B.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
C.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
D.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
E.  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
F.  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.02 - Applicability. 
A.  Areas of special flood hazard. 
1)  This section shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. Areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its current effective flood insurance study (FIS), as described in the documents adopted by reference section in chapter 101 of this UDC. 
2)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this section prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
B.  Compatibility with other regulations. 
1)  This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. 
2)  The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.03 - Administration. 
A.  The city engineer is hereby designated the floodplain manager. This designation authorizes the city engineer to administer and implement the provisions of this section. 
B.  The duties of the city engineer shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this section have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the floodplain manager shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 107.03.07 and 107.03.08; 
4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level(or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the floodplain manager shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resource (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain manager shall make the necessary interpretation. 
a.  Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
b.  Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps. 
9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this section shall be maintained in the office of the city engineer and shall be open for public inspection. 
10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the board of construction adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.04 - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
A.  In addition to the current effective flood insurance study (FIS), other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
2)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city. 
B.  In addition to the current effective FIS, other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
2)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state, which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city. 
C.  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Canton City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.05 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.06 - Permit procedures and requirements. 
A.  Permit application requirements. 
1)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this section. 
2)  Unless specifically excluded by this section, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
B.  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 107.03.08.B.2; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 107.03.08.A.5; 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS. 
5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development. 
6)  All appropriate certifications required under this section. 
a.  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. 
b.  Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
c.  Floodplain management, flood damage prevention plan engineer's certification: 
"I certify that this plan was prepared by me or under my direct supervision and that all applicable federal, state, and local codes and ordinances have been met. The proposed improvements shown hereon have been designed to prevent fold damage and any adverse effects to adjacent property owners. 
_____       
Ga. Registered Professional Engineer Date" 
C.  Construction stage submittal requirements. 
1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites which require a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain manager a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. 
2)  A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. 
a.  Any lowest-floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. 
b.  When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. 
3)  The floodplain manager shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. 
a.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
4)  Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.07 - Standards for development. 
A.  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FEMA FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be shown on the floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
B.  Definition of floodway boundaries. 
1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. 
2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be shown on the floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. If floodway data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
C.  General standards. 
1)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or greater than 0.01-foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
2)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection 1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall: 
i.  Occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood; and 
ii.  Occur between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood; and 
iii.  Lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed or within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. 
b.  Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (predevelopment) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel. 
c.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent. 
d.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased. 
e.  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01-foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection D below. 
f.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water (see also chapter 110), sanitary sewer (see also chapter 111), gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters. 
g.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. 
i.  The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. 
ii.  The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
iii.  Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit to FEMA as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
D.  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 107.03.08.D apply. 
1)  This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. 
2)  This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. 
3)  Such study shall include: 
a.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
b.  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City. 
i.  Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. 
ii.  Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles. 
c.  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development. 
d.  A preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
E.  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection E.2 below. 
2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative CLOMR is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
F.  Maintenance requirements. 
1)  The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood-storage capacity is not diminished. 
2)  The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.08 - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
A.  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions shall apply: 
1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above have been met. 
2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
5)  Elevated buildings. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
b.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
c.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this section, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area. 
d.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of this UDC to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding. 
13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this section, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this section. 
16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
B.  Building standards, future conditions-floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in section 107.03.08.A above shall apply to structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain: 
1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above have been met. In addition: 
i.  If all of the requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one-foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
ii.  Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08.A.5. 
b.  Substantial improvements. 
i.  Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
ii.  Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08.A.5. 
2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08.A.5. In addition: 
i.  New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
ii.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain manager using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by The floodplain manager to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards subsection 107.03.08A.5. 
i.  The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
ii.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain manager using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
3)  Standards for accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar nonhabitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 107.03.08A.5 and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings — substantial improvements under section 107.03.08 (see subsection B), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 107.03.07.C, D, and E above have been met, all new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08A.5. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08.A.7. 
C.  Building standards, adjacent to future-conditions floodplain. The following provisions shall apply to structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain: 
1)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08.A.5. 
2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08.A.5. Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
D.  Building standards, residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
1)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the floodplain manager shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this section. 
2)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
b.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with subsection 107.03.08.A.5. 
3)  The applicant may be required to submit a flood study prepared by a professional engineer registered with the State of Georgia. 
E.  Building standards, areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions shall apply: 
1)  New and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one-foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade. 
a.  If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
b.  Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107.03.08.A.5. 
2)  New and substantial improvements of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
a.  The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one-foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certificate to the floodplain manager using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
F.  Standards for subdivisions. 
1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and areas of future-conditions flood hazards therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
3)  All subdivision plans shall state the minimum L.F.E. (lowest floor elevation) of proposed structures. See also the elevation requirements in section 107.03.06.B. 
4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of City of Canton to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.09 - Variance procedures. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
2)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of section 107.03.09 are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4)  Variances shall not be issued to a non-complying development activity after the activity has taken place ("after the fact."). 
5)  The floodplain manager shall report any variances to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
B.  Variance requests. 
1)  A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit due to the proposed development activity being inconsistent with the provisions of this UDC. 
2)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this section shall be submitted to the city. All such requests shall be heard and decided by the board of construction adjustments and appeals in accordance with chapter 105 of this UDC. 
3)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city and board of construction adjustments and appeals shall deem necessary for consideration of the request. 
C.  Standards for variance decisions. 
1)  In reviewing variance requests, the board of construction adjustments and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other provisions of this section. 
2)  The provisions of this section are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the requirements must be weighed carefully. 
3)  Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
4)  A variance shall only be issued when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
5)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this section, the board of construction adjustments and appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this section. 
D.  Issuance of variance. Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.10 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the community development department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the board of construction adjustments and appeals in accordance with the appeals section of chapter 105 of this UDC. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of construction appeals and adjustments may appeal such decision to the magistrate court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
C.  The floodplain manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.03.11 - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this section or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of violation. 
1)  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this section, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. 
2)  Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site and result in an immediate stop work order. 
3)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this section and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
B.  Penalties. 
1)  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
2)  Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
3)  In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. 
i.  The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. 
ii.  The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. 
i.  The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. 
ii.  A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a financial penalty as permitted by municipal charter or state law for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5)  Criminal penalties. 
a.  For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. 
b.  Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as permitted by municipal charter or state law. 
c.  Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.00 - River corridor protection. 
107.04.01 - Findings. 
A.  The state has determined that its river corridors are of vital importance in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. 
B.  River corridors are fragile natural resources subject to flood, erosion, soil-bearing capacity limitation, and other natural and human-induced hazards. 
C.  In their natural state, river corridors serve multiple functions for pollution control, aquifer recharge and discharge, storage and passage of floodwater, and erosion and sedimentation control, as well as wildlife habitat education, scientific study, open space and recreation, and scenic and aesthetic beauty. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.02 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to: 
A.  Protect river corridors, regulate activities, and guide future growth and development in or adjacent to those corridors; 
B.  Provide for the powers and duties of the city; 
C.  Provide for goals, guidelines, practices, procedures, policies, rules and regulations; 
D.  Provide for minimum standards for regulated activities within river corridors and their buffers, which natural resources are of vital importance to the city and its citizens; 
E.  Provide for a review of decisions; 
F.  Provide for hearings and judicial review; 
G.  Provide for enforcement; 
H.  Prohibit certain activities or actions; 
I.  Provide for civil and other penalties; 
J.  Repeal conflicting ordinances; and 
K.  Provide for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.03 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this section shall apply to the land within 150 feet horizontally on both sides of the Etowah River, which has been designated as a protected river by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
B.  The boundary of this land ("Etowah River Corridor") shall be set as places readily identifiable on the city zoning map or the Etowah River Corridor Map. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.04 - Regulation of underlying zoning district. 
Unless otherwise noted in this section, the regulation of the underlying zoning district as provided in chapter 102 of this UDC shall be maintained and not affected. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.05 - Vegetative buffers. 
A.  All development within the Etowah River Corridor shall maintain a natural vegetative buffer except as otherwise provided in this section. 
B.  The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the Etowah River Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.06 - Construction restricted. 
Except as otherwise noted in this section, all construction within the Etowah River Corridor is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.07 - Allowed uses. 
The following acceptable uses of the Etowah River Corridor are allowed, provided that such uses do not impair the long term functions of the river corridor: 
A.  Single-family dwellings. Single-family dwellings, including the usual appurtenances, may be constructed within the Etowah River Corridor subject to the following conditions: 
1)  The dwelling shall be in compliance with all local zoning regulations. 
2)  The dwelling shall be located on a parcel of land containing at least two acres. For the purpose of this section, the size of the parcel shall not include any area within the protected river (that is, for parcels that include the area between the riverbanks, that portion cannot be counted towards the two-acre minimum size). 
3)  There shall be only one such dwelling on each two-acre or larger parcel of land. 
4)  A septic tank serving such a dwelling may be located within the Etowah River Corridor. However, the septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the corridor. 
B.  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
1)  Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
2)  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
C.  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
D.  Wastewater treatment. 
E.  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criterion, but a hard-surface tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criterion. Paths and walkways within the river corridor are consistent with this criterion. 
F.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
G.  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
1)  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
2)  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
3)  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the state department of agriculture. 
H.  Mining activities, if permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968 (O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.), as amended. 
I.  Other uses permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
J.  Utility lines and maintenance of easements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.08 - Use limitations. 
Within the Etowah River Corridor, the following limitations on permissible uses shall apply in addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning district and of this section: 
A.  Except as expressly provided for under section 107.04.07.A.4, septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within the Etowah River Corridor. 
B.  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited within the Etowah River Corridor. 
C.  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within the Etowah River Corridor. 
D.  Other uses unapproved by the city shall not be acceptable within the Etowah River Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.09 - Prior land uses. 
For the purposes of this section, land uses existing prior to October 14, 1999, are subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Industrial and commercial uses of river corridors shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
B.  Industrial and commercial activity within the river corridor shall meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.10 - Road and utility crossings. 
Construction of road crossings and utility crossings of the Etowah River Corridor are exempt, provided that construction of such road and utility crossings shall meet all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., and of section 107.09.00 (Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control) of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.04.11 - Location of utilities. 
Except as discussed in section 107.04.10, if utilities cannot be feasibly located outside the Etowah River Corridor (feasibility shall be decided conservatively by the city engineer), utilities may be located in the corridor, provided that: 
A.  The utilities shall be located as far from the riverbank as reasonably possible; 
B.  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the Etowah River Corridor as well as is reasonably possible; and 
C.  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.00 - Groundwater recharge area protection. 
107.05.01 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  Groundwater is among the nation's most important natural resources. It provides drinking water to urban and rural communities, supports irrigation and industry, sustains the flow of streams and rivers, and maintains riparian and wetland ecosystems. In many areas of the nation, the future sustainability of ground-water resources is at risk from overuse and contamination. Because groundwater systems typically respond slowly to human actions, a long-term perspective is needed to manage this valuable resource. 
B.  This section is intended to implement rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division known as the "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria" as they specifically relate to groundwater recharge areas (Rule 391-3-16-.02). It is essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the public that the quality of subsurface public drinking water be maintained. Groundwater resources exist in underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface that are capable of providing water for a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface, known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when development occurs within groundwater recharge areas. Certain land use activities, such as septic tanks, underground tanks, and chemical spills, pose a significant threat to the quality of groundwater supplies. Therefore, it is necessary to manage land uses within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats and development impacts are minimized. To this end, this section establishes minimum lot sizes to provide for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.02 - Applicability. 
This section shall apply to all lands within the City of Canton that are mapped in the groundwater recharge area district map. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.03 - Permit required. 
A.  No land disturbance permit or building permit shall be issued by the community development director for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the land disturbance or building conforms to the requirements of this section. 
B.  Prior to a land disturbance permit or building permit being issued, the community development director shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.04 - County health department approval of permit required. 
No land disturbance permit or building permit shall be issued by the community development director for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the Cherokee County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter DHR Manual) and this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.05 - Minimum lot size. 
A.  Within an area governed by this section, new homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum lot sizes as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in sections A—F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the Cherokee County Health Department. 
1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area. 
3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
B.  Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this UDC shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this section. 
C.  Within an area governed by this section, no subdivision plat shall be recorded until and unless said plat has been reviewed and approved by the community development director as being in compliance with the minimum lot sizes established by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.06 - Manufactured home parks. 
A.  Within an area governed by this section, new manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum areas in square feet as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in sections A—F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the Cherokee County Health Department. 
1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area; 
3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
B.  Within an area governed by this section, no site plan for a manufactured home park shall be considered valid until and unless said site plan has been reviewed and approved by the community development director as being in compliance with the minimum space sizes established by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.07 - Agricultural waste impoundment sites. 
New agricultural waste impoundment sites in a significant recharge area, as specified below, shall contain a liner consisting of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource Conservation Service: 
A.  Any agricultural waste impoundment site located in a high pollution susceptibility area; 
B.  Any agricultural waste impoundment site within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area which exceeds 15 acre-feet; or 
C.  Any agricultural waste impoundment site within a low pollution susceptibility area that exceeds 50 acre-feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.08 - Above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks. 
A.  Within an area governed by this section, new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a minimum volume of 660 gallons shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. 
B.  Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.09 - Hazardous materials handling facilities. 
Within an area governed by this section, new facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any adopted City of Canton or applicable State of Georgia fire code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.05.10 - Stormwater infiltration basins. 
Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in significant recharge areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.06.00 - Water supply watershed protection. 
107.06.01 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The quality of public drinking water supplies must be assured. land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation, which threaten the storage capacity of reservoirs and impair the quality of public drinking water supplies. Stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients, and sediments into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive, and rendering water resources unusable for recreation and other uses. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in potential risks of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. Therefore, land use activities within water supply watersheds must be regulated to ensure that public water supplies remain clean. 
B.  This section establishes standards consistent with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria for Water Supply Watersheds (Rule 391-3-16-01) to ensure water quality in the watershed system is not compromised by land activities such as grading, septic systems, and accidental release of contaminants. The intent of this section is to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, to maintain the yield of water supply watersheds, and to ensure water can be treated to meet federal and state drinking water standards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.06.02 - Applicability. 
A.  This section shall apply to all lands within existing and future small water supply watersheds, large water supply watersheds, and to water supply reservoirs and their immediate surroundings, as shown on the watershed protection map. 
B.  This section does not apply to watersheds not used for public drinking water supply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.06.03 - Exemptions. 
The following land uses and activities are exempted from compliance with this section: 
A.  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this UDC. 
B.  Mining activities permitted by the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
C.  If utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer or setback areas required by this section, such utility locations can be exempted from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions subject to the following conditions: 
1)  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible; 
2)  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible; and 
3)  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
D.  Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
1)  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture; and 
2)  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.06.04 - Hazardous materials handling facilities. 
New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, and which will locate in a small water supply watershed or within seven miles upstream of a water supply intake or a water supply reservoir of a large water supply watershed, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and the requirements of any adopted or applicable fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.06.05 - Requirements for large water supply watersheds with reservoirs. 
The following regulations shall apply to all lands within any large water supply watersheds with a water supply reservoir identified on the watershed protection map: 
A.  Maintain a buffer with a minimum width of 100 feet on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, within a seven-mile radius upstream of a water supply reservoir boundary. 
B.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, within a seven-mile radius upstream of a water supply reservoir boundary. 
C.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the required 150-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, within a seven-mile radius upstream of a water supply reservoir boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.06.06 - Requirements for small water supply watersheds. 
The following regulations shall apply to all lands within any small water supply watersheds identified on the watershed protection map: 
A.  Maintain a buffer with a minimum width of 100 feet on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, along all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir. 
B.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir boundary. 
C.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the required 150-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or a water supply reservoir boundary. 
D.  Maintain a buffer with a minimum width of 50 feet on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir. 
E.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir boundary. 
F.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the required 75-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or a water supply reservoir boundary. 
G.  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
H.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire small water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.06.07 - Water supply reservoirs. 
A.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from any water supply reservoir boundary as measured from the normal pool elevation. 
B.  All development within the 150-foot buffer from any water supply reservoir boundary, and any uses of the reservoir itself including docks, shall comply with the Hickory Log Creek Reservoir Management Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.07.00 - Wetlands protection. 
107.07.01 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the well being of communities in the State of Georgia. Nationally, a considerable number of wetlands have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other activities. Without additional regulation, piecemeal or cumulative losses of wetlands will continue to occur over time. Therefore, it is in the interest of public safety and general welfare to avoid damage or destruction to wetlands. 
B.  The purpose of this section is to promote wetlands protection by adopting a generalized wetlands map; provide for the withholding of land use and building permits in areas designated as wetlands until a jurisdictional wetland determination is completed; and establish permitted and prohibited land uses within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.07.02 - Applicability. 
This section shall apply to all lands within the city of canton that are shown on the generalized wetlands map, as defined by this UDC, as wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.07.03 - Permit required. 
No land disturbance permit or building permit shall be issued by the community development director for a land use, building, structure, or manufactured home, nor shall any regulated activity as defined by this section commence, unless the land use, building, structure, manufactured home or regulated activity conforms to the requirements of this section. Prior to a land use permit or building permit being issued, the community development director shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.07.04 - Jurisdictional wetland determination required. 
If an area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetland as shown on the generalized wetlands map, as determined by the community development director, no local land disturbance permit or building permit on said wetland shall be issued until a jurisdictional wetland determination has been completed and either of the following occur: 
A.  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that there are jurisdictional wetlands present on the proposed development site, a section 404 permit is required, and either a section 404 Permit or a letter of permission is issued by the Corps for the proposed development; or 
B.  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that jurisdictional wetlands are not present on the proposed development site, and no section 404 permit or letter of permission is required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.07.05 - Allowed uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: 
A.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
B.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
C.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
D.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
E.  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
F.  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.07.06 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
A.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
B.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.00 - Hillside and ridgeline protection. 
107.08.01 - Findings. 
A.  Hillsides are inherently unstable. Changes to slopes — through undermining by humans, flowing rivers, heavy rains or the focusing of stormwater runoff by human-built channels or storm drain outlets — can cause erosion or landsliding. Steep slopes are less forgiving of construction errors than are shallow slopes. When steep slopes fail, such failures can have disastrous consequences. 
B.  Disturbed surfaces create loose materials which tend to move downhill. The steeper the natural slope, the greater the area is that must be disturbed. Development can result in alteration of land surfaces that can contribute to slope destabilization. Alterations that have the potential for creating unstable slopes include placing fills on top of marginally stable slopes, cutting slopes at too steep an angle or undermining the toe of a slope, redirecting storm runoff in a way that artificially concentrates flows onto portions of the landscape not prepared to receive such flows, removing woody vegetation and adding water by means of hillside septic systems. These factors work together and can cumulatively decrease the stability of slopes and eventually lead to disaster. Landslides and slope failures pose a variety of hazards to human settlements. 
C.  Hillside development, if unregulated, can take place at the expense of environmental concerns. Stormwater runoff from slopes is greater in both quantity and velocity than it would be from level ground. Preserving existing vegetation reduces erosion by maintaining roots which increase infiltration and bind soils. Vegetation also reduces the velocity of raindrops and slows the velocity of surface water flow by increasing the roughness of the ground. Constructing hillside roads involves cuts in the upslope side and fills on the down slope side. Such cuts and fills are often much wider than the normal city or county road right-of-way and can be more susceptible to failure. 
D.  Hillsides are unique vegetation communities and wildlife habitats. Hillsides in developing areas are often the last remaining natural areas and are the final refuges for many animal species. Development needs to be sensitive to the hillside's function of providing biodiversity. 
E.  Hillsides have general aesthetic value to the community and contribute to the community's sense of identity. Prominent peaks and ridges can have significance as identifiable landmarks to area residents. Hillside development, if unregulated, can take place at the expense of aesthetic concerns. Hills are highly visible from surrounding areas. Vegetation clearance and landform grading practices, if unregulated, can upset the natural shape of hills. The bulk, shape, height and color of buildings can contrast with the natural landscape if unregulated and thus intrude on the natural character of the landform. Regulations are needed to ensure that buildings and structures blend in with the natural environment through their shape, materials and colors. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.02 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  It is the purpose of this section to provide development regulations applicable to hillsides and ridgelines to ensure that such development occurs in a manner that: 
1)  Protects the natural and topographic character of hillsides; 
2)  Prevents inappropriate development on hillsides, steeply sloping sites and in geologically hazardous areas; 
3)  Protects fragile steep slopes and other environmental resources; 
4)  Preserves the aesthetic and scenic qualities of hillsides and steep slopes; 
5)  Ensures the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  The provisions of this section are intended to prevent developments that will erode hillsides, result in sedimentation of lower slopes, cause damage from landslides or create potential for damage from landslides, flood downhill properties or result in the severe cutting of trees or the scarring of the landscape. It is the intent of this section to encourage a sensitive form of development and to allow for a reasonable use that complements the natural and visual character of the community. These purposes cannot be met fully with existing development codes, such as soil erosion, grading, tree protection and flood damage prevention. This section is considered the minimum necessary to attain these purposes. 
C.  This section is also intended to encourage the application of principles of civic design, landscape architecture, architecture, planning and civil engineering to preserve the appearance and protect the resources of hillside areas and ridgelines. Guidelines are also provided to encourage imaginative and innovative building techniques and to encourage building designs compatible with natural hillside surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.03 - Applicability. 
A.  This section shall apply to any development proposal for property with a natural slope of 25 percent or more, and including the crests, summits, and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher than any such areas even though the slopes of such crests, summits and ridge tops have a slope of less than 25 percent. 
B.  For purposes of determining whether this section applies, the natural slope of a given property shall be calculated perpendicular to topographic contours from property line to property line, prior to grading, using quadrangle maps of the United States Geological Survey, other reputable topographic maps of the subject area or, if available, a topographic survey of the subject property. 
C.  This section shall apply, and the community development director shall apply and enforce the provisions of this section, to the earliest application for development or building approval required of the applicant, whether that is an application for land use permit, application for preliminary subdivision plat, or application for land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.04 - Exemptions. 
The following land uses or activities are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
A.  Agriculture and forestry. Agriculture and forestry, provided that they are consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, consistent with all state and federal laws, and all applicable regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
B.  Mining. Mining activity existing on the effective date of this UDC, if such activity has been lawfully permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
C.  Landscape maintenance. Landscape maintenance activities, including the removal of diseased, dead or damaged trees; provided, however, that such activities shall be carried out in conformance with applicable regulations of this UDC. 
D.  Prior development plan approval. Any land, or part of any land, which was contained in or subject to any development plan, and which was filed with the community development department and approved by the city prior to the effective date of this UDC. 
E.  Additions to single-family residences. On legal lots of record with existing residences that were approved prior to the effective date of this UDC, said existing residences may be expanded without demonstrating compliance with this section, provided that the height of the building addition does not exceed the existing height of the building, no land disturbance is required to accomplish the building addition, and the building addition is in conformity with the purposes and intent and consistent with regulations and guidelines of this section as determined by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.05 - General provisions. 
A.  Compliance. No land to which this section applies shall hereafter be subdivided, cleared, developed or used, and no building or structure shall be constructed, placed, extended, converted or structurally altered, except in full compliance with the regulations of the section. 
B.  Regulations versus guidelines. 
1)  This section provides both regulations and guidelines. 
2)  Regulations are identified by use of the term "shall" and compliance is mandatory. Guidelines are identified by use of the term "should" and compliance is not mandatory but is strongly recommended. 
3)  Substantial inconsistencies with one or more guidelines in a manner that is clearly counter to the purposes of this section may provide the basis for denial of a development by the community development director. 
C.  Topographic data. 
1)  Where the community development department does not have reliable data on existing topography, or when a quadrangle map of the U.S. Geological Survey or other topographic maps which may be available does not provide sufficient detail to administer the requirements of this section, the community development director may require, and the development applicant shall provide, a topographic survey of the property proposed to be developed. 
2)  Said topographic survey, if required, may exclude areas not proposed for development. 
3)  The topographic survey shall provide contour intervals of no more than five feet unless otherwise approved by the land use officer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.06 - General development guidelines. 
A.  All development proposals subject to the requirements of this section should be designed to meet generally accepted principles of land use planning, soil mechanics, engineering geology, civil engineering, environmental management, civic design, architecture, landscape architecture, landscape ecology and related disciplines. The community development director should consider whether or not each development proposal is consistent with these general guidelines and may cite any one or more of them in support of a decision to approve or deny each development proposal that is subject to the requirements of this section. 
B.  Planning of the development should take into account the topography, soils, geology, hydrology, vegetation and other features of the proposed site. 
C.  Areas not well suited for development due to soil characteristics, geology, vegetation, existing plant and animal life or hydrology limitations, should not be developed. 
D.  Site designers are encouraged to propose and apply innovative concepts for slope and soil stabilization, grading, landscaping and building placement and design to meet the purposes and objectives of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.07 - Grading and land disturbance. 
A.  General grading provisions. 
1)  All grading, retaining wall design, drainage and erosion control plans for development subject to this section shall be designed by a civil engineer. In cases where geologically hazardous areas exist, such plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional. 
2)  No grading, filling, clearing or excavation of any kind in excess of 50 cubic yards shall be initiated until a grading plan is approved and a land disturbance permit is obtained from the land use officer. 
3)  Borrowing for fill shall be prohibited unless the material is obtained from a cut permitted under an approved grading plan or imported from outside the hillside area. 
4)  Any approved cut or fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical unless it can be shown by the project engineer that steeper slopes are feasible and such showing is accepted by the community development director. 
5)  Development on the site should be located, designed and oriented so that grading and other site preparation are kept to the minimum needed to serve the intended building or use. 
6)  When grading must occur, it should blend with the natural landform as much as possible. Grading to form level pads and building sites is strongly discouraged and when required such grading should be minimized. 
7)  Projects involving more than one use or phase should be phased into workable units in a way that minimizes the amount of soil disturbance at any given point in time. 
B.  Cut slopes. 
1)  No cuts shall be permitted solely for the purpose of obtaining fill, unless specifically approved in the grading plan. 
2)  Cut slope angles shall be determined in relationship to the type of materials of which they are composed. Steep-cut slopes shall be retained with stacked rock, engineered retaining walls or a functional equivalent, to control erosion and stabilize the slope. 
3)  Cut faces on a terraced section should not exceed a maximum height of five feet, as measured on a vertical plane from the high point of the cut or fill to the bottom-most point. 
4)  Terrace widths should be a minimum of three feet to allow for the introduction of vegetation for erosion control. The total height of a cut slope should not exceed 15 feet. 
C.  Fill slopes. 
1)  Fill slopes should not exceed a total vertical height of 25 feet, as measured on a vertical plane from the high point of the cut or fill to the bottom-most point. 
2)  The toe of any fill slope area not utilizing an engineered retaining structure should be a minimum of six feet from any property line. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.08 - Lot size minimums and clearing and improvement limits. 
A.  All new lots created by subdivision shall contain a building envelope with a natural slope of 35 percent or less and shall meet the lot size minimum based on slope as provided in this subsection below. 
B.  Existing parcels without adequate buildable area less than or equal to 35 percent cannot be subdivided but shall be considered buildable for one unit. 
C.  Subdivision of land, land disturbance, and development of lands that are subject to this section shall meet the requirements shown in table 107-1: 
Table 107-1 Land Subdivision, Disturbance and Development Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.09 - Trees and vegetation. 
A.  Removal. 
1)  Existing deep-rooted vegetation, including trees, bushes and ground covers, should be removed only in cases where necessary for buildings, roads, driveways, parking and minimum required yards. 
2)  View corridors from the proposed development to surrounding areas may be provided, but the thinning of limbs of individual trees is preferred over tree removal as a means to provide a view corridor. 
B.  Tree protection areas. 
1)  All areas required by this section to be maintained in their natural state shall be designated as tree protection areas on the site plan. 
2)  Development shall avoid disturbing designated tree protection areas. 
3)  Construction site activities, including material storage, shall be located and arranged so as to prevent disturbances of designated tree protection areas. 
C.  Tree replacement. 
1)  No trees, other than those located within a building envelope, within a proposed street, driveway or parking area, or within a utility easement, shall be removed except by permit issued by the community development director. 
2)  A replacement plan for such trees shall be required to be approved by the community development director. 
D.  Tree survey required. 
1)  When grading or land disturbance is proposed to occur outside of roadways, utility areas, building pads and minimum required yard areas, a tree survey at the same scale as the project site plan shall be required. 
2)  Portions of the lot or project area not proposed to be disturbed by development shall not be required to be included in the tree survey. 
3)  All tree surveys required by this subsection shall show all trees greater than six inches diameter at breast height (DBH), along with their DBH and species. 
4)  Groups of trees in close proximity (i.e., those within five feet of each other) may be designated and shown as a stand of trees, provided that the predominant species, estimated number and average diameter of trees are indicated on the tree survey. 
5)  The tree survey shall include the name, address and signature of the professional conducting the tree survey. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.10 - Revegetation. 
A.  Plan required. Revegetation according to a planting plan approved by the community development director shall be required for all disturbed areas outside of roadways, driveways, building sites and minimal yard areas. 
B.  Species selection. 
1)  Vegetation used to revegetate disturbed areas shall be native species or species similar in resource value as the vegetation removed. 
2)  Vegetation shall be chosen after consideration of its ability to survive the conditions of soils, climate, temperature, elevation and other natural conditions. 
3)  Use plant materials that blend with the ridgeline or hillside. 
4)  Landscape schemes that are rough, natural and/or subdued in character are encouraged. 
5)  Use of exotic plants and sod are strongly discouraged. 
C.  Slope stability. When revegetation is required, it should be installed to assist in providing long-term slope stabilization and help reduce the visual impact of any cut slopes. 
D.  Installation. When revegetation is required, all required revegetation shall be installed prior to approval by the community development director to occupy the activity, development or building. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.11 - Drainage. 
A.  Stormwater management facilities shall be provided for all developments subject to this section. 
1)  Storm drain systems shall be designed to capture stormwater from streets, driveways, parking areas, building roofs and other impervious surfaces. 
2)  Unless otherwise required by the community development director, the drainage for the site shall be directed to flow to streets or other approved collector systems. 
B.  The overall drainage system shall be completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during construction. 
C.  Stormwater facilities shall be designed to divert surface water away from cut faces or sloping surfaces of a fill. When this is not possible, interceptor ditches shall be installed above all cut/fill slopes and the intercepted water conveyed to a stable channel or natural drainage way with adequate capacity. Alternatively, berms at the top of slopes may be used to screen developments, vary the profile and ensure drainage will be directed away from slopes. 
D.  Existing natural drainage systems should be utilized, as much as possible, in their natural state. 
1)  Alterations of major natural drainageways shall be prohibited except for approved road crossings and drainage structures. 
2)  Natural drainageways shall be riprapped or otherwise stabilized below drainage and culvert discharge points for a distance sufficient to convey the discharge without channel erosion. 
E.  Flow-retarding devices and detention ponds shall be used where required to minimize increases in runoff volume and peak flow rate due to development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.12 - Erosion control. 
Erosion control measures shall be required for all developments as specified in section 107.09.00 (Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control) of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.13 - Roads, driveways and parking areas. 
A.  No new street shall be constructed on lands equal to or greater than 35 percent slope; provided, however, that a portion of a street on land equal to or greater than 35 percent slope may be constructed if it does not exceed a length of 100 feet. 
B.  Streets, driveways, buildings, utilities, parking areas and other site disturbances shall be located such that the maximum number of existing trees on the site is preserved. 
C.  Roads, driveways and parking areas shall be designed to create the minimum feasible amounts of land coverage and the minimum feasible disturbance of the soil. Variations in road design and road construction specified in this UDC shall be permitted, as may be approved by the community development director, to prevent the dedication of unnecessarily large amounts of land. 
D.  Road alignments should follow the natural terrain unless the project engineer can justify additional cuts or fills. Roads, walkways and parking areas should be designed to parallel the natural contours of the site. 
E.  One-way streets shall be permitted and encouraged where appropriate for the terrain and where public safety would not be jeopardized. For instance, a two-way street may have the directions of flow split into one-way pairs that differ in elevation, circumnavigate difficult terrain or avoid tree clearance. 
F.  Combinations of collective private driveways, shared parking areas and on-street parallel parking bays should be used where possible to minimize land and soil disturbance, minimize impervious surface coverage and achieve excellence of design and aesthetic sensitivity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.14 - Building requirements and guidelines. 
A.  Building pads. 
1)  Building pads should be of minimum size to accommodate the structure and a minimal amount of yard space. 
2)  Pads for tennis courts, swimming pools and large lawns are discouraged. 
3)  Building envelopes should be located and sized to preserve the maximum number of trees on site. 
4)  Building pads should be varied in elevation above street level to avoid the appearance of monotonous, flat, level pads. 
B.  Foundations. 
1)  All buildings and structures on lands with slopes of 25 percent or greater shall have foundations which have been designed by a civil engineer or other qualified professional. 
2)  Large building pads and footings should be split into more than one (i.e., split-level homes that step down the hillside), where possible, to allow the building pad and structure to more closely follow the existing slope of the land. 
3)  Building footprint coverage should be minimized where possible by using multiple-level (two or more story) buildings. 
C.  Roofs. 
1)  Buildings and structures with roofs must be designed such that the roofline of the building does not project above a ridgeline more than two feet. 
2)  Roof forms and roof lines for new structures should be broken into a series of smaller building components to reflect the irregular forms of the surrounding hillside. 
3)  Long, linear unbroken roof lines are discouraged. 
4)  Flat roofs are discouraged. 
5)  The slope angle of roof pitch should be at or below the angle of the natural hillside slope. 
D.  Height. The height of all buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 feet measured vertically from the highest point of the natural grade. 
E.  Setbacks. When appropriate, buildings and structures should be located as close to the street as possible to preserve the natural terrain and to minimize disturbance and the length of driveways. Buildings and structures shall be located as close to the street as possible to preserve the natural terrain and to minimize disturbance and the length of driveways. Proposed variance from minimum setback requirements may be submitted for review by the community development director in accordance with the administrative action process in chapter 105 of this UDC. 
F.  Mass. The visible mass of larger buildings and structures should be reduced by utilizing below-grade rooms cut into the natural slope. 
G.  Location. Buildings and structures should be clustered where possible to reduce disturbance and removal of vegetation. 
H.  Designs that reduce clearing and impervious surfaces. 
1)  Wooden deck areas either on the roof of a garage, or roof of the house, or extending from the house or garage, may be used to reduce the amount of grading and need for yard areas and provide private outdoor spaces. 
2)  Wooden decks that allow infiltration of stormwater into the ground may be used instead of concrete slabs for patios and, in some cases if structurally sufficient, parking, in order to reduce the amount of impervious surface. 
I.  Partial screening. 
1)  A portion of natural on-site vegetation shall be retained sufficient to partially screen (along 50 percent of the building face, or that achieves 50 percent opacity or more along the building face) the building, structure, use, or activity from views from public roads not serving the building; 
2)  Landscaping shall be installed and designed to partially screen the building, structure, use, or activity from views from public roads; or 
3)  Other measures shall be included in the project and approved by the community development director to reduce the visual impacts of such development from views from public roads. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.15 - Fire protection. 
A.  Where adequate access for firefighting equipment or where water supply for firefighting are not available, in the opinion of the community development director as may be informed by the fire marshal, an approved automatic fire sprinkler system in compliance with the applicable state plumbing code shall be required and installed for all occupied buildings prior to occupancy of said buildings. This provision shall not apply to gazebos, storage sheds or other detached accessory structures not intended for occupancy. 
B.  Adjacent to residences or structures to be occupied, in areas of high risk of forest fires as determined by the fire marshal, there shall be required a clear zone of no less than 20 feet on all sides of said residences or structures, or to the property line, whichever is nearer. 
1)  Within the clear zone, all brush, flammable vegetation or combustible growth shall be removed. 
2)  This provision shall not apply to single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants used as ground cover, provided that they do not form a continuous means of rapidly transmitting fire from the native growth to a residence or structure to be occupied. 
C.  In areas of high risk of forest fires as determined by the fire marshal, the following provisions may be made a condition of development or permit approval: 
1)  Roofs shall be covered with noncombustible materials, such as clay or concrete shake or tile. 
2)  Exterior walls shall be surfaced with noncombustible or fire-resistant materials. 
3)  Chimneys shall be provided with approved spark arresters. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.08.16 - Free standing walls. 
A.  Any wall that exceeds a height of four feet along any portion of the wall shall require a separate wall permit. 
B.  Walls exceeding 30 inches in height shall be required to have a guardrail. For guardrail design use the requirements as shown in the Deck Construction Guide as shown in the International Residential Code. 
C.  An engineer's letter approving the structural safety of any wall exceeding four feet in height must be provided prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
107.09.00 - Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, adopted July 19, 2018, repealed the former § 107.09.00, §§ 107.09.01—107.09.09, and enacted a new § 107.09.00, §§ 107.09.01—107.09.09, as set out herein. The former § 107.09.00 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2017-08, adopted April 20, 2017. 

107.09.01 - Exemptions. 
This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 107.09.02.C.15 and 16 of this section, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power, except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.09.02 - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
A.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections B and C of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this section and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections B and C of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3)  Failure to property design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections C.15, 16 and 17, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection B.2 of this section; 
15)  Except as provided in paragraphs 16 and 17 of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: Provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in [EPD Rule] 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections B and C of this section. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
F.  All waste from construction activities shall be controlled and properly disposed of in a manner which prevents adverse impacts to water quality. Waste includes, but is not limited to: Discarded building materials, chemicals, litter, sanitary waste and concrete washout. A designated area for concrete wash down of tools, concrete mixer chutes, hoppers and the rear of vehicles shall be provided in a location convenient to construction activities and readily accessible by concrete trucks. The designated area shall be a zero discharge containment facility which completely prevents concrete wash water from infiltrating into the ground or discharging to any natural or structural stormwater drainage conveyance or to any waters of the state. Wash out of the drum of a concrete truck at a construction site, unless in a designated wash down facility is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.09.03 - Application/permit process. 
A.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this section, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application requirements. 
1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Canton without first obtaining a permit from the Canton Development Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Canton Development Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection C of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 107.09.02.B and 107.09.02.C of this section will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by seven copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 107.09.02.C.15, 16, and 17 have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 107.09.03.B.6., have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan requirements. 
1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 107.09.02.B and 107.09.02.C of this section, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this section. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits. 
1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this section, any variances required by subsections 107.09.02C.15, 16, and 17 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 107.09.03.B.6 are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this section. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.09.04 - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The City of Canton will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
B.  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The City of Canton shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.09.05 - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this section without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this section, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 107.09.03.B.6. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary penalties. 
1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section, or who negligently or intentionally falls or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this section under county ordinances approved under this section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.09.06 - Reserved. 
107.09.07 - Education and certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this section. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.09.08 - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
A.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of appeals within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.09.09 - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
A.  Effectivity. The ordinance from which this section is derived shall become effective on the 19 th day of July, 2018. 
B.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this section shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this section. 
C.  Liability. 
1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this section, nor the compliance with provisions of this section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
3)  No provision of this section shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved the under or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0719-01, 7-19-2018) 
107.10.00 - Conservation subdivision/open space development. 
107.10.01 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  To provide for the preservation of green space as a nonstructural storm water runoff and watershed protection measure. 
B.  To provide an alternative to conventional subdivision design in residential zoning districts that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
C.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater recharge areas, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
D.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive areas which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
E.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
F.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
G.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
H.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
I.  To encourage street design that reduces traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
J.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
K.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
L.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.10.02 - General regulations. 
A.  Applicability of regulations. 
1)  This conservation subdivision option is available in the following zoning districts as a use by right: R-40, R-20, R-15, and R-10. 
2)  The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of this UDC and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
B.  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
C.  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, as approved by the community development director: 
1)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain, not to be confused with future conditions floodplain, where mapped; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
2)  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.10.03 - Application requirements. 
A.  Site analysis map required. 
1)  Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. 
2)  The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this section. 
3)  The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 107.10.04 below; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
B.  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 107.10.04 below, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
C.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 107.10.04 below, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
D.  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.10.04 - Open space. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. 
2)  Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
B.  Standards to determine open space. 
1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this section: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least 75-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual stands of existing healthy native trees with a DBH of greater than eight inches; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
C.  Allowable uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
4)  Passive recreation areas; 
5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this section. 
D.  Prohibited uses of open space. 
1)  Golf courses; 
2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in this section; 
3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
E.  Ownership and management of open space. 
1)  Ownership of open space. 
a.  The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. 
b.  If a homeowners' association is the owner, the following shall apply: 
i.  Membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. 
ii.  The homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. 
c.  The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
2)  Management plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the city council; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city of Canton may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. 
a.  The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. 
b.  Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
F.  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this section. If the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Canton, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Canton shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Canton. 
2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this section, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.00 - Mass grading and clearing. 
107.11.01 - Purpose and intent. 
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
A.  To promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Canton without preventing the reasonable development of land; 
B.  To promote building and site planning practices that are consistent with the City of Canton's natural topography, soils, and vegetative features while recognizing that certain factors, such as disease, proximity to existing and proposed structures and improvements, interference with utility services, and protection of scenic views may require the removal of certain trees and ground cover; 
C.  To encourage site development on public and private property, including cleaning, excavation, and filling in such a manner as to minimize hazards to life, health, and property; 
D.  To promote land development practices that result in a minimal disturbance to vegetation and soils; 
E.  To minimize surface water and ground water run-off and diversion; 
F.  To minimize the need for additional storm drainage facilities; 
G.  To preserve and enhance the city's physical and aesthetic character by preventing untimely and indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and ground cover; 
H.  To minimize surface water run-off and diversion which may contribute to increased turbidity; 
I.  To reduce sedimentation in the streams, lakes, rivers, storm sewer systems, and waterways; 
J.  To insure prompt development, restoration and replanting and effective erosion control of property after land clearing and mass grading; 
K.  To protect fish, wildlife and their habitats and promote the retention and restoration of vegetation; 
L.  To implement the goals and objectives of the State of Georgia's Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act; 
M.  To allow the reasonable development of land. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.02 - Application. 
A.  Permit approval required. No person, corporation, or other legal entity shall engage in clearing or grading in the City of Canton without having received an approved permit from the community development director. 
B.  Application requirements. All applications for mass grading or clearing permits shall be submitted for approval to the community development director on an application form provided by the community development department or in accordance with the application specifications established by the community development director. Accompanying such form shall be: 
1)  A general plan which shall include the following information: 
a.  General vicinity map; 
b.  Property boundaries indicating the extent and location of proposed grading activities, and relevant physical features of the property (i.e. streams, ravines, etc.); 
c.  Location and dimensions of buffer areas to be maintained or established, and location and description of proposed erosion control devices or structures; and 
d.  Identification and location of all trees and vegetation that are to be retained and protected. 
2)  At the discretion of the community development director, other information as deemed appropriate to this section may be required in instances relating to geological hazard, shoreline protection, tree protection, and replacement or project scope. 
3)  An application fee for grading or clearing five acres or less, plus an additional fee for each additional acre, or portion thereof. Fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of city council. An application shall be deemed incomplete without the accompanying application fee. 
4)  Tree survey indicating the location of each specimen tree, specifying type and size. 
C.  No work shall commence until permit notice is posted by the community development department on the subject site for a period of ten business days prior to the commencement of grading activities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.03 - Permit submission. 
A.  The mass grading or clearing permit application shall be delivered to the community development department. 
B.  All permit applications shall be stamped by the community development director indicating the submission date. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.04 - Completeness. 
A.  Within ten business days of receiving an application for a mass grading or clearing permit, the community development director shall review it for completeness. 
B.  If the community development director finds it complete, the community development director shall stamp the application indicating the completion date and the application shall then be processed. 
C.  If the community development director finds that the application is incomplete, he or she shall, within such ten business day period, send to the applicant a written notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable section of this UDC, stamp the date of return of the application, and send the written notice by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application. 
D.  Any subsequent application responding to the notice of deficiency shall be assigned a new submission date when it is received by the community development director. Such application shall be reviewed by the community development director within ten business days for completeness. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.05 - Review and approval. 
A.  The community development department shall review each application for a grading or clearing permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this UDC. 
B.  Within 30 business days after stamping a completion date on an application, the community development department shall, in writing: 
1)  Approve the permit application; 
2)  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to enforce the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions, providing the applicant an opportunity to comment within ten business days on the reasonable conditions stated; or 
3)  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application. 
C.  The community development director shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the City of Canton by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the thirtieth business day after the community development director has stamped completion date on an application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of the mailing in conformity with this section. 
D.  If an application is revised and resubmitted, such application shall be assigned a new submission date. If the application is denied because it does not contain the required information or the information is inaccurate or false, a new application shall be submitted to the community development department with all of the required information and such application shall be assigned a new submission date. 
E.  Upon expiration of the 30-business day period without a decision being issued, the applicant shall be permitted to begin mass grading or clearing activities under this UDC. 
F.  Upon making a final decision, the community development director shall stamp each application, and the permit if applicable, with a decision date. 
G.  If a permit applicant has two or more violations of previous permits of this UDC or permits under section 107.09.00 (Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control) of this UDC within three years to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the community development director shall deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.06 - Standards. 
All mass grading and clearing on lots shall conform to the following standards and provisions unless where otherwise recommended in an approved soil engineering, engineering geology, hydrology, or tree protection plan where the alternate procedures will be equal or superior in achieving the purposes of this UDC. In addition, the following standards and provisions shall be the governing criteria for the issuance or denial of mass grading and clearing permits under this UDC. 
A.  Grading regulations. 
1)  Mass grading operations shall be conducted so as to expose the smallest practical area of soil. 
2)  The grading shall not create or contribute to landslides, accelerated soil creep, settlement and subsidence or hazards associated with strong ground motion and soil liquefaction. 
3)  The proposal shall contain reasonable provisions for the preservation of natural land and water features, vegetation, drainage and other indigenous natural features of the site. 
4)  The grading shall not create or contribute to flooding, erosion, or increased turbidity, siltation or other forms of pollution in a watercourse. 
5)  The grading shall be undertaken in such a manner as to preserve and enhance the City of Canton's aesthetic character. Vegetative screens or buffer strips shall be maintained or reestablished in a timely manner with approved plantings consistent with this UDC. 
6)  Development shall be initiated or a vegetative screen or buffer established within 12 months of the date of initiation of mass grading or clearing activities, except in regard to those activities exempt in this UDC. 
7)  Mass grading shall not occur on areas larger than 50 contiguous acres. 
8)  Mass grading activities shall be done in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations, including those pertaining to air and water pollution, and noise control. 
9)  The faces of all slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. Devices or procedures for erosion protection shall be installed within one week of the initiation of mass grading operations and shall be maintained in operable condition by the owner during the duration of the activity for which the permit was issued. 
B.  Clear cutting and cuts regulations. 
1)  Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two-to-one (2:1). 
2)  The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, nonapproved fill, topsoil, and other unsuitable materials as determined by the community development director and, where the slopes are five-to-one (5:1) or steeper, by the excavation of relatively level steps into the slope, on which the fill is to be placed. 
3)  Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes which are steeper than two-to-one (2:1). 
4)  When the owner of any parcel shall raise, lower, or alter the level of existing grade of a site by a fill or excavation, he or she shall at his or her own expense protect all adjoining property from encroachment by such fill or from danger of collapse due to such excavation either by erection of engineered retaining wall or by sloping the sides of such fill or excavation entirely within the confines of the site in a manner approved by the community development director. 
5)  Clear cutting shall not occur on areas larger than 50 contiguous acres. 
6)  Clear cutting shall not occur 30 feet beyond the building footprint. 
7)  Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with surface and subsurface drainage as necessary to retain slope stability. 
8)  The faces of all slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. Devices or procedures for erosion protection shall be installed within one week of the initiation of clear cutting or cut operations and shall be maintained in operable condition by the owner during the duration of the activity for which the permit was issued. 
C.  Approval. A mass grading or clearing permit application shall be approved by the community development director if it meets the requirements of this UDC. 
D.  Appeals. Any person or persons aggrieved by a permit application denial of the community director may file a notice of appeal in accordance with chapter 105 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.07 - Exceptions. 
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
A.  The activities which are exempted in the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act; 
B.  Grading and clearing in emergency situations involving immediate danger to life or property or substantial fire hazards; 
C.  Removal of diseased, dead, or dying trees upon written verification by a qualified arborist or landscape architect or landscape contractor which states that removal of the trees is essential for the protection of life, limb, or property and which statement is filed with the community development department; 
D.  Agricultural operations on existing farmed areas, as defined in the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act; and 
E.  Routine maintenance activities, including tree removal, required to control vegetation on road and utility rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.08 - Violation and penalty. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this section or an approved permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of violation. 
1)  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a mass grading or clearing permit or the provisions of this section, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. 
2)  Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site and result in an immediate stop work order. 
3)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit or this section and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
B.  Penalties. 
1)  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
2)  Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
3)  In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. 
i.  The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. 
ii.  The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold issuance of other permits. The city may withhold issuance of other permits from City of Canton, including but not limited to permits for building construction and water and sewer hookup, for the affected property until corrective action is taken by the responsible party. However, if mitigating circumstances exist and a reasonable commitment for corrective action is made, the city may issue permits. Such corrective action may include: 
i.  Restoration of surface vegetation with plant material similar in character and extent as existed prior to the unauthorized clearing; 
ii.  Implementation of drainage and erosion control measures; 
iii.  Replanting of trees to replace those lost through unauthorized clearing. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. 
i.  The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. 
ii.  A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a financial penalty as permitted by municipal charter or state law for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5)  Criminal penalties. 
a.  For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. 
b.  Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as permitted by municipal charter or state law. 
c.  Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.09 - Appeals. 
See the appeals section of chapter 105 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.10 - Permit expiration. 
A.  A permit authorizing grading or clearing shall expire and become null and void unless activities are commenced within 60 business days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse for a period exceeding 14 business days. 
B.  Any permit granted shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
C.  Any site for which the grading or clearing permit expires shall be stabilized by the applicant to prevent erosion within a ten-day period. 
D.  Upon a showing of good cause, a permit may be extended by the community development director for one six-month period. 
E.  No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to the failure to commence activities or lapse and abandonment of activities. 
F.  The community development director shall notify the permit holder of the permit expiration and send the written notice by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.11.11 - Variance. 
Variances from the requirements of this section will be considered in accordance with the variances section of chapter 105 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.12.00 - Litter control. 
107.12.01 - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this section are to: 
1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Canton of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the City of Canton and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
B.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Canton. 
C.  Compatibility with other regulations. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.12.02 - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the City of Canton or any waters in the City of Canton unless: 
A.  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
B.  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
C.  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.12.03 - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
107.12.04 - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined below or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
B.  Evidence. 
1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
2)  Except as provided in subsection B.1 above, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. 
C.  Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than an amount permitted by municipal charter or state law; and 
2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection C.1 above, the violator shall reimburse the City of Canton for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the City of Canton; and 
3)  One of the following: 
a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this UDC. 
D.  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 108 - PLANS, PLATS, PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

108.01.00 - Generally. 
This UDC sets forth the procedures for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on development proposals and permits. Chapter 108 describes the plan approval process, permit procedures and required inspections. It is the city's intent that the procedures and requirements set forth in this UDC shall be followed in order to seek approval for any development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.02.00 - Plan approval process. 
108.02.01 - Policy. 
Development proposals shall be reviewed in a timely manner for compliance with the standards adopted by the Canton City Council through the plan approval process prior to any development of land and before any development permits may be issued. The remainder of this section describes the requirements and process in general so that designers and developers may be familiar with this information in order to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the approval process. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.02.02 - General requirements. 
A.  Proposed development shall meet the requirements of this UDC. 
B.  All fees associated with the plan approval process shall be determined by city council. 
C.  The plan approval process includes the approval of the following types of plans and plats: 
1)  Concept plans (preliminary plan approval). 
2)  Civil/site plans. 
3)  Final plats. 
4)  As-built plans. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.02.03 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following types of development or land subdivisions shall be submitted for approval by the city but are exempt from the plan approval process: 
1)  Development of an individual residential lot which does not result in the creation of a public or private street, or is not part of part of a subdivision or phased development project. 
2)  A minor subdivision, as defined in this UDC. 
3)  Combination of two or more lots into one. 
4)  Boundary line adjustments between two lots. 
B.  Exempted development or land subdivisions identified in subsection A above shall meet the requirements of the plat review process described in section 108.05.00 of this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.02.04 - Concept plans (preliminary plan approval). 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of reviewing concept plans is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land developments prior to investing in preparing civil/site documents and to reduce the overall number of document revisions prior to approval. 
B.  Concept plans are recommended to be reviewed by the development review team (DRT) prior to submitting civil/site documents for any development that includes one or more of the following elements: 
1)  Dedication of a public street. 
2)  Installation of public infrastructure. 
3)  Subdivision constituting a larger common plan of development, including mixed use districts as defined in chapter 102 of this UDC. 
4)  Installation of a stormwater management facility. 
5)  Complex commercial projects. 
C.  Process. The following steps outline the required concept plan submittal, review and approval process: 
1)  Request preliminary review. 
a.  Applicant requests preliminary review and schedules a meeting with the DRT through the engineering department. 
b.  The DRT shall include representatives from city departments or divisions, including but not limited to engineering, planning and zoning, building, fire, police, stormwater management, as well as the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
2)  Plan submittal. Fourteen days prior to the preliminary review meeting, the applicant shall submit the following to the engineering department in order for the city to accept the plan: 
a.  Completed application form. Application forms are available at the engineering department and on the official City of Canton, Georgia website. 
b.  Concept plans at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet minimum, including: 
i.  A digital version of the concept plan. 
ii.  Eight paper copies of the concept plan, sized 24 inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. 
c.  Plan review fee payment based on type of plan. 
d.  All plans submitted must be complete. Failure to submit complete plans shall result in a delay of the reviewing process. 
3)  Plan specifications. Concept plans shall, at a minimum, include the following components, which are more fully described in section 108.03.00: 
a.  Basic information and location map. 
b.  Property boundaries and easements. 
c.  Zoning and land use. 
d.  Water resources, stream buffers and floodplain. 
e.  Topography. 
f.  Road/streets, ROW and utilities. 
g.  Buildings and structures. 
h.  Open space and amenity areas. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading. 
j.  Stormwater management. see also the stormwater system standards and requirements section in chapter 109, Design Standards: Streets and Stormwater Systems for stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting requirements. 
4)  Preliminary review meeting. The applicant shall attend the meeting and receive comments from the plan approval team to assist with the preparation of civil/site documents. Review criteria include the following: 
a.  Compliance with this UDC, including but not limited to densities, height restriction, lot size, setbacks, buffers, roadway access, overlay districts, uses, streets, open space requirements. 
b.  Compliance with all conditions of zoning, terms and conditions of development agreements, all conditions of variances or appeals. 
c.  Compliance with relevant provisions of the City of Canton Code of Ordinances. 
d.  Provisions made for water supply and sewage disposal that will meet federal, state and local regulations. 
e.  Whether proposed roads provide safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation and are otherwise consistent with the City of Canton Comprehensive Plan and the City of Canton Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
f.  Proposed development makes accommodations for areas unsuitable for development due to the likelihood of flooding or improper drainage, or due to rock formations, topography, utility easements or other characteristics that would render development of these areas harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the general public and the citizens of the City of Canton. 
D.  Resubmittal. Concept plans and related comments will be kept on file for one year. After one year, applicants shall resubmit a concept plan prior to submitting construction documents. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.02.05 - Civil/site documents. 
A.  Purpose. Civil/site documents are intended to document the detailed design and construction required for an individual building or subdivision. 
B.  Process. The remaining section outlines the submittal, review and approval process. The steps, as outlined in subsections C through I, are required to be followed in the order and manner described. 
C.  Plan submittal. Applicant shall submit a completed application package to the engineering department. A code number will be assigned to assist in tracking plans during process. All plans submitted must be complete. Failure to submit complete plans shall result in a delay of the reviewing process. The application package shall include: 
1)  Completed application form. Application forms are available at the engineering department and on the official City of Canton, Georgia website. 
2)  Civil/site documents. Final plats at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet minimum shall be submitted to the engineering department. 
a.  A digital version of the documents is required. 
b.  Eight complete sets (paper copies), sized 24 inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches, are required. No other sizes will be accepted. 
3)  Plan review fee payment based on the current review fee schedule depending on the type of proposed development. 
4)  The centerline of the development entrance shall be located by nail and cap at the centerline or edge of pavement of the roadway that the development will access. Said nail and cap location shall be indicated on the submitted construction plans along with the date that the nail and cap were placed. 
5)  A copy of the NPDES notice of intent (NOI) ensuring compliance with that state permit and a copy of either the certification indicating the developers' completion of a NPDES class thereby permitting him/her to monitor his/her own site or a copy of a contract from a professional engineer currently registered on the State of Georgia stating that he/she been hired to monitor the development. 
6)  A copy of a certificate indicating the completion of one of the following: 
a.  The University of Georgia Erosion Control Course. 
b.  NPDES certification. 
c.  The Georgia Department of Transportation Work Site Erosion Control Supervisor Course. 
7)  A letter of approval from the Cherokee County Environmental Health Department must be submitted with the construction plans to address developments containing septic tank systems. On-site waste water systems shall not be approved where sewer is considered available to a project. 
8)  A copy of the developer's contract or a letter of commitment from a professional geo-technical engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. 
9)  If a clearing and grubbing only permit is being requested, the applicant shall submit the erosion and sedimentation control plan as well as the tree save plan. 
10)  The applicant is responsible for submitting all structural drawings and/or architectural building plans to the building department prior to any building permits being issued. 
D.  Plan specifications. Civil/site documents shall, at a minimum, include the following components, which are more fully described in section 108.03.00: 
1)  Basic information and location map. 
2)  Property boundaries and easements. 
3)  Zoning and land use. 
4)  Water resources, stream buffers and floodplain. 
5)  Topography. 
6)  Road/streets, ROW and utilities. 
7)  Stormwater management plan. 
8)  Buildings and structures. 
9)  Open space and amenity areas. 
10)  Off-street parking and loading. 
11)  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. 
12)  Landscape and tree preservation plan. 
E.  Completeness check. After the engineering department reviews the application package for completeness, the applicant will be contacted to schedule a technical review meeting. 
F.  Plan routing and initial review. 
1)  The city engineer enters the application into the tracking system, which assigns a code number to assist in tracking plans during the approval process. 
2)  Development review members are notified that civil/site documents are distributed for review, the date of the technical review meeting and deadline for their comments. The City of Canton requires a minimum two-week review period. 
3)  The DRT shall include representatives from the following departments and agencies based on the scope of the proposal: 
a.  Stormwater management. 
b.  Canton Planning and Zoning Division. 
c.  Canton Building Division. 
d.  Canton Engineering Department. 
e.  Canton Utilities Department. 
f.  Canton Fire Department. 
g.  Canton Oversight Committee. 
h.  USDA Natural Resource Conservation Services (GASWCC). 
4)  Plan approval team members enter their review comments into the tracking system. 
5)  Applicant may review comments from the online "track it" system as they are completed by individual team members. Applicant may note any comments that require clarification or further explanation. 
G.  DRT meeting. Applicant shall attend the technical review meeting with the DRT to discuss and clarify comments prior to revising the civil/site documents. 
H.  Plan revisions after technical review. 
1)  Applicant shall submit revised civil/site documents to the engineering department. 
2)  City staff logs in revisions and notifies DRT that they are available for review. 
3)  DRT reviews revisions. 
a.  If the revisions completely address comments, team members approve application. 
b.  If comments are not addressed, applicant will receive comments through the online "track it" system. The applicant may contact individual departments for clarification. Any changes to the plans must be resubmitted to the engineering department for re-re-routing to the DRT. 
c.  Team members indicate their approval in the tracking system. 
I.  Plan approval. 
1)  When revisions completely address comments, the applicant will be notified by the engineering department that all departments and agencies have approved the construction plans and final copies must be submitted for stamping. 
2)  The applicant shall submit final copies. Final copies are stamped for LDP issuance. The approved set of plans does not constitute a land disturbance permit. 
3)  The city engineer shall provide the applicant with an approval letter containing information about the LDP process and fees (see section 108.04.01). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.02.06 - Final plats. 
A.  Purpose. Final plats illustrate the final configuration of ROW and property lines in order for the property to be subdivided by recording the plan in the engineering office. 
B.  Process. The remaining section outlines the final plat submittal, review and approval process. The steps, as outlined in subsections C through F below, are required to be followed in the order and manner described. 
C.  Plat submittal. 
1)  The applicant shall submit the following to the engineering department for review: 
a.  Completed application form. Application forms are available at the engineering department and on the official City of Canton, Georgia website. 
b.  Final plats at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet minimum, including: 
i.  A digital version of the final plat. 
ii.  Eight paper copies of the final plat, sized 18 inches by 22 inches. 
c.  Plan review fee payment based on current fee schedule. 
2)  Final plats will not be approved for recording until the development inspector has approved the public improvements on the property. 
3)  At the time of final plat submittal, the as-built plans must be presented in accordance with section 108.02.07. 
D.  Plat specifications. Final plats shall, at a minimum, include the following components, which are more fully described in section 108.03.00: 
1)  Basic information and location map. 
2)  Property boundaries and easements. 
3)  Zoning and land use. 
4)  Water resources, stream buffers and floodplain. 
5)  Road/streets, ROW and utilities. 
6)  Buildings and structures. 
7)  Open space and amenity areas. 
8)  Off-street parking and loading. 
9)  Signature blocks and stamps. 
E.  Review criteria. The final plat shall be reviewed for conformance with the approved civil/site documents, the requirements of this UDC, and any special conditions or restrictions imposed by the DRT, engineering department or any other reviewing entity. 
F.  Plat approval. 
1)  Final approval shall be granted provided the final plat is substantially the same as the approved civil/site documents or approved revisions, fulfills all conditions specified by the DRT, engineering department or any other reviewing entity and contains all of the specifications set forth in section 108.03.00. 
2)  When the final plat is found to be in conflict with the approved site/civil documents or with this UDC, the final plat shall be disapproved. The subdivider will be provided with a statement of the reasons for disapproval along with the original plat. The final plat may be resubmitted for approval after corrections have been made. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.02.07 - As-built plans. 
A.  Purpose. As-built plans document the final location of infrastructure and utilities; they shall be submitted for all developments prior to issuance to a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Process. The remaining section outlines the as-built submittal and review process. The steps, as outlined in subsections C through E below, are required to be followed in the order and manner described. 
C.  Plan submittal. 
1)  The applicant shall submit the following to the engineering department for review: 
a.  Completed application form. Application forms are available at the engineering department and on the official City of Canton, Georgia website. 
b.  As-built plans at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet minimum, including: 
i.  A digital version of the plans. 
ii.  Ten paper copies of the plans, sized 24 inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. 
c.  Plan review fee payment based on current fee schedule. 
D.  Plan specifications. 
1)  As-built plans shall be prepared by an appropriate state approved professional certifying a field run survey of as-built conditions. 
2)  As-built plans shall, at a minimum, include the following components, which are more fully described in section 108.03.00: 
a.  Basic information and location map. 
b.  Property boundaries and easements. 
c.  Road/streets, ROW and utilities. As-built plans shall include storm sewer plans, sanitary sewer plans and profiles and vertical grade data, including storm drainage and detention structure and basins. 
d.  Stormwater management. 
e.  Buildings and structures. 
f.  Off-street parking and loading. 
g.  Landscaping and tree planting. As-built plans shall indicate the actual tree protection plan areas at the end of construction so they can be verified against the approved civil/site documents. 
E.  Review criteria. The as-built plans shall be reviewed for conformance with the approved civil/site documents, the requirements of this UDC, and any special conditions or restrictions imposed by the DRT, engineering department or any other reviewing entity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.00 - Plan specifications. 
Plans and documents submitted for review in accordance with section 108.02.00 shall address each of the items listed below the relevant component, as described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.01 - Plan specifications; basic information and location map. 
A.  Name of project, i.e. residential subdivision or proposed business, and project phases, if any. 
B.  Project address, street addresses shall be obtained from Cherokee County. 
C.  Land lot, section and district of subject property. 
D.  Water flow test conducted by the City of Canton Fire Department. 
E.  Name, address and phone number of the property owner(s). 
F.  Name, address and phone number of the developer or sub-divider, including 24-hour phone number to contact on civil/site documents or plans. 
G.  Name, address and phone number of design professional responsible for preparing plans, including firm name and registration number. 
H.  Date of submittal and most recent revisions. 
I.  North arrow and graphic scale on all plans. 
J.  Location map. 
1)  Map of the area in the vicinity of the subject property with adjoining roads. 
2)  Property boundary outline. 
3)  Nearest major intersections. 
4)  Scale. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.02 - Plan specifications; property boundaries and easements. 
A.  Surveyed boundaries of the all tracts/lots and their relationship to adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and easements. Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings. Show field survey error of closure. 
B.  Total acreage of property. 
C.  Total number of lots. 
D.  Proposed lot layout, with approximate dimensions. 
E.  Lots shall be numbered consecutively across all units with no duplication of numbers. There will be no block lettering or phasing. Division will be made by units. 
F.  Adjacent property owners and surrounding residential subdivisions. 
G.  References to recorded subdivision plats of abutting land. Provide record name/plat book/page number. 
H.  Location of all existing and proposed easements on the property and their purpose. 
I.  Any city or county boundaries, utility lines, bridges, street culverts and similar features. 
J.  Requirements specific to civil/site documents: 
1)  Total disturbed acres. 
2)  Lot areas in acres or square feet. 
3)  Assigned addresses for all lots. Show on plan for multiple lots. 
K.  Requirements specific to final plats and as-built plans: 
1)  Unit lines, for subdivisions to be developed in units. 
2)  Land lot lines or the nearest existing street intersection shall be tied to the subdivision by bearings and distances. 
3)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest tenth foot and bearings to the nearest minute. 
4)  Accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments and markers. 
5)  References to any protective covenants, with deed book and page number or a statement indicating that there are no protective covenants. 
6)  Name of former subdivision, if any or all of the land had been previously subdivided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.03 - Plan specifications; zoning and land use. 
A.  Zoning of subject property and surrounding properties, including if located within an overlay district. 
B.  Proposed land use for subject property and current land use of surrounding properties. 
C.  Indicate if residential subdivision is a conservation subdivision. 
D.  Gross and net density in lots per acre. 
E.  Minimum lot size or site area for zoning district. 
F.  Front, side and rear setbacks for subject property, listed in notes and shown on a plan. 
G.  Buffers between dissimilar land uses. Label width and designate as "land use buffer." 
H.  Requirements specific for civil/site documents: 
1)  Case number and scanned copy of city council resolution from map amendment or approval letter for any variances, if applicable. 
2)  Indicate that all lots meet minimum lot width requirements. 
I.  Water resources, stream buffers and floodplain. 
1)  All streams (perennial and intermittent), rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features within 200 feet of subject property. 
2)  Any permanent ponds or lakes, required buffers and any private easements. 
3)  Location of the 100-year floodplain, or a statement that no part of the property lies within the 100-year floodplain. 
4)  Twenty-five-foot undisturbed state water buffer, 50-foot undisturbed city stream bank buffer and 75-foot impervious surface setbacks or note "there are no state waters on or within 200 feet of property." 
5)  Etowah River buffers (100 feet), if applicable. 
6)  Groundwater recharge areas, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.04 - Plan specifications; topography. 
A.  Topographic contours at the following intervals: 
1)  Two-foot intervals (mean sea level) for civil/site documents. 
2)  Location and mean sea level elevation based on NAVD88 and a benchmark. 
3)  Areas that have slopes greater than or equal to 25 percent shall be identified as steep slopes and shall be subject to the requirements of the Hillside and Ridgeline Protection section in chapter 107, Resource Management. 
B.  Proposed grading, if different than existing contours. 
C.  General soil types. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.05 - Plan specifications; roads/streets, right-of-way and utilities. 
A.  All existing roads, streets or alleys within 200 feet of subject property, showing right-of-way and pavement widths. 
B.  Proposed street layout and inter-parcel connections. Private streets shall only be allowed within gated or secured developments. Street signs within these developments shall contain the words "Private Streets" on each sign. 
C.  Existing and proposed sidewalks or trails that connect the subject property to neighboring areas. 
D.  Deceleration lanes at development entrances, where required. 
E.  Indication that utilities will be located underground or overhead. 
F.  Proposed type of water and sanitary sewer service. 
G.  Location of nearest existing fire hydrant with hydrant number (located on hydrant). 
H.  Additional requirements specific to civil/site documents: 
1)  Proposed street names verified with Cherokee County. 
2)  The plan, profile and speed limit for the existing city road at the development entrance. 
3)  Profiles and typical sections for all proposed streets. 
4)  Proposed street grades. 
5)  Proposed lengths of all vertical curves. 
6)  Appropriate curve data for all streets. 
7)  Stations at 100-foot intervals shall be shown. 
8)  Vertical stopping sight distance at all proposed internal subdivision intersections. 
9)  Dimensions of turning radii. 
10)  Street horizontal curve radii. 
11)  All radii, curb setbacks and taper details. 
12)  Typical construction details, such as ROW paving details and curb/gutter details. 
13)  Location of street signs, stop signs and speed limit signs. 
14)  Intersection plans for intersections of proposed roads, showing topographic features, storm drainage, intersection geometry, existing and proposed contours, traffic control devices and signs, pavement markings, typical paving sections and other pertinent details. 
15)  Future right-of-way, if additional right-of-way is required to bring an existing city road up to current standards. 
16)  Details of temporary construction exits at all construction access points to public roads. 
17)  The names of all utility companies serving the development. 
18)  Standard utility placement cross section detail. 
19)  Certification that a water flow test has been performed within the past 12 months. 
20)  If the development will utilize on-site wastewater disposal, the location of all wells on or within 100 feet of the property shall be indicated, or a statement provided certifying that there are no such wells. 
21)  Confirm compliance with the requirements for fire apparatus access as required by the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of Canton. 
22)  See also the pre-construction requirements section in chapter 110, Design Standards: Water System (pertaining to water requirements). 
23)  See also the plans section in chapter 111, Design Standards: Sewer System (pertaining to sewer requirements). 
I.  Additional requirements specific to as-built plans: 
1)  Table of dedication. 
2)  Location of fire hydrants. 
3)  In addition to subsection H.22 above, see also the water line inspection, testing and acceptance section in chapter 110, Design Standards: Water System (pertaining to water requirements). 
4)  See also the plans section in chapter 111, Design Standards: Sewer System (pertaining to sewer requirements). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
108.03.06 - Plan specifications; stormwater management. 
See the post-development stormwater management section in chapter 109, Design Standards: Streets and Stormwater Systems for stormwater management plan requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.07 - Plan specifications; buildings and structures. 
A.  All existing buildings, foundations, walls, wells, and other structures. 
B.  All proposed buildings, indicating shape, size and setbacks. Show dimensions between buildings and property lines at a minimum of two building corners. 
C.  All other proposed structures, such as retaining walls. 
D.  Label each non-residential building with total gross square footage. 
E.  Representative architectural sketches or renderings of typical proposed structures, signs, landscaping, screening and/or fencing may be required depending on zoning district. 
F.  Requirements specific to civil/site documents: 
1)  The proposed finished floor elevations of all buildings. 
2)  The location, height and size of any proposed free-standing signs. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.08 - Plan specifications; open space and amenity areas. 
A.  Total acres of open space. 
B.  Distribution of open space between natural areas and civic spaces, if applicable. 
C.  Location of all land to be reserved or dedicated for open space for recreation, public gathering places or natural wildlife habitat. 
D.  Location of existing or proposed bikeways, pedestrian paths or other recreational facilities. 
E.  See also the conservation subdivision/open space development section in chapter 107, Resource Management for open space requirements in conservation subdivision developments. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.09 - Plan specifications; off-street parking and loading. 
A.  Show relevant parking requirements and parking calculations. 
B.  Proposed off-street parking facilities, including the dimensions of the parking lot, location of parking spaces, and maneuvering aisles. 
C.  Loading and unloading space(s), if applicable. 
D.  A standard detail of a commercial driveway entering a street. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.10 - Plan specifications; soil erosion and sediment control. 
See the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section (application/permit process subsection) in chapter 107, Resource Management. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.11 - Plan specifications; landscaping and tree planting. 
See the landscape and buffer standards section (landscape plan requirements subsection) and the tree protection section (tree protection plan subsection) in chapter 103, Site Planning and Project Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.03.12 - Signature blocks and stamps. 
A.  Appropriate state approved professional's stamp. 
B.  State approved design professional's stamp and signature. 
C.  Requirements specific to as-built plans: 
1)  Surveyor's stamp and signature for as-built plans. 
2)  Surveyor's certification statement. 
3)  Owner's certification and dedication statements. 
4)  Health department certification statement, if required. 
5)  Community development department certification statement. 
6)  Statement explaining plat changes, if the plat is being re-recorded. 
D.  Requirements specific to final plats: 
1)  Approval certificate . Upon approval of the final plat, a certificate, stamped directly on the plat, shall state: 
"Pursuant to the Unified Development Code of the City of Canton, Georgia, and all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given preliminary approval on ________, 20___, and final approval by the Community Development Director and City Engineer and it is entitled to recordation in the Clerk's Office, Cherokee County Superior Court." 
2)  Surveyor's certificate. A certificate by a surveyor directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or persons under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and that their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Unified Development Code of the City of Canton, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By: ___________ Registered Georgia Land Surveyor 
No.: _____" Surveyor's Certificate. 
3)  Owner's certificate. A certificate by the owner directly on the final plat, signed in an appropriate manner as follows: 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, and that all State, City and County taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. Said owner donates and dedicates to the public for use forever the street right-of-way as shown on this plat. 
Owner Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
______________________________ 
4)  Health department approval certificate. 
"This final plat has been approved by the Cherokee County Health Department as being consistent with applicable state and local environmental health requirements. 
______________________________  Director, Cherokee County Health Department" 
5)  Private street notes and certificates (if applicable). 
a.  "WARNING, the City of Canton has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat."; 
b.  "Grant of Easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City of Canton, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 

 
c.  The following certificate of dedication shall be required, unless the Canton City Council waives the dedication requirement: 
"Certificate of Dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within the general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) are hereby dedicated to the City of Canton. 

 
d.  Requirement for purchaser's acknowledgement of private responsibilities. Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the city, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall obtain a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility 
(I)/(We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction _______ (insert address or attach legal description). (I)/(We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am)/(we are) purchasing and requires (me)/(us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am)/(we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots as depicted on this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me)/(us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my)/(our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. (I)/(We) further understand that the City of Canton has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. (I)/(We) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am)/(we are) purchasing. 
________________________  Purchaser 
________________________  Purchaser" 
6)  City officials. This plat has been found to be in accordance with all the rules, regulations of the City of Canton and is hereby approved for recording. 
Date: Zoning Administrator _____    
Date: City Engineer _____    
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
108.04.00 - Permits and inspections. 
108.04.01 - Land disturbance permits. 
A.  General. 
1)  After civil/site documents are approved by the DRT, a developer or his authorized agent must apply for a land disturbance permit (LDP) prior to beginning any development activities. 
2)  The development inspectors are charged with issuance of any LDPs and ensuring compliance with regulations through all phases of the permit. 
3)  The City of Canton issues the following types of land disturbance permits: 
a.  Timbering. 
b.  Clearing and grubbing. 
c.  Clearing and grading. 
d.  Full site LDP. 
4)  Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the development inspector. The development inspector shall make the required inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the work that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this UDC. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected before work continues on that portion. 
5)  All permits shall be posted in a visible place so that they will be legible from the frontage roadway. 
6)  Additional permits may be required for activities outside of the LDP process such as burning or blasting. 
B.  Application and payment of fees. 
1)  The following items shall be completed prior to applying for a land disturbance permit: 
a.  Apply for NPDES permit to the state and the city at least 14 days prior to beginning construction. 
b.  Applicant must bring the certificate of mailing and a copy of the NPDES check sent to the state. 
2)  Once the application has been submitted and the fees have been paid, the applicant will request a pre-construction meeting. 
C.  Pre-construction meeting. 
1)  The developer is responsible for requesting a pre-construction meeting once the LDP application has been submitted and fees paid. 
2)  The developer shall bring the approved set of civil/site documents to the pre-construction meeting. 
D.  Pre-construction inspection. 
1)  The developer is responsible for requesting a pre-construction inspection once the following items are completed: 
a.  Advance warning signs posted with speed reduction advisory plates placed on connecting thoroughfares at 1,000 feet and 500 feet points on either side of the intersection. 
b.  All buffers (state, city and those required by zoning) protected with orange tree save fencing material reviewed and approved by the development inspector. 
c.  Construction exit installed and permit board posted. 
2)  If the items listed under subsection D.1 above are not approved by the development inspector, the developer will have to complete the insufficient items, call for another inspection and pay a re-inspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the Canton City Council. 
3)  At the development inspector's discretion, the pre-construction meeting and inspection may be combined based on the scope of the project and level of experience of the developer. 
4)  LDP card will be issued by the development inspector. 
E.  Phase I: Clearing. 
1)  The clearing phase of the project is when the developer clears the site of trees and vegetation according to the approved civil/site documents. The developer is also responsible during this phase for installing and maintaining required erosion and sedimentation control devices. 
2)  During the clearing phase, only 50 acres may be disturbed at one time. 
3)  The developer is responsible for completing the following items, if applicable, prior to the clearing inspection: 
a.  All trees and other vegetation removed, mulched or burned. 
b.  All Phase I erosion control measures installed. 
c.  All sediment ponds installed, matted and grassed. 
d.  Seven-day letter from the design engineer concerning all erosion control devices. 
F.  Phase II and III: Grading. 
1)  The grading phase of the project is when the developer reshapes the contours of the property, constructs public infrastructure elements and installs landscaping as shown on the approved civil/site documents. During this phase, the development inspector will be conducting on-going erosion control, stormwater and transportation inspections based on the pace of construction of the project. 
2)  Erosion control inspections ensure the following items are installed and maintained as required: 
a.  Active grassing every seven days on non-active disturbed areas. 
b.  Silt fence. 
c.  Check dams. 
d.  Temporary ponds. 
e.  Permanent ponds. 
3)  Transportation inspections ensure the following items are installed according to the approved civil/site documents and City of Canton Specifications: 
a.  Curb and gutter. 
b.  Subgrade. 
c.  Base. 
d.  Asphalt. 
e.  Entrances—Sight distance and water flows. 
4)  Stormwater inspections ensure the following items are installed according to the approved civil/site documents and City of Canton Specifications: 
a.  Pipes. 
b.  Catch basins, inverts, grout, tops, BMP's, etc. 
G.  Final site approval. 
1)  The final site inspections ensure that all site improvements are complete and the project is ready to move into the maintenance period prior to city acceptance. These inspections will review the following: 
a.  As-builts. 
b.  Storm drains. 
c.  Permanent grass. 
d.  Silt fence removal. 
e.  Water flow (easements/drainage and entrances). 
f.  Pond inspection/letter/water quality. 
g.  Street signs. 
h.  Striping. 
i.  Landscaping (reviewed by the zoning administrator). 
j.  Retaining wall letters. 
2)  The final site inspections shall only occur after the final plat and as-builts have been submitted. 
3)  Upon the completion of paving, the developer shall request a final punch list in writing from the development inspector. The development inspector shall transmit the completed punch list along with the calculated maintenance guarantee amount. 
4)  If the development inspector finds upon inspection that all improvements meet the city requirements, the inspector shall provide written "notice of acceptance" to the developer. 
5)  The developer shall post the maintenance guarantee before the final plat is recorded (see also section 108.04.02). 
6)  If the development inspector finds, upon inspection, that the improvements do not meet the city requirements, the inspector shall provide the developer with written notice detailing the reasons for rejection of the improvements. 
7)  The development inspector shall re-inspect the project for compliance and release when requested by the developer. If any further re-inspection is necessary, then a re-inspection fee shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule that is adopted by the Canton City Council. All re-inspection fees shall be paid in full prior to the approval of a final plat (residential) or certificate of occupancy (non-residential). 
8)  Once the final plat has been approved and all required public improvements complete except work covered by a performance guarantee (see section 108.04.03), the final plat shall be signed by the responsible city departments and presented by the developer to the Clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County for recording. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.04.02 - Maintenance guarantee. 
A.  The developer shall submit a maintenance guarantee, in the form of an open ended, automatically renewing bond to cover the cost of maintaining or repairing the constructed improvements. 
B.  The developer shall be required to keep the 18 month maintenance guarantee active until the improvements have been accepted as outlined in this chapter or the city will have no recourse but to call the bond, cash or assignment of certificate of deposit and make any improvements or repairs necessary for city acceptance. 
C.  If all maintenance repairs are not completed within the 18 month maintenance period, the amount of the maintenance guarantee will be reviewed by the community development director and/or the city engineer, to determine if the amount is still acceptable to cover the construction cost of the required repairs. If the amount of the guarantee is found not to be sufficient to cover the construction cost of the required repairs, the developer shall post a revised guarantee in the revised amount. 
D.  Bonds shall be issued by sureties licensed by and active with the Georgia Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner and listed in Circular 570 (Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 126) among companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties on Federal bonds and as acceptable reinsuring companies. Assignments of certificates of deposit shall be issued by banks or savings and loan associations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, licensed to do business in Georgia and shall be fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. All bonds and assignments of certificates of deposit shall be on the form supplied by the city and must be approved as to execution and as to the validity of any attached power of attorney by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.04.03 - Performance guarantee. 
A.  At the discretion of the city, a developer may submit a performance guarantee in the form of a bond, cash or assignment of certificate of deposit in lieu of the required final coat of paving and/or required tree planting before the final plat is recorded or certificate of occupancy is issued. 
B.  The amount of such guarantee shall be set by the city. The amount of the performance guarantee will be based upon 110 percent of the construction cost necessary to cover the installation of the final course of paving and/or required tree planting. 
C.  The developer shall be required to keep the performance guarantee active until all work covered by the guarantee is completed. 
D.  If all work is not completed within one year of the posting of the performance guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee will be reviewed by the development inspection manager, to determine if the amount is still acceptable to cover the construction cost of the required improvement. If the amount of the guarantee is found not to be sufficient to cover the construction cost of the required improvement, the developer shall post a revised guarantee in the revised amount. 
E.  Bonds shall be issued by sureties licensed by and active with the Georgia Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner and listed in Circular 570 (Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 126) among companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable sureties on Federal bonds and as acceptable reinsuring companies. Assignments of certificates of deposit shall be issued by banks or savings and loan associations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, licensed to do business in Georgia and shall be fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. All bonds and assignments of certificates of deposit shall be on the form supplied by the city and must be approved as to execution and as to the validity of any attached power of attorney by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.04.04 - Approval and acceptance of improvements. 
A.1)  a.  The final plat has been approved and recorded. 
b.  All performance and maintenance guarantees have been released. 
c.  Improvements have been approved for city acceptance. 
2)  During the 18-month maintenance period the development inspector shall observe the improvements for a full 12-month period. The developer shall be required to contact the development inspector in writing at the end of the 12-month period to initiate the city's approval process. 
3)  The development inspector shall prepare a punch list to the developer affording him/her a 60-day period in which to make all necessary repairs. The developer shall be required to contact the development inspector at the end of the 60-day period in writing after all punch list items have been completed. The development inspector shall have 30 days to make his/her final review for approval and shall notify the developer in writing of the results of this inspection. 
4)  An extension of the maintenance guarantee can be granted at the discretion of the city engineer. The amount of the maintenance guarantee will be reviewed by the development inspection manager, to determine if the amount is still acceptable to cover the construction cost of the required repairs, prior to granting any extensions. If any needed repairs are not completed by the developer within the specified period of time, the maintenance guarantee shall be called in to pay for such repairs. Should the amount of the maintenance guarantee be inadequate to pay for the full cost of the repairs, the City of Canton shall have the authority to collect the remaining amount from the developer. 
5)  At the time that the work is inspected and found free from defects, the development inspector shall provide the developer with written approval and the city engineer shall submit the improvements for city acceptance. 
6)  Acceptance shall be made as an item of business conducted at the next regular meeting of the Canton City Council. 
B.  Revisions to approved civil/site documents. Any revisions or changes made to civil/site documents as a result of changes made out in the field are required to be documented under the following criteria: 
1)  Revised civil/site documents (major). 
a.  Civil/site documents shall be re-submitted if proposed changes meet the criteria for major changes. 
b.  A change meeting one or more of the following criteria shall be considered a major change: 
i.  Any increase in the number of lots. 
ii.  Any revision to an approved detention pond. 
iii.  Any shifting of storm drainage pipes resulting in an increase of drainage basin by ten percent or more. 
iv.  Any revision to a road grade that has been approved at six percent or greater that result in an increase in road grade or in a reduction in road grades of four percent or more. 
v.  Any revision to a road layout resulting in an increase of road length by ten percent or more. 
vi.  Any renumbering of lot numbers, blocks, pods, etc. 
vii.  Any renaming of streets. 
c.  Documents for all major changes shall be re-submitted in accordance with the plan approval process prior to any construction changes in the field. 
2)  Revised civil/site documents (minor). 
a.  The following procedures must be followed for a minor change to be accepted the time of final plat submittal: 
i.  The change must be minor. 
ii.  The development inspector must review in the field and communicated his findings with the city engineer. 
iii.  The engineer of record must contact the city engineer. 
iv.  The engineer of record must follow-up with a letter indicating the revision or a plan as needed. 
b.  The following are definitions of what constitutes a minor change: 
i.  Any decrease in the number of lots. 
ii.  Any shifting of storm drainage pipes resulting in less than a ten percent increase of drainage basin. 
iii.  Any revision to an approved road grade that results in a change not exceeding four percent reduction. 
iv.  Any revision to a road layout resulting in a decrease in road length. 
v.  Shifting of lot lines within a phase with no increase in the total number of approved lots. 
vi.  Buffer revisions or variances that have been approved in compliance with this UDC. 
vii.  Any extension of pipes for aesthetic purposes. 
viii.  The division of an approved single-phase development into one or more phases. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.04.05 - Building permits. 
A.  Permit application. 
1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
2)  Exceptions. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
a.  Any portable heating appliance; 
b.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
c.  Any portable cooling unit; 
d.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
e.  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
f.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
g.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
3)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
4)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
5)  Information required. 
a.  Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. 
b.  The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. 
c.  The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
6)  Time limitations. The following time limitations shall apply: 
a.  An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. 
b.  One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
B.  Drawings and specifications. 
1)  Requirements. 
a.  When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. 
b.  All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
2)  Additional data. 
a.  The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. 
b.  All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the Building Official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal and signature. 
3)  Design professional. 
a.  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
i.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
ii.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
iii.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
b.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
c.  Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
5)  Site drawings. 
a.  Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. 
b.  The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
6)  Foundation surveys. 
a.  For all newly constructed buildings or additions, the permit applicant shall provide a foundation (footings) survey signed by a registered land surveyor showing: 
i.  The foundation (footing) location, 
ii.  The outer perimeter of the proposed structure, 
iii.  Building setbacks to property lines, 
iv.  Any easements, 
v.  Any zoning setback and buffer dimensions, 
vi.  Any existing structures on site, and 
vii.  Any buffers of the waters of the State of Georgia. 
7)  The survey shall be submitted for approval to the city prior to scheduling of any further construction inspections on site. 
8)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to the location of: 
i.  All buildings, 
ii.  Permanent access ways, 
iii.  Evacuation routes, 
iv.  Parking lots, 
v.  Internal roads, 
vi.  Chemical loading areas, 
vii.  Equipment cleaning areas, 
viii.  Storm and sanitary sewer accesses, 
ix.  Emergency equipment, 
x.  Adjacent property uses, and 
xi.  Exterior storage facilities (exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored). 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
C.  Examination of documents. 
1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
D.  Issuing permits. 
1)  Action on permits. 
a.  The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
b.  If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
2)  Refusal to issue permit. 
a.  If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. 
b.  Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
3)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the city engineer for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
E.  Contractor responsibilities. 
1)  It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. 
2)  In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with a copy of their license before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
F.  Conditions of the permit. 
1)  Permit intent. 
a.  A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. 
b.  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit, in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
ii.  Extensions shall be granted by the building official. 
2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Such architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. 
b.  In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, all sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other sets shall be returned to the applicant. One copy of the permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
G.  Fees. 
1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if required has been paid. 
2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees collected the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
5)  Building permit valuations. 
a.  If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. 
b.  Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor and shall be based on the approved index of the City of Canton. 
H.  Inspections. 
1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. 
a.  The building official shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. 
b.  The building official shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
3)  Inspection service. 
a.  The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection H.6 below. 
b.  The building official may accept third party inspections. The contractor may proceed with these only with prior approval and must use a company approved by the City of Canton. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises and in accordance with the following additional requirements: 
a.  The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. 
b.  This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with this UDC: 
a.  Building. 
i.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
ii.  Structural sheathing: To be made after all sheathing, panels and exterior structural elements are in place. 
iii.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. All MEP inspections must be approved before a frame inspection is approved. 
iv.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
i.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
ii.  Wall rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing and fire blocking are in place and all conduit, wiring and supports are in place and properly connected and prior to the installation of wall membranes. 
iii.  Ceiling rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing and fire blocking are in place and all conduit, wiring and supports are in place and properly connected and prior to the installation of ceiling membranes. 
iv.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
i.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
ii.  Wall rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste, supply and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall membranes. 
iii.  Ceiling rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing and fire blocking are in place and all soil, waste, supply and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of ceiling membranes. 
iv.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
v.  Note: See section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
i.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
ii.  Wall rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall membranes. 
iii.  Ceiling rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of ceiling membranes. 
iv.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
i.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
ii.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
iii.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
i.  Foundation inspection: be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
ii.  Frame inspection: to be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
iii.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
7)  Written release. 
a.  Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. 
b.  Written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
I.  Certificates. 
1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. 
i.  A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
ii.  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the construction type and the occupant load in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. The building official may, upon review of the circumstances, issue a temporary/partial certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. 
i.  A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. 
ii.  When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the existing building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
2)  Certificate of completion. 
a.  Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. 
b.  The certificate of completion is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. 
c.  The certificate of completion does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to a building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
J.  Floor loads. 
1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. 
2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. 
3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
K.  Tests. 
1)  The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. 
2)  Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.04.06 - Minor land disturbance permits. 
A.  General. 
1)  The owner or his authorized agent must apply for a minor land disturbance permit prior to beginning any land disturbing activities. 
2)  The development services manager and inspectors are charged with issuance of any minor land disturbance permits and ensuring compliance with regulations. 
3)  Work shall not be done until the minor land disturbance permit has been issued. 
4)  All permits shall be posted in a visible place so that they will be legible from the frontage roadway. 
B.  When required. 
1)  Any project with disturbance less than one acre, which includes but not limited to the following: 
a.  Removal of underbrush, shrubs and other low growing vegetation and trees up to three inches, when it includes the removal of the stumps and root systems. 
b.  Construction of driveways, patios, parking areas, and/or walls under four feet. 
c.  Removal and/or addition of earth onto property. 
d.  Site preparation prior to building permit. 
e.  Septic tank installation and/or access. 
2)  Projects under one acre that propose to create or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface, projects that include any work in the right-of-way and/or projects within 200 feet of state waters will be required to submit for full land disturbance permit per section 108.04.01. 
C.  Exemptions. 
1)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
2)  The construction of single-family residences when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale with planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section. 
D.  Information required. 
1)  Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the community development department on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. 
2)  Drawings with dimensions and with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. 
E.  Erosion protection and sediment control. 
1)  Minor land disturbance permits are subject to all erosion protection and sediment control requirements as stated in the City of Canton Development Code. These requirements will be inspected and enforced by the City of Canton and failure to comply may result in the issuance of a "Stop Work Order" and/or penalties until compliance is accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 2019-0117-09, 1-17-2019) 
108.05.00 - Plat review process. 
108.05.01 - Plat review process, generally. 
A.  Required review. 
1)  Minor subdivisions, lot combinations and boundary line adjustments that meet the criteria and requirements of this chapter shall be reviewed and approved through the administrative plat review process, as described in subsection a.2 below. 
2)  The plat review process includes the following steps: 
a.  Step 1. Applicant submits complete application with three copies of the final plat for review. 
b.  Step 2. Community development staff reviews final plat based on the criteria in section 108.05.03. If the final plat is meets all requirements, staff will prepare the final plat for recording. If corrections need to be made, the applicant is provided with a list of necessary corrections. When corrections have been made, the revised final plats must be submitted to staff for verification before they are prepared for recording. 
c.  Step 3. Applicant pays fee for review and recording of final plat. 
d.  Step 4. Final plat is submitted to the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County for recording. 
B.  Exemptions. The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements elsewhere in this UDC: 
1)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
2)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
3)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
4)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the city to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the City of Canton concerning lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.05.02 - All land subdivisions to comply. 
The following land subdivisions, as described herein, shall comply with the requirements of the plat review process: 
A.  Minor subdivision. 
1)  Purpose. 
a.  Property owners who desire to subdivide property for subsequent sale as independent tracts of land; and in which the land involved is not a part of a larger common plan of development; but otherwise meet all other city regulations regarding zoning and land development, may submit such subdivision of land to the city for review and approval as a final plat. 
b.  It is the intent of the city council to provide for the division of land not a part of a larger common plan of development (minor subdivisions), whereby an original tract of land may be divided into not more than five individual tracts of land provided all tracts of land within the subdivision have appropriate frontage, access, and otherwise comply with all city regulations including, but not limited to this UDC. 
2)  Chain subdivisions prohibited. 
a.  Divisions of land not a part of a larger common plan of development may be submitted to the city for review and approval following the procedure as a final plat. Such divisions of land provide certain advantages, in that a final plat is all that may be required for the purpose of subdividing the original tract of land into new lots, which tend to favor their use. Given these advantages, the prospect exists that sub-dividers may seek to divide a parcel via consecutive and/or contiguous final plats instead of filing a concept plan as a larger common plan of development. 
b.  It is the policy of the city council to prohibit the practice of "chain" subdivisions where the same land owner subdivides land and then files additional subdivision applications on common contiguous parcels, which collectively creates a larger common plan of development. It is also the policy of the city council to prohibit the division of land not a part of a larger plan of common development adjacent to each other within a two-year time period, in cases where part of an original tract of land is now owned by another person or entity and was transferred or sold to another owner with the apparent intent to circumvent the preliminary plat process. 
3)  Contiguous common parcels shown on subdivision plats. 
a.  Contiguous common parcels, as defined in this section, shall be referenced on all applications for subdivision of land, and contiguous common parcels shall be considered part of any application for subdivision of land, for purposes of determining whether or not the division of land proposed is a part of a larger common plan of development. 
b.  Common contiguous parcels shall not be counted as lots in the case of a subdivision. 
4)  Limitations. This section only applies to the division of a single parcel into not more than five sub-parcels smaller than ten acres, and within any two-year period. In all other cases, a concept plan application must be filed and approved pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the approval of two contiguous subdivisions under separate ownership; however, this provision is intended to be construed liberally so that one property owner does not develop a subdivision on part of an original tract and transfer or sell another part of the original tract for the purposes of subdivision within a two-year period. It is the intent that land abutting a subdivision that was owned by the sub-divider of the abutting subdivision shall not be subdivided for a period of two years, regardless of ownership without preliminary plan review. 
5)  City reservation. The City of Canton reserves the right to require any person seeking to subdivide land within the city limits of Canton to submit a concept plan for review where the city engineer or community development director find that such plan review is necessary to conform to state or city laws and regulations. 
B.  Lot combinations. 
1)  An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of this UDC. In the case where no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the community development director and recorded as a final plat. 
2)  Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 
C.  Boundary line adjustments. 
1)  One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the community development director and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the community development director and recorded. 
2)  Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
108.05.03 - Plat review criteria. 
A.  The community development director may grant final plat approval for minor subdivisions, lot combinations and boundary line adjustments if the following conditions are met: 
1)  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of this UDC. 
2)  All other city regulations and requirements pertinent to land development have been met. 
3)  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of the Georgia Plat Act. 
4)  A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting materials required for final plats. 
B.  The community development director shall consider final plats and applications that meet the above-referenced conditions a ministerial action of approval. Denial of a final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of the above-referenced conditions have not been met. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 109 - DESIGN STANDARDS: STREETS AND STORMWATER SYSTEMS 

109.01.00 - Generally. 
This chapter expands upon the standards of chapter 103 by addressing additional details of project design for the purpose of ensuring a coordinated layout and site design of land development. Chapter 109 establishes standards and requirements for the provision of streets, sidewalks and stormwater. The standards in this chapter are intended to ensure that proposed development is compatible with existing and future development on neighboring properties and produces an environment of desirable character, consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.02.00 - General design requirements. 
109.02.01 - Subdivisions. 
A.  All subdivisions hereafter established in the City of Canton shall be developed in accordance with the design standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or which has topographical, geological or other constraints on its development, shall not be subject to development for any uses which may continue such conditions or increase the danger to health, safety, life or property, unless such constraints can be legally eliminated or abated. 
C.  All subdivisions shall be identified by name. Subdivision names may not be duplicated unless they are a logical extension of and are contiguous to an existing subdivision. 
D.  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to all applicable zoning regulations and development policies of the City of Canton in effect at the time of submission of the construction plans or any variance that has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.02.02 - Monuments. 
A.  All property line corners shall be marked with a metallic pin, at least one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches in length. The top level of such pin shall be approximately level with the finished grade. 
B.  If the ground cannot be penetrated the required 24 inches, another type of permanent monument shall be installed on the property line as shown on the plat as a reference monument to the corner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.00 - Street and transportation standards and requirements. 
109.03.01 - Street design requirements. 
A.  General. 
1)  The arrangement of streets shall conform to the City of Canton Road Classification Map, or, for streets not shown on this plan, shall provide for an appropriate extension of the existing pattern of streets. Where discrepancies or conflicts within this UDC occur, the AASHTO Green Book, "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," shall be used as the guideline. 
2)  The minimum right-of-way as required by this UDC must be shown on the final plat and dedicated to the City of Canton if the proposed development fronts on an existing city road. All building setback requirements shall be measured from this established right-of-way line. 
3)  Traffic studies shall be required for all residential subdivisions containing more than 200 lots, non-residential subdivisions containing more than 50,000 square feet of floor area, or at the discretion of the community development director and city engineer. Such studies will at a minimum address the level of traffic generated by the proposed development and its distribution on the existing road network; and the need for traffic signals, deceleration lanes, left turn lanes, other additional lanes and other traffic control devices on all existing and proposed roadways. 
4)  All streets with curb and gutter shall be constructed with a minimum 13-foot behind both curbs. See standard detail 201 "Residential Streets" and standard detail 202 "Non-Residential Streets." 
5)  All streets shall have a minimum centerline grade of at least two percent including culs-de-sac and intersections. 
6)  Super-elevated curves shall be provided as per Georgia Department of Transportation design guidelines for arterial streets. 
7)  A horizontal curve with a 100-foot radius minimum shall be designed at all points of intersection along the street centerline. 
8)  The minimum length of crest vertical curves shall be 100 feet. Longer lengths may be required based on required stopping sight distance. The sight distance for crest vertical curves shall be measured along the roadway from three and one-half feet above the pavement to an object six inches high, as discussed in the current AASHTO policy on design. Vertical curves may be designed to extend past the end of a cul-de-sac provided stopping sight distance is met. See standard detail 203 "Minimum Stopping Sight Distance." 
9)  The minimum length of sag vertical curves shall be 100 feet. For residential 2 and non-residential class streets, minimum sag vertical curve length shall be ten times the algebraic difference in grades, but in no case shall be less than 100 feet. 
10)  Sight distances at intersections shall be determined by the posted speed limit of the street (existing city road, county road or state highway) onto which a vehicle must turn. Such distances shall be measured beginning from a point established 15 feet from the edge of the travel way on the centerline of the egress lane at a height of three and a half (3½) feet above the finish grade elevation. The line of sight is then extended the minimum required distance on either side to the centerline of the road terminating at a point two feet above the finish grade elevation (see standard detail 204 "Intersection Sight Distance Requirements for Driveways and Side Streets"). 
11)  If a subdivision street accesses a city, county or state road, the design consultant shall verify the intersection stopping distance and shall determine if hidden dips occur on the city, county or state road which will impact the proposed access point. 
12)  Roads may be constructed across an existing or proposed dam. The appropriate state approved professional shall provide a report certifying that the existing or proposed dam is structurally capable of supporting the road. Any road across a dam shall be a private street. Ingress and egress easements, not right-of-way, shall be granted. A second point of access to the each residence must be provided. The section of road across the dam, and the dam itself, shall be maintained by the subdivision property owners or a mandatory homeowners' association. 
B.  Residential street design requirements. 
1)  Residential streets shall be classified into a street hierarchy system for design and construction purposes. Street design standards in residential subdivisions shall be based on road function and the number of dwelling units (d.u.) served by the street. Residential street classifications and their corresponding dwelling unit thresholds are shown in table 109-1: 
Table 109-1 Residential Street Hierarchy System 

 
2)  Apartment, condominium, and mobile home park streets shall be designed and constructed to the same standards as other residential streets. 
3)  Depth requirements. 
a.  Depth checks on base material and asphalt cores shall be taken at random locations at 500-foot intervals along each travel lane staggered in each direction and at a minimum of one per lane and at each cul-de-sac. 
b.  Any area found deficient shall be brought up to the required thickness prior to placing any additional layer of material. 
c.  All asphalt core holes shall be filled with hot mix asphalt of similar grade prior to approval of the final plat. 
4)  The following residential street design standards, shown in table 109-2, shall apply to all public and private streets in residential subdivisions. See standard detail 201 "Residential Streets." 
5)  Design requirements for arterial and collector streets in residential subdivisions shall be based on AASHTO and Georgia DOT standards, and approved by the city engineer. 
Table 109-2 Residential Street Design Standards 

 
1  Private streets shall be built to city standards. See section 109.03.09, Private streets. 
2  The applicant shall demonstrate to the city engineer that the distribution of traffic to the proposed residential street system shall not exceed the dwelling unit thresholds for any of the proposed street classifications. Submitted construction plans must indicate the number of lots being served by each street for subdivisions that contain 401 lots or more (see table 109-1). 
3  Minimum pavement width does not include curb and gutter. 
4  See also the paving requirements contained in section 109.03.05. 
5  For residential 2 streets, sag length will be calculated as ten times the algebraic difference in grades, with a minimum allowable sag length of 100 feet. 
6  Greater crest lengths may be required based on the minimum stopping sight distance requirements. See standard detail 203 "Minimum Stopping Sight Distance." 
C.  Non-residential street design requirements. 
1)  Non-residential streets shall be classified into a street hierarchy for design and construction purposes. Street design standards in non-residential subdivisions shall be based on road function and the average daily traffic (ADT) the street will accommodate, as determined in the current edition of ITE's Trip Generation manual. Non-residential street classes and their corresponding ADT thresholds are: 
Non-residential: 0—10,000 ADT 
2)  Pavement depth shall be based upon projected traffic loads designed by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia but in no event shall it be less than 8"/2"/1½". 
3)  Arterial or collector streets shall be required when ADT generated by the development will exceed 10,000 daily trips. Street design requirements for arterial and collector streets shall be based on AASHTO and Georgia DOT standards, and approved by the city engineer. 
4)  Jogs in the centerline, pavement, or right-of-way shall not be permitted for residential or non-residential streets. 
5)  The applicant shall demonstrate to the city engineer that the distribution of traffic to the proposed street system shall not exceed the ADT thresholds for any of the proposed street classifications. 
6)  All non-residential streets shall be constructed with curb and gutter, except for those non-residential streets serving developments where the minimum lot size is five acres or larger. Non-residential subdivision curb and gutter may be either vertical faced or rollover. 
7)  Grading and embankment specifications are the same as section 109.03.02 (Roadway grading requirements). 
8)  The following non-residential street design standards, shown in table 109-3, shall apply to all public and private streets constructed in non-residential subdivisions. See standard detail 202 "Non-Residential Streets" in chapter 112. 
Table 109-3 Non-Residential Street Design Standards (Non-Residential) 

 
1  Minimum pavement width does not include curb and gutter. 
2  For non-residential streets, sag length will be calculated as ten times the algebraic difference in grades, with a minimum allowable sag length of 100 feet. 
3  Greater crest lengths may be required based on the minimum stopping sight distance requirements. See standard detail 203 "Minimum Stopping Sight Distance." 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.02 - Roadway grading requirements. 
A.  All streets and roads shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so that pavements and sidewalks, where required or proposed for future installation, can be constructed on the shoulder as shown in standard detail 201 "Residential Streets" and standard detail 202 "Non-Residential Streets." 
B.  The entire area within the typical grading section shall be cleared and grubbed of all trees, bushes, stumps and debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner, and shall not be buried in the right-of-way. 
C.  Embankment. 
1)  The embankment shall be constructed in parallel layers. 
2)  The material shall be deposited and spread in uniform, horizontal layers not more than eight inches thick, loose measurement, for the full width of the cross-section where practicable, and these layers shall be kept uniform by the use of motor graders, bulldozers or other approved equipment. 
3)  Embankment shall be compacted to at least 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density. 
4)  Each layer shall be compacted within the range of optimum moisture content to permit the specified compaction. Successive layers shall not be constructed on previous layers that exhibit excessive pumping under construction equipment regardless of compaction. Material containing too much moisture shall be dried to the moisture content necessary to obtain stability and compaction. 
5)  If the material is too dry, water shall be added and uniformly mixed with the soil to the extent necessary to obtain stability and compaction. 
6)  Embankment at bridge structures shall be compacted to at least 100 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density for the full depth of the embankment, beginning at the top of the slope and extending 100 feet from the end of the bridge. 
7)  Embankments at structures. 
a.  No rock more than four inches in any diameter shall be placed within two feet of any drainage structure. 
b.  Before any traffic is allowed over any structure the contractor shall provide sufficient depth to adequately protect the structure from damage or displacement. 
8)  Compaction of the embankment shall be accomplished by the use of a sheep's foot roller or other approved method. 
9)  Embankment compaction tests shall be taken at an interval not exceeding 5,000 cubic yards or one per day. Compaction test results shall be reported to the city inspector immediately after results are obtained. 
10)  All areas that are not accessible by a roller shall be required to use an approved mechanical tamper to achieve compaction. The density requirements of this UDC shall apply. 
11)  Compaction backfill for minor structures shall be placed in uniform six-inch layers compacted to 95 percent of maximum dry density and the top 12 inches will be compacted to 100 percent of the maximum dry density. 
12)  Utility trenches cut in the subgrade shall have the backfill material placed in uniform six-inch layers compacted to 95 percent of maximum density and the top 12 inches will be compacted to 100 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density. 
13)  Compaction backfill for minor structures shall be taken at an interval not exceeding one per structure. 
14)  Compaction test results shall be reported immediately after results are obtained to the city inspector. 
D.  Cut and fill slope ratios shall start at the edge of the right-of-way and shall not exceed two-to-one (2:1). In lieu of a cut or fill slope, a retaining wall may be utilized where necessary with the approval of the city engineer. 
E.  Cut or fill slopes shall be uniform for each section of cut or fill. When a cut made in rock requires blasting, the slope may be changed to a flatter slope upon written approval of the city engineer. 
F.  If paving is to be delayed, provisions shall be made to drain low points in the roadway. If curbing has not been installed, a break in the berm section may be provided. If curbing is in place, pipe sections which are functioning and maintained shall be used to provide drainage under the curb to side slopes. 
G.  It is expressly reserved by the City of Canton that any and all reasonable inspections of roads under construction in a subdivision may be initiated at any time by the City of Canton. All work must be approved by the city engineer prior to placement of base material. It is the City of Canton's right to inspect and verify that road grading specifications have been met. 
H.  In the event that the city inspector is not available at the time of the proof roll and the developer has notified the city inspector by telephone or e-mail at least 24 hours prior to the proof roll, then the developer may proceed under the direction of a city-approved geotech. The developer shall thereby be required to proceed by following the recommendations of the city-approved geotech. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.03 - Roadway subgrade requirements. 
The entire surface of the in-place subgrade shall be plowed, harrowed and mixed to a depth of at least six inches. After the material has been thoroughly mixed, the top 12 inches of subgrade shall be brought to grade and compacted to 100 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density as tested for both cut and fill sections at a frequency of one test for every 1,000 lineal feet of roadway for a two-lane road with a minimum of one test per street and at all low points and storm drain crossings. 
A.  Compaction of the subgrade will be accomplished by the use of a sheep's foot roller. In all places that are not accessible by a roller, the required compaction shall be secured by the means of approved mechanical tampers. The same density requirements as stated above shall apply. 
B.  Prior to placing any subsequent layers of base and paving materials, the subgrade shall have sufficient stability to support construction equipment without excessive movement regardless of compaction. The city inspector may direct the contractor to proof roll the subgrade with a loaded dump truck. 
C.  If any sections of subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to a depth directed by the city inspector or the approved geotech engineer, replaced with suitable dry material and compacted to 100 percent of maximum laboratory dry density. 
D.  The surface of the completed subgrade shall be bladed to a smooth and uniform texture. The centerline profile shall conform to the established elevations with an acceptable tolerance as established by this UDC. 
E.  No graded aggregate materials shall be placed on a muddy or frozen subgrade. 
F.  Test results shall be reported immediately after results are obtained to the city inspector. 
G.  No graded aggregate material shall be placed on the subgrade until passing compaction results are reported to the city inspector. 
H.  When a street will be used for construction traffic before paving work is completed, a layer of #3 stone shall be laid as a traffic surface at the entrance of the subdivision for a distance of 50 feet. The developer shall maintain at all times a construction entrance until the graded aggregate base has been approved. This material shall not be used as part of the base material. It may be worked into the subgrade, or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. An alternative method of protecting the base material and the existing street may be used if approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.04 - Roadway graded aggregated base requirements. 
A.  This work shall consist of constructing a base of mineral aggregate on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and in reasonable close conformity with the lines, grades, thickness and typical cross-sections shown on the plans or established by the city engineer. 
B.  All equipment necessary for the proper construction of the base shall be on the project and in satisfactory condition before construction will be permitted to begin. 
C.  No graded aggregate base shall be placed on muddy or frozen subgrade. 
D.  The materials shall be spread uniformly to the proper depth to obtain the specified thickness. Graded aggregate materials containing frost or frozen particles shall not be placed. 
E.  The moisture content of the mixture of materials at the time of compaction shall be uniformly distributed and shall be adequate to allow compaction to the specified density. After the material placed has been shaped to line, grade and cross-section, it shall be rolled until the course has been uniformly compacted to at least 100 percent of the maximum dry density when group 2 aggregate in used, or to at least 98 percent of maximum dry density when group 1 aggregate is used. Compaction tests shall be taken at an interval not exceeding one per 1,000 feet per two lanes of road way with a minimum of one test per street. 
F.  The compacted base shall have sufficient stability to support construction equipment without pumping regardless of compaction. If the base material becomes unstable as a result of too much moisture, the base material and the underlying subgrade if necessary shall be dried and reworked to a moisture content that will provide stability and compaction. 
G.  At all places not accessible to the roller, the required compaction shall be secured by means of approved mechanical tampers. The same density requirements as stated above apply. 
H.  The finished surface of the base shall be checked by a system of ordinates measured from a stringline. Ordinates measured from the bottom of the stringline to the surface shall not exceed one-quarter-inch at any point. Any variations found in excess of these requirements shall be immediately corrected. 
I.  The base shall be maintained and cured for a minimum of 24 hours during the compaction testing, proof-rolling, and priming process before any pavement can be placed. 
J.  This maintenance shall consist of such additional wetting, rolling and blading as may be necessary to maintain true grade, crown and cross-section. This preservation does not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to maintain the work until final acceptance. 
K.  Depth checks shall be taken at random locations at 500-foot intervals along each road. The thickness of the base shall be determined by making as many checks as necessary to determine the average thickness. 
L.  Any area deficient in thickness by more than one-half-inch shall be corrected by adding additional quantities of the same materials and scarified and rebuilt to the design thickness. 
M.  When graded aggregate base is used under asphaltic concrete less than five inches, bituminous prime shall be applied. 
N.  Test results shall be reported immediately after results are obtained to the city engineer. 
O.  No asphalt material shall be placed on the graded aggregate base until passing results and depth checks are reported to the city engineer. 
P.  The theoretical maximum dry density shall be established Using Test Method GDT-49 of the Georgia DOT Sampling, Testing and Inspection Manual. 
Q.  Graded aggregate base shall meet the requirements of Georgia DOT specification #815 and produced from an approved DOT source. 
R.  Non-compliance in graded aggregate base may be corrected by scarifying in asphalt screenings (when too coarse) or coarse aggregate (when too fine). The scarifying operations produce a uniformly graded lift in compliance with all specification requirements and reasonably close to the theoretical density gradation. The lift thickness and compaction requirements are maintained. The scarifying operation should be accomplished without soil contamination. The blend materials are to be acquired from the same source as the base material. All areas that have been blended to produce specification compliance will be verified through additional project testing before placing asphalt. 
S.  If the contractor and/or materials supplier is unable to meet all of the above, areas of non-compliance should be removed and replaced with acceptable materials. 
T.  Graded aggregated base must pass proof rolling prior to placement of asphalt. 
U.  A job mix formula for each type of asphaltic concrete mixture to be used shall be submitted for approval in writing to the city engineer. All proposed job mix formulas shall be submitted one week prior to beginning mixing operation. The contractor may, at any time after construction has started, request that the job mix formula be revised as necessary and submit a revised formula for consideration. 
V.  Asphalt plants shall be on the Georgia Department of Transportation's approved list. 
W.  All equipment for transporting and construction of hot mix asphaltic concrete shall be approved by the city inspector. The equipment shall be in satisfactory mechanical condition and capable of its intended function at all times during productions and placement operations. The contractor shall provide sufficient hand tools and power equipment for cleaning the roadway surface prior to the placement of the bituminous tack coat. 
X.  The bituminous pavers used for placement of hot mix asphaltic concrete shall be capable of spreading and finishing all courses to the indicated widths and depths, true to line, grade, and cross-section, and shall be capable of striking a smooth finish, uniform in density and texture. 
Y.  The compaction equipment must be in good mechanical condition and capable of compacting the mixture to the required density. The number, type, size, operation, and condition of the compaction equipment shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
Z.  Trucks used for hauling bituminous mixture shall have tight, clean smooth beds. An approved releasing agent from the approved qualified product list of the Georgia Department of Transportation may be used in the beds of the transporting vehicles shall prevent the mixture from adhering to the beds. The releasing agent shall not be detrimental to the mixture and shall be applied in such a manner that the excess will be drained from the bed prior to loading. 
AA.  Diesel fuel shall not be allowed in the beds of vehicles transporting asphalt. 
BB.  Each haul vehicle shall use a waterproof cover large enough to extend down over the side and ends of the bed far enough to protect the mixture and shall be securely fastened while in transit. Adequate provisions shall be made to assure the mixture will be delivered to the roadway at a temperature within +/-20 degrees Fahrenheit of that specified on the job mix formula. 
CC.  The city-approved geotech shall test the temperature of the job mix within the first three trucks to ensure that the temperature meets the requirements of this UDC. The geotech shall fax a certified letter stating that the job mix temperature is in compliance with this UDC. 
DD.  Weather limitation. See table 109-4. 
Table 109-4 Weather Limitation Requirements 

 
EE.  Cleaning of existing surface. Before beginning the application of any hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement, the existing surface shall be cleaned to the satisfaction of the development inspector. 
FF.  Bituminous tack coat. The application rate shall be approved by the city engineer and will be within the limitation as shown in table 109-5: 
Table 109-5 Bituminous Tack Coat Application 

 
GG.  Spreading operations. 
1)  Upon arrival at the point of paving operations the mixture shall be unloaded into the paver hopper from the delivery vehicles and transferred into the spreader. 
2)  The mixture shall be spread by means of a mechanical spreader, true to line, grade, and cross- section specified and to the loose depth that will result in the specified compacted thickness or the specified rate of spread. 
HH.  Truckloads of mixture that are visually inspected by the city inspector and can reasonably be expected not to meet these specifications, such as a mixture containing segregated material, nonconforming to temperature, a deficiency or excess of asphalt content, or otherwise unsuitable for placing on the roadway shall not be used in the work. Any mixture containing segregated spots, deficiency of excess of asphalt content, or otherwise unsuitable that is placed on the roadway shall be removed and replaced with satisfactory material. 
II.  Rolling operation. 
1)  The type of equipment used for compacting the material shall be approved by the city inspector. 
2)  Rolling shall be started as close behind the spreader as possible without excessive distortion and shall be continued until roller marks are no longer visible. 
3)  The approved compacting equipment shall be used on all subsurface courses. 
JJ.  Plant production, transportation and paving operations shall be so coordinated that a uniform continuity of operation is maintained. 
KK.  One asphalt concrete extraction test per type mix shall be taken at an interval not exceeding 500 tons or one per type mix per day. Extraction test results shall be reported to the city engineer daily. 
LL.  If the acceptance test for asphalt cement content exceeds two-tenths from the approved job mix formula, the contractor will make the necessary adjustment to the mix to bring the asphalt cement back to the approved job mix formula. 
MM.  If the acceptance test for asphaltic concrete "B" exceeds 4.1 on the three-eighths-inch sieve or 3.6 on the no. 8 sieve from the approved job mix formula, the contractor will make the necessary adjustment to the mix to bring the gradation back to the approved job mix formula. 
NN.  If the acceptance test for asphaltic concrete "F" exceeds 3.8 on the no. 4 sieve or 3.2 on the no. 8 sieve from the approved job mix formula, the contractor will make the necessary adjustment to the mix to bring the gradation back to the approved job mix formula. 
OO.  If the acceptance test for asphaltic concrete "E" exceeds 5.6 on the no. three-eighths-inch sieve or 4.8 on the no. 8 sieve from the approved job mix formula, the contractor will make the necessary adjustment to the mix to bring the gradation back to the approved job mix formula. 
PP.  Asphaltic concrete compaction test for each mix shall be taken at an interval not exceeding one per 500 linear feet per travel lane of roadway and in each cul-de-sac with a minimum of one test per street. 
QQ.  The target density will be set at 94 percent of the theoretical voidless mix for 50 blow marshall design. 
RR.  The asphalt shall be rolled and compacted to at least 97.5 percent of the target density. 
SS.  Three asphalt cores will be taken from the first day's production for each type mix to determine if compactions are meeting the 97.5 percent of target density. If the compaction does not equal or exceed 97.5 percent of target density, the contractor will establish a new rolling pattern to achieve the 97.5 percent of target density. 
TT.  Compaction test results shall be reported daily to the city inspector immediately after results are obtained. 
UU.  In the event that a majority of a pavement course is in place and found to be deficient in density, it will be left to the discretion of the city engineer as to what course of action to take in regarding the corrective action. Removal and replacement may be a possible course of action based on city engineer discretion. 
VV.  The thickness of the asphaltic concrete "B" or surface course shall be determined by taking as many cores as necessary to determine the average thickness of the course. A minimum of one core per 500 feet per two lanes of roadway shall be taken randomly for thickness determinations with a minimum of one test per street. 
WW.  Any core found deficient shall be brought up to the required thickness prior to placing any additional layer of material. 
XX.  All asphalt core holes shall be filled and compacted with hot mix asphalt of a similar grade prior to approval of the final plat. See table 109-6. 
Table 109-6 Asphalt Core Hole Fill/Compaction 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.05 - Paving requirements. 
A.  Residential. Residential paving requirements are as follows in table 109-7: 
Table 109-7 Residential Paving Requirements 

 
1  Pavement design for residential 2 streets shall be based on AASHTO and Georgia DOT standards, and approved by the city engineer, or supporting documentation from a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia stating design requirements for residential 2 streets. But in no event shall the paving requirements be less than 8"/2"/1½". 
B.  Non-residential. Non-residential paving requirements are as follows in table 109-8: 
Table 109-8 Non-Residential Paving Requirements 1 

 
1  For subdivisions in commercial and industrial zones, pavement design shall be based on projected traffic loads. Pavement design shall be based on AASHTO and Georgia DOT standards, and approved by the city engineer, or supporting documentation from a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. In no event shall the paving requirements be less than 8"/2"/1 ½". 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.06 - Curb and gutter. 
A.  Concrete curb and gutter shall be required for all paved streets. 
B.  Residential subdivision curb and gutter may be either vertical faced or rollback. 
1)  Residential subdivision vertical faced and rollback curbing shall have a typical minimum section of six inches by 24 inches by 12 inches. 
2)  The concrete shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
3)  Vertical faced curb and gutter shall be used at all subdivision entrances, deceleration lanes and downhill culs-de-sac. 
4)  See standard detail 207 "Curb and Gutter Cross Sections." 
C.  Non-residential subdivision curb and gutter may be either vertical faced or rollback. 
1)  Non-residential subdivision vertical faced curbing shall have a typical minimum section of six inches by 24 inches by 12 inches. 
2)  Non-residential subdivision rollover curbing shall have a typical minimum section of six inches by 24 inches by nine inches. 
3)  The concrete shall have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
4)  See standard detail 207 "Curb and Gutter Cross Sections." 
D.  Parallel curb lines shall be at the same elevation on each side of the street at the same station except for intersections and approved super-elevated sections. 
E.  One-half-inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at intervals not to exceed 500 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. Provide construction joints at intervals not to exceed 20 feet. 
F.  Cracks in the concrete are permissible provided that there is no vertical or horizontal displacement. The development inspector shall determine when cracked curb shall be replaced by the developer. 
G.  Graded aggregate base shall be placed under the curb and gutter for all roadways. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.07 - Intersections. 
A.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, but in no case shall a street intersection be at an angle of less than 90 degrees. The 110 degree angle of the intersection should be directed towards the approach with the highest volume of traffic. 
B.  Interior street jogs or intersections shall have centerline offsets of a minimum of 125 feet. Exterior street jogs or intersections shall have centerline offsets of a minimum of 250 feet. 
C.  Islands at intersections shall meet sight distance requirements established by AASHTO and the Georgia DOT, and the developer shall submit a maintenance agreement satisfactory to meet the city attorney's approval. Anything extending more than three feet above the top of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting streets shall require approval by the city engineer. 
D.  Right-of-way shall be mitered at all roadway intersections so as to provide a minimum of 13 feet of right-of-way for utility placement as measured from the back of curb. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.08 - Culs-de-sac. 
A.  All permanent dead-end streets shall be constructed as culs-de-sac with a turn-around provided at the closed end. Culs-de-sac shall be constructed according to their street level classification. 
B.  Residential culs-de-sac shall have a right-of-way radius of at least 55 feet, and a pavement radius of at least 40 feet, as measured to the back of the curb. See standard detail 205 "Cul-de-sac Details." 
C.  Non-residential culs-de-sac shall have a right-of-way radius of at least 75 feet, and a pavement radius of at least 60 feet, as measured to the back of the curb. See standard detail 205 "Cul-de-sac Details." 
D.  Islands at intersections shall meet sight distance requirements established by AASHTO and the Georgia DOT, and the developer shall submit a maintenance agreement satisfactory to meet the city attorney's approval. Anything extending more than three feet above the top of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting streets shall require approval by the city engineer. 
E.  If a street is planned to be terminated as a cul-de-sac the subdivider may not utilize a vacant lot to extend the street to an adjacent property without proper notification of affected property owners. Such a change in the construction plans shall be considered a variance and must be submitted to the board of zoning appeals for review and approval. 
F.  In the event that a cul-de-sac is used to terminate a street which abuts an adjacent property that has no other access but to use the street and cul-de-sac as the only access then the developer shall cross hatch the cul-de-sac and place a reversion clause on the final plat notifying all who will purchase a home/lot in the development that in the future the cul-de-sac may be removed allowing for access to the development of the rear property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.09 - Private streets. 
All private streets shall require the approval of the community development director and the city engineer, and shall be built to city standards. The following requirements shall also apply: 
A.  A homeowner's association document requiring the subdivision property owners to maintain all private streets shall be recorded with and denoted on the final plat. 
B.  Also, on the final plat it should be denoted that this is a private subdivision and not maintained by the city. See also the standards for all development and land uses section (design standards for lots, all development subsection) in chapter 103 for plat requirements. 
C.  If requested by all the homeowners, the streets may become city accepted only if they are brought up to existing city standards. 
D.  All private streets shall be constructed to city standards. 
E.  Private streets shall only be allowed within gated or secured developments. Street signs within these developments shall contain the words "Private Streets" on each sign. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
109.03.10 - Traffic control devices. 
A.  All required street name signs, traffic control signs and other traffic control devices shall be installed by the developer. 
B.  The design and placement of all traffic control devices shall meet the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The design professional shall show the placement of all required street markers. 
C.  The installation and perpetual maintenance of non-standard traffic control devices shall be the responsibility of the developer and the homeowners association. 
1)  All nonstandard traffic control devices shall provide "break-away" features and/or other appropriate safety measures prior to installation. 
2)  The number, type and location of all traffic control devices shall be approved by the city engineer. 
D.  See section 109.03.09.D for requirements pertaining to private streets. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.11 - Sidewalks. 
A.  Concrete sidewalks shall be required in all residential developments, and on all roads for commercial and industrial developments. Sidewalks shall be provided and located on both sides of all road frontages (existing and proposed); both public and private. 
B.  When a subdivision project abuts a public right-of-way, sidewalks shall be required for a length equal to the distance of the required road improvements along the road frontage. Sidewalks will be constructed on both sides of the road (if development abuts both sides of the road) when the road is classified as an arterial, major collector or minor collector roadway. 
C.  The concrete sidewalk shall be four inches thick, shall have a maximum side-to-side slope of one-quarter-inch per foot, and shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
D.  Sidewalks shall be constructed per standard sidewalk detail #213. 
E.  Sidewalk location and width requirements. 
1)  Sidewalks located within one foot of the curb shall have a minimum width of six feet. 
2)  Sidewalks located within one to four feet from the curb shall have a minimum width of five feet. 
3)  Sidewalks located greater than four feet from the curb shall have a minimum width of four feet. 
F.  Sidewalks shall be located as stated in subsection E above, but not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. 
G.  Amenity areas must be accessible by sidewalks from the nearest sidewalk in the subdivision. 
H.  All sidewalks, crosswalks, handicap ramps and access to amenity areas shall be constructed in compliance with the 2010 Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Design Guidelines (ADAAG) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. 
I.  Handicapped access ramps and curb cuts shall be provided at all street intersections. 
J.  No certificate of occupancy will be granted for any specific lot that the installation of sidewalks is required until they are constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.12 - Development access. 

 
A.  Access to every development shall be provided over an existing public street. Existing developments with private streets can be continued without additional access to a public street, subject to subsection B below. 
B.  Access means a point of entrance to and a point of exit from land adjacent to a public road. 
C.  Where the property configuration prohibits or makes impractical the installation of two access points to an existing public street, and alternative access may be approved or this provision may be waived by the city council. In the event an alternative secondary access point is required and approved, said access point must be at least 20 feet wide and be constructed of asphalt, concrete, brick, cement pavers or other approved hard surface other than gravel or loose fill. 
D.  When a new access point for a development is provided from an existing county road, it shall be permitted and approved through Cherokee County. The developer shall provide approval by Cherokee County for existing county road improvements. 
E.  Any development accessed by a city road shall conform to city standard details. 
F.  Access onto a state road shall meet existing Georgia DOT requirements. 
1)  Before the plans can be approved, a copy of the Georgia DOT permit or D.O.T. letter of intent shall be submitted to the city stating that a curb cut will be granted as long as the applicant meets all D.O.T. standards. 
2)  The submitted construction plans must indicate by a note on the preliminary plat that the plans have been approved subject to all modifications or requirements placed upon the development by the Georgia DOT. 
G.  Deceleration lane and taper length shall be based on the main roadway posted speed limit as follows (see table 109-9). The city may require residential subdivisions exceeding 125 units or at its discretion below 125 units to install longer deceleration lanes and/or a center turn lane. If the city determines that the entrance onto a city roadway could result in a safety problem then the City of Canton may require the developer to present a traffic study to address any safety concerns. 
Table 109-9 Deceleration Lane and Taper Length 

 
H.  The minimum pavement width of a deceleration lane shall be 12 feet, and the minimum turning radius shall conform with standard detail #206. The minimum pavement design for the proposed deceleration lane shall match the subdivision street shall be 6"/2"/1½" or match the existing pavement specification, whichever is greater. 
I.  Additional street right-of-way necessary for deceleration lanes shall be dedicated as needed, and as illustrated in standard detail 206 "Subdivision Entrance Intersection." 
J.  The cross slope of any deceleration lane shall follow the crown or super elevation of the existing street. A minimum of one-quarter-inch per foot shall be maintained. 
K.  Vertical faced curb and gutter is required through the radius, excluding the tapers. 
L.  The developer shall be responsible for the costs of any utility relocation or catch basins that must be constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-0817-2, § 1, 8-17-2017; Ord. No. 2019-0117-08, 1-17-2019) 
109.03.13 - Driveways. 
Residential Driveways 
A.  Definitions. 
1)  Driveway approach. Paved or otherwise delineated area on the right-of-way between the roadway and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from a roadway to private property. 
2)  Driveway. Paved or otherwise delineated area off the street right-of-way used for the access of private property. 
B.  Permit. 
1)  Each new driveway that is not part of a larger development will be required to obtain a residential driveway permit from the community development department. 
C.  Driveway design. 
1)  Location. 
a.  Only one driveway shall be permitted for each parcel of two acres or less unless otherwise approved by the city. 
i.  A second curb cut to a single-family residence shall not be approved unless the property has at least 120 feet of frontage along a single public street or is a corner lot. 
I.  A minimum of 27 feet must separate each driveway approach. 
II.  For circular driveways, the secondary approach is limited to a maximum 12 feet in width. 
ii.  More than two curb cuts are prohibited. 
b.  Driveways shall not be located within 35 feet of a roadway intersection. 
c.  Driveways shall not be installed closer than ten feet to a catch basin, as measured along the gutter line from the centerline of a catch basin to the nearest edge of the driveway. 
d.  Driveways shall be located a minimum five feet from neighboring properties, including radii, as measured along the right-of-way line. 
2)  Spacing. 

 
3)  Widths. 
a.  Within the right-of-way the driveway width shall be 12-foot minimum and 24-foot maximum, not including radii. 
4)  Grades. 
a.  Residential driveways grades within the right-of-way shall be two percent minimum and six percent maximum. 
b.  Driveway grades on private property shall not exceed 11 percent. 
c.  Slopes through sidewalks shall not exceed two percent. 
5)  Sight distance. 
a.  No tree, shrub, or other obstruction may be placed adjacent to a driveway if it may impair sight distances. 
6)  Turn radius. 
a.  The driveway radii shall be three-foot minimum and six-foot maximum. 
b.  Within the right-of-way the driveway approach shall be at a 90-degree angle (+/-) 15 degrees to the roadway. 
7)  Materials. 
a.  Driveways shall be asphalt, concrete or permeable pavers unless otherwise approved by the city. If gravel is approved, a minimum of 25 feet or to the edge of the right-of-way, whichever is greater, shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or permeable paver. 
8)  Shared driveway. 
a.  Documents describing easement rights and maintenance details shall be recorded and provided with permit application. 
b.  A shared driveway providing access to multiple properties shall have a travel surface a minimum of 20 feet in width. 
D.  Utilities. 
1)  Driveway approaches must not be located within a utility easement where an installed utility is known to exist or where a drainage easement is located. 
2)  No water meters, sanitary sewer cleanouts, water valves, water hydrants or other utility boxes may be placed within a driveway or driveway approach unless previously approved. Any utility placed within the driveway or driveway approach shall be traffic rated. 
E.  Erosion protection and sediment control. 
1)  Driveways are subject to all erosion protection and sediment control requirements as stated in the City of Canton Development Code. These requirements will be inspected and enforced by the City of Canton and failure to comply may result in the issuance of a "Stop Work Order" and/or penalties until compliance is accomplished. 
Non-Residential Driveways 
A.  Non-residential driveways shall be permitted with the overall site plan. Additional driveways for existing non-residential properties shall be permitted as a civil site plan as per section 8.02.05 and section 8.03.00 of the City of Canton Development Code. 
B.  All driveways providing access to the street shall be designed as illustrated in standard detail 209 "Non-Residential Driveway" and standard detail 210 "Non-Residential Driveway on Existing Street Landing Requirements." 
C.  All non-residential subdivisions will install a full deceleration lane, offset radii and tapers. 
D.  All driveways are subject to all erosion protection and sediment control requirements as stated in the City of Canton Development Code. These requirements will be inspected and enforced by the City of Canton and failure to comply may result in the issuance of a "Stop Work Order" and/or penalties until compliance is accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 2019-0117-05, 1-17-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-0117-05, adopted January 17, 2019, amended § 109.03.13 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § l09.03.13, pertained to development entrances, non-residential, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-18, adopted August 21, 2014. 
109.03.14 - Temporary turn-arounds. 
A.  Stub-out streets shall not be allowed, except at unit lines. A temporary turn-around is required when the street length exceeds 150 feet. 
B.  A temporary turn-around shall be maintained for a period not to exceed 24 months. All such turn-arounds shall, at a minimum, be constructed with six inches of graded aggregate base, and have a minimum radius of 40 feet. 
C.  Where temporary turn-arounds are permitted, the city engineer may require a performance guarantee for completion of a cul-de-sac. The community development director or city engineer may also require that the final plat record sufficient right-of-way to construct a permanent cul-de-sac. The additional right-of way shall revert to the adjacent property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.15 - Street names. 
A.  street names shall require the approval of the community development department and the Cherokee County Addressing Services. 
B.  Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets within the same subdivision development shall be given the same name. 
C.  The names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets in the City of Canton and Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.16 - Construction testing. 
A.  Quality control testing which is a part of roadway construction will be performed by a reputable professional geo-technical and testing engineering company that will be employed by the developer and all associated costs will be paid by the developer. 
B.  All construction shall be inspected and approved by a City of Canton Development Inspector. 
C.  The following information is required on the compaction and depth check reports submitted by the approved geotechnical engineer to the city engineer: 
1)  Subdivision name. 
2)  Street name. 
3)  Station number or structure number. 
4)  Location. 
5)  Percent compaction required. 
6)  Percent of compaction tested. 
7)  Passed or failed statement. 
8)  Thickness required. 
9)  Thickness testing results. 
10)  Any rechecking of failed compactions. 
11)  Maximum dry density, in-place density and percent of moisture for each test. 
12)  Location of aggregate quarry. 
13)  Asphaltic compactions: 
a.  Theoretical. 
b.  Target density. 
c.  In-place dry density. 
d.  Percent compaction required. 
e.  Percent of compaction tested. 
f.  Type mix. 
g.  Passed or failed statement. 
h.  Subdivision name. 
i.  Street name. 
j.  Date of test. 
k.  Location and station number. 
l.  Location and name of asphalt plant. 
14)  Asphaltic concrete job mix formula: 
a.  Design mix and graduation and ac content. 
b.  Design temperature. 
c.  Theoretical. 
d.  Type mix. 
e.  Plant Location. 
15)  Asphaltic extractions: 
a.  Subdivision name. 
b.  Date and time of test. 
c.  Location and name of asphalt plant. 
d.  Type -ix. 
e.  Acceptance test — percent passing each sieve and percent of asphalt. 
f.  Percent passing each sieve and ac content from job mix formula. 
g.  Temperature of asphaltic concrete mix and time of sampling. 
h.  Correction made to asphaltic concrete mix shall be documented in extraction report. 
i.  Tons of asphalt of each type mix ran each day. 
16)  The developer must contact the city engineer by telephone or e-mail within 24 hours of any testing procedures. If the city engineer does not respond within 24 hours, the developer may proceed with testing using an approved geotechnical engineer. All testing procedures shall be done at locations on the project at the direction of the city representative while both the testing technician and the city representative are present on the project, unless otherwise directed by the city representative, so that test results can be given directly and additional tests may be ordered if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.03.17 - Dedication and reservation. 
A.  Rights-of-way for all proposed and existing public streets shall be dedicated to the City of Canton as stipulated in the provisions of this UDC. 
B.  No landscape irrigation systems will be authorized for installation in a dedicated street right-of-way without a permit from the City of Canton Engineering Department. The applicant within city right-of-way must submit a site plan indicating the locations of the irrigation systems along with a liability waiver from the appropriate entity (i.e., homeowners association, owner, declarant) in the event that the city at some time in the future may damage, destroy or remove the system during a city road widening project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.00 - Stormwater system standards and requirements. 
109.04.01 - General. 
A.  Stormwater management structures shall be provided by the developer as required by section 109.04.03 (Stormwater management facilities) of this UDC. 
B.  The City of Canton Engineering Department will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (latest edition) and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this section. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
C.  All proposed stormwater management structures shall be designed and certified by an appropriate state approved professional engineer, and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
D.  Stormwater management structures shall be designed based on a 25-year storm event. The drainage formula used in design of all drainage structures shall be determined by the developer's appropriate state approved professional and based on sound engineering practice. 
E.  All cross-drain pipes under streets carrying live streams and all bridges shall be designed for a 100-year storm event. 
F.  A dam breach zone is required if an existing or proposed pond or lake is part of the proposed development. If there is an existing or proposed pond or lake, a geotechnical engineer must certify the integrity of the dam regardless of lot location. Certification that there is not a potential for a "Category 1" structure must be submitted as a part of the LDP review process (NOTE: Dam breach analysis is not required for dry detention ponds unless otherwise specified in this UDC). 
G.  Subdrainage structures shall be installed as necessary to control surplus groundwater by intercepting side hill seepage or lowering or regulating the ground water level. 
H.  Energy dissipation devices shall be installed at all discharge points of storm drains in compliance with the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan. At a minimum, an area of rip rap six times the pipe diameter in length and two times the pipe diameter in width shall be provided. If the exit velocity from the pipe will exceed ten fps, rip rap set in concrete, stilling basins, baffle wall basins, impact blocks or other energy dissipation devices approved by the city engineer shall be required. 
I.  Concrete collars shall be installed on all storm drainage pipes having a slope of 20 percent or greater. 
J.  Maintenance of all stormwater detention ponds either above ground or underground and all drainage easements outside of the city right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the owner or the homeowners association and agrees to perform annual inspections and provide all necessary maintenance. 
K.  The City of Canton shall not be responsible for maintenance of any pipes, ditches, detention ponds or other structures within any drainage easement outside the city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.02 - Dedication and reservation. 
A.  Drainage easements shall be 20 feet wide for open channels, and easements shall be provided for all pipes, a width of four times the pipe's vertical depth. 
B.  Drainage easements shall be provided where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural stream or channel. They shall conform substantially to the limits of such watercourse plus any additional width as is necessary to accommodate flow boundaries generated from a 100 year storm event. 
C.  Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the final plat and the plat of the individual property owner. The City of Canton will not maintain drainage easements outside of the street right-of-way. 
D.  The City of Canton maintains the right, but not the obligation to access drainage easements for emergency purposes as deemed necessary by the city engineer. The following statement shall appear on all final plats: "The City of Canton maintains the right to access drainage easements for emergency purposes as deemed necessary by the City Engineer." 
E.  Drainage and sanitary sewer easements may be combined when both are piped, but must meet width requirements including ten-foot spacing between pipes. 
F.  It is the policy of the City of Canton that drainage easements are dedicated to the public use are not accepted by the City of Canton for city maintenance and are not considered city property. Therefore, it is City of Canton Policy that no city forces or equipment shall be used to perform construction to any drainage easement within the City of Canton, unless said easement lies within City of Canton right-of-way and/or said work is necessary per subsection D above. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.03 - Stormwater management facilities. 
A.  General. 
1)  All pipe installation and backfilling shall be in accordance with current Georgia DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges. 
2)  A certification by the supplier of the specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. All pipe manufacturers must be Georgia DOT approved. 
3)  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. Any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe shall be removed by the developer as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
4)  Between the bottom of the road base, or sub-base if used, and the exterior crown of any culvert, the minimum clearance shall be three feet or greater if required by Georgia DOT. 
5)  A minimum one-foot clearance shall be maintained between underground utilities and the exterior crown or floor of culverts. 
6)  Storm drainage pipe shall be bedded in "Type 57" stone, if the trench bottom material is not suitable for bedding. 
7)  Drainage easements shall be cleaned and opened to the extent necessary for drainage purposes at the time of development to control surface water runoff. Runoff control from slopes and side slopes shall be specified by the developer's appropriate state approved professional, in accordance with sound engineering practice. 
8)  Changes in the construction plans of storm drainage facilities caused by field conditions shall be made in compliance with section 108.04.01.K.1 ("Revisions to approved civil/site documents") of this UDC. 
9)  Bridge piling shall be driven to Georgia DOT standards for loading. Certification of pile load shall be provided by a registered professional engineer. 
10)  The developer and/or homeowner shall be responsible for keeping dirt, mud, building materials, concrete and other foreign materials off of the pavement and curbing of existing city or county roads during the construction of buildings in all developments covered by these regulations. 
B.  Catch basins. 
1)  The costs of any catch basins or drop inlets shall be the responsibility of the developer. These facilities shall be designed by the developer's appropriate state approved professional to Georgia DOT standards and shall be approved by the city engineer. Catch basins shall be located outside of intersection radii. 
2)  The spacing of catch basins shall be as follows: 

 
3)  These spacing requirements can be altered if justified by sound engineering practice. Gutter spread calculations may be required. 
4)  Culs-de-sac on downhill street centerline grades shall have six-inch vertical curb and gutter along the circumference, beginning at the 25-foot transition radius and ending at the second 25-foot transition radius. A catch basin throat design or standard Georgia DOT detail shall be submitted for downhill street centerline grade culs-de-sac. 
5)  A hooded inlet may be used in an intersection radius with approval of the city engineer. 
C.  Piping. 
1)  Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped so as to maintain a velocity of three fps to prevent the collection of sediment. 
2)  Compaction test on all cross drain pipes within a roadway section shall be taken at intervals of one per line or one per day, whichever is greater. Compaction tests on all longitudinal pipe running from catch basin to catch basin shall be taken at intervals of one per two 250 feet or one per day, whichever is greater. All ditches shall be backfilled and compacted in eight-inch lifts. The minimum compaction is to be 95 percent in accordance with the standard proctor test and 100 percent for the top 12 inches. 
3)  All drainage pipes in a city right-of-way shall be a minimum of 18 inches in diameter. No storm sewer parallel to any existing or proposed city roads shall be placed beneath a proposed deceleration lane without the approval of the city engineer. 
4)  The inlet and outlet ends of all storm drain pipes for streets with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or greater, within or connected to city right-of-way, shall have concrete headwalls or a metal flared-end section with safety grates, or county-approved grate and frame, or raised pedestal drop inlets meeting the standards of the Georgia DOT. 
5)  On only the downstream side of a roadway, storm drain pipes 36 inches in diameter or smaller shall extend into the rear building setback line, but not more than 120 linear feet from the right-of-way, for all zoning districts except the R-40 district. Storm sewer larger than 36 inches in diameter at a minimum shall extend from edge of right-of-way to edge of right-of-way. The drainage ditch on each end of the pipe shall be designed to limit runoff velocity to less than 5 fps or the ditch must be lined to prevent erosion. 
6)  The maximum continuous length for pipes shall be 300 feet for pipes less than 42 inches. Junction boxes providing pipe access shall be constructed to current Georgia DOT standards. Junction box covers shall not be made of plastic. 
7)  All man-made stormwater drainage ditches shall be designed by an appropriate State approved professional. The ditch profile and typical cross sections, including the velocity of flow, shall be shown on the plans. Maximum velocity for unlined ditches shall be five fps design flow. 
8)  On all live streams, reinforced concrete pipes shall be used from headwall to headwall. Concrete headwalls are required for all pipes on live streams. 
9)  Georgia DOT approved concrete pipe shall be used within city right-of-way. 
10)  Outside of the right-of-way, where more than ten feet of fill will be located over the crown of the pipe, Georgia DOT approved concrete pipe shall be used from junction box to junction box, regardless of depth or slope. 
11)  For the installation of pipes in live streams, the following is hereby required: 
a.  A concrete pipe placed from zero feet to five feet in depth shall require a ten-foot minimum easement. 
b.  If the pipe is to be placed at a depth of more than five feet in depth, a 20-foot easement shall be required for a concrete pipe and a ratio of four times the vertical depth shall be used for all pipes. 
D.  Materials. 
1)  The class or gauge of pipe under fill shall be determined using current Georgia DOT standards. 
2)  All metal pipe shall be fully coated or aluminized with re-rolled ends. 
3)  Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used in rights-of-way. 
4)  High-density polyethylene pipe (HDPE) shall meet AASHTO M-294 Type "S" with an annular exterior and smooth interior. 
a.  Pipe shall consist of a bell and spigot joint incorporating an F477 gasket to insure a leak-tight performance. 
b.  Proposed subdivisions may utilize HDPE in all drainage areas, except in live streams or within the right-of-way. 
c.  HDPE pipe shall be back filled by concurrently applying eight-inch lifts on each side of the pipe using two tamps (one for each side). Backfill soil shall conform to class II, B2 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, current edition. 
E.  Driveway culverts. 
1)  Each site shall be analyzed for stormwater runoff flow patterns. 
2)  Where a wet weather stream exists between a proposed road and the building line on a lot, the design professional shall size the driveway culvert to convey runoff from the 100-year storm event without overtopping the driveway and maintain a minimum of three feet of freeboard. 
3)  The construction plans and the final plat shall show the minimum driveway pipe size required and shall comply with all city standards for pipe installation. 
F.  Stormwater detention. 
1)  Stormwater management report required. 
a.  Every project shall provide a stormwater management report prepared by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia that shall take into account the entire project area regardless of phasing. 
i.  The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage stormwater runoff so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff related problems are not exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. 
ii.  The professional engineer shall be responsible for obtaining all information necessary for the report. 
b.  The stormwater management report shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre- and post-developed conditions. 
i.  Detention facilities shall be designed using pre-development flows based on existing on-site lakes and detention. 
ii.  Post-development flows shall be based on onsite upstream areas being developed per the development plans and existing conditions for offsite upstream areas. 
iii.  Existing conditions shall be defined as the conditions of the site at the time a land disturbance permit is applied for. The existing condition includes onsite lakes and ponds. 
iv.  The report shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the on-site and off-site areas, relative to watercourses, drainage divides, drainage structures, and other pertinent features including existing land use regarding ground cover. 
c.  For the purposes of these regulations, the words "downstream" and "analysis" shall have the following meanings: The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage way "immediately" downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. The following shall also be addressed: 
i.  The report shall examine the conditions downstream of the project to a point where the project is ten percent of the total drainage basin; 
ii.  The analysis must include all existing and potential erosion problems, existing drainage complaints, and any pertinent observations made by the professional engineer preparing the report. The downstream watercourses and receiving conveyance shall be analyzed to ensure that channel velocities do not exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream; 
iii.  Comparison of peak flows shall include the timing of the hydrographs; and 
iv.  Hydrographs shall be based on the 24-hour storm type II event. The rational method may be used for basins less than 50 acres. 
d.  The following criteria shall be evaluated by the professional engineer preparing the stormwater management report, and in determining whether or not detention should be required for any portion of any site: 
i.  Existing land use downstream, 
ii.  Anticipated future land uses downstream, 
iii.  Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development, 
iv.  Presence of existing drainage problems, 
v.  Capacity of existing drainage systems, 
vi.  Creation of concentrated flows where none occurred previously, 
vii.  Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities, 
viii.  Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site, 
ix.  The nature of the receiving water course. 
2)  Stormwater detention required. 
a.  Whenever a stormwater management report indicates that an adverse impact from stormwater runoff is expected to result from the development of a property, that project shall be required to provide stormwater detention facilities. 
i.  The meaning of "adverse impact" shall apply when pre-development flows did not cause difficulties and post-development flows do. Difficulties shall include but are not limited to situations where 25-year velocities exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream, and habitable structures are shown to be subject to increased depth of flooding for any frequency up to and including the regulatory flood. 
ii.  The detention facilities shall be designed such that the peak flows from the developed site do not exceed those generated in the pre-development conditions at the project boundary. 
b.  Stormwater detention facilities required by this chapter (see also section 109.04.04.E) shall be provided, unless the registered professional engineer preparing the stormwater management report certifies and provides certified documentation supporting the conclusion to the City of Canton Engineering Department that at least one of the following is true and correct is possible: 
i.  The effect of detention would be to concentrate flows where sheet flow had occurred under pre-development conditions, and any impact of increased sheet flows upon downstream properties would be less adverse than that which would result from the concentrated flows from a detention facility even if energy dissipation devices were employed. 
ii.  The site runoff will flow directly into a stream or lake with a contributing drainage area of at least 100 acres without compromising off-site properties, and the increase in site runoff will result in a no-rise in the 100-year storm elevation (less than 0.05-ft. increase) for the receiving watercourse at the point where the watercourse crosses the project site's downstream property line. 
iii.  The undetained flow will pass through downstream properties, in drainage easements obtained by the developer, to an existing detention facility which has been designed to manage the upstream property's runoff or to the point in the downstream analysis which shows a less than 0.05-foot increase in the 100-year flood elevation due to the increase in peak runoff leaving the project site. 
c.  Should the professional engineer conclude that stormwater detention may not be necessary because of anticipated compliance with this chapter (see also section 109.04.04.E, rigid compliance with all of the following criteria is mandatory: 
i.  A stormwater management report shall always be required whether or not stormwater detention is required. 
ii.  If the applicant proposes to show that the detention requirement may be eliminated for all or a portion of the project, then a pre-submittal conference with the City of Canton Engineering Department is required prior to preparation and submittal of construction plans for the project. 
iii.  At the pre-submittal conference with the staff, the consultant shall be prepared to discuss the downstream analysis findings as follows: The affected stream must be analyzed downstream from the project to a point where the project area is ten percent of the total drainage basin; If the existing downstream conditions are overburdened by the pre-developed flows in the stream, then detention shall be required unless the developer elects to eliminate the downstream overburdened conditions at his or her expense when the development occurs. 
3)  Detention design criteria—General. 
a.  All stormwater detention design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. 
b.  All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to control the two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year, and 100-year return frequencies. 
c.  A variety of methods achieving stormwater management goals shall include providing detention facilities. The type of facility provided shall be based on the following criteria: 
i.  The type of development which the detention facility is being provided, 
ii.  The type of development which the detention facility is intended to protect, 
iii.  Volume of stormwater to be stored, 
iv.  Origin and magnitude of the flows to be managed, 
v.  Topographic opportunities and limitations, 
vi.  Safety considerations, 
vii.  Maintenance requirements, 
viii.  Aesthetic considerations, 
ix.  Likelihood of facility operation interfering with access to public or private facilities, 
x.  Proximity of facility to property lines, utilities, buffers, etc., and 
xi.  Similar site-specific constraints. 
d.  Detention facilities may be of the following types, and two or more types may be used in combination with one another: 
i.  Normally dry basins, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods (damming may be achieved by the construction of an earthen dam or approved masonry wall), 
ii.  Lakes and ponds, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods, 
iii.  Parking lot facilities, 
iv.  Underground facilities, 
v.  Roof top facilities, 
vi.  All detention pond slopes shall be a maximum of two feet horizontal to one-foot vertical except for masonry walls, and 
vii.  Fences a minimum of five feet in height with a minimum of a ten-foot wide gate shall be required on all detention where the 100-year storm depth of the water in the pond is greater than four feet. 
e.  Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. 
f.  The detention methodology used for any given project shall be the SCS Method, utilizing a 24-hour storm. 
g.  Runoff curve numbers used for pre- and post-development conditions shall be documented by the registered professional preparing the stormwater management report. 
h.  Calculations shall be provided showing how all lag times were computed, for both pre- and post-developed conditions. Likewise, adequate support must be provided for all composite runoff coefficients or curve numbers used. 
i.  If a computer program is used for detention design, including generating and routing hydrographs, the output from the program shall be summarized in the stormwater management report. 
j.  The outlet system for all detention facilities shall be evaluated for malfunctioning i.e., the clogging of small orifices and weirs). A safe path for overflow condition flows shall be provided. 
4)  Detention facility location criteria. 
a.  For the purpose of these regulations, a detention facility shall be deemed to consist of the area within the maximum design ponding limits, the dam (if one) including all embankment slopes and wall footings (if applicable), primary and emergency outlet works, any drainage and drainage and access easements, and any energy dissipation devices. 
b.  Detention facilities, to the greatest extent feasible, shall be located so as to minimize the amount of flow generated on-site that bypasses the facility. 
c.  No portion of any detention facility shall disturb any required buffer, landscape strip, or tree protection area, except that natural bottom detention ponds and their appurtenant structures, which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach into a required construction buffer. 
d.  Detention facilities may be located within utility easements or rights-of-way, or encroach upon utility easements or rights-of-way, upon receipt by the city engineer of written permission from both the property and utility owners. 
e.  Detention facilities may be constructed within recreation areas required, if the following criteria are met: 
i.  Ownership of the area will be held by a qualified property owners association, homeowners association, or other private parties. 
ii.  Permanent structures, such as buildings or swimming pools, will not be constructed within the boundaries of the detention facility. 
iii.  Detention facilities within recreation areas will be approved only if the design of the area includes recreation amenities such as ball fields, tennis courts, grassed open areas or other similar improvements. The intent is to provide recreation facilities with detention as a secondary feature. 
iv.  Permanent detention features shall not interfere with the intended use of recreation amenity (i.e., a ditch or large swale shall not traverse a ball field, an inlet structure shall not be in a tennis court, etc.). 
5)  Detention facility easement requirements. 
a.  An easement of at least 20 feet in width shall be required to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street. This easement shall be cleared, grubbed and graded so that it can be utilized by rubber-tired construction vehicles that require access to the outlet structure. The easement location shall be such as to minimize the amount of grading required. 
b.  Every normally dry detention basin, lake, or parking lot detention facility shall be completely enclosed within a drainage easement. The drainage easement shall extend at least ten feet beyond the limits of the detention facility. 
c.  Detention facility maintenance. 
i.  The detention storage capacity or function of any detention basin, pond, or other impoundment, whether natural or man-made, shall not be removed or diminished without the express approval of the city engineer. 
ii.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or property owners association to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility constructed on their property for stormwater detention pursuant to section 109.04.03 above. 
6)  Detention facility engineer's certification and record drawings. 
a.  A certified record survey of each detention facility shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia. A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon this survey. 
b.  Based on the actual parameters established on the record drawing, an addendum to the approved stormwater management report or a certification letter will be submitted demonstrating that the facility, as constructed, complies with the requirements of these regulations. The amended stormwater management report shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.04 - Post-development stormwater management. 
A.  Findings. It is hereby determined that: 
1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures; 
5)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; 
6)  Therefore, the City of Canton has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has been determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
B.  General provisions. 
1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This section seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
a.  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
b.  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
c.  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
d.  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
e.  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as reducing impervious cover and the preservation of greenspace and other natural areas, to the maximum extent practicable. 
f.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
g.  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
2)  Applicability. 
a.  This section shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection b below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
i.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover; 
ii.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover; 
iii.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the City of Canton Engineering Department to be a hotspot land use; or 
iv.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items i and ii above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
b.  The following activities are exempt from this section: 
i.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
ii.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
iii.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
iv.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
C.  Stormwater design manual. The City of Canton Engineering Department will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this section. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
D.  Permit procedures and requirements. 
1)  Permit application requirements. 
a.  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this UDC prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
b.  Unless specifically exempted by this UDC, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Canton Engineering Department a permit application on a form provided by the City of Canton Engineering Department for that purpose. 
c.  Unless otherwise exempted by this UDC, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
i.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection D.2 below; 
ii.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection E below; 
iii.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection F below, if applicable; 
iv.  Performance bond in accordance with subsection G below, if applicable; and 
v.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection H below. 
2)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
a.  Before any land disturbance permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer meet with the City of Canton Engineering Department for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. 
b.  This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plat of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
c.  To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
i.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
ii.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
iii.  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
d.  Local watershed protection plans and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. If necessary, a follow-up meeting may be held to verify the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project before formal design commences. 
E.  Stormwater management plan requirements. 
1)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this UDC, including the performance criteria set forth in section 109.04.05. 
2)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
3)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in section 109.04.03 are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. This includes: 
a.  Common address and legal description of site. 
b.  Vicinity map. 
c.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, shall include: 
i.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
ii.  Acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
iii.  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; 
iv.  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; 
v.  Direction of flow and exits from the site; 
vi.  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
vii.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
viii.  For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
d.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, shall include: 
i.  A topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
ii.  Total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
iii.  Calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 109.04.05; 
iv.  Location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; 
v.  Documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; and 
vi.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
vii.  If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 109.04.05 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
e.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system shall include: 
i.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
ii.  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
iii.  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
iv.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 109.04.05; 
v.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and 
vi.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
f.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. 
i.  The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. 
ii.  The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. 
iii.  In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. 
iv.  The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
g.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
i.  An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act and the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section of chapter 107 of this UDC and NPDES permit for construction activities. 
ii.  The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
h.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices shall also include: 
i.  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
ii.  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
iii.  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; 
iv.  Density of plantings; 
v.  Descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and 
vi.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
i.  Operations and maintenance narrative. A detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved shall be provided. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include: 
i.  An inspection and maintenance schedule, 
ii.  Maintenance tasks, 
iii.  Responsible parties for maintenance, 
iv.  Funding, 
v.  Access, 
vi.  Safety issues, and 
vii.  Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
j.  Maintenance access easements. 
i.  The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. 
ii.  Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
k.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Canton as provided in subsection F below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with subsection F below. 
l.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Canton Engineering Department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
F.  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
1)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Canton Engineering Department requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City of Canton Engineering Department and the city attorney prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval and/or issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
3)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. 
a.  Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. 
b.  If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
4)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
5)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Canton Engineering Department may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 109.04.07. 
6)  Final plats and/or certificates of occupancy will not be issued without a final inspection of the completed work by the City of Canton Engineering Department, submission of "as-built" plans, a signed maintenance agreement, and a certification of completion by the design engineer that the stormwater management system complies with the approved plan and provisions of this UDC. 
G.  Performance bonds. 
1)  The City of Canton shall require the developer to post an irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of security acceptable to the City of Canton, prior to the issuance of any land disturbance permit for the construction of a development requiring a stormwater management system. 
a.  The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management system. 
b.  The bond required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with all of the provisions of this UDC, other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations. 
H.  Application procedure. 
1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection D.1 above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
3)  The City of Canton Engineering Department shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
4)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City of Canton Engineering Department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph H.3 above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
5)  Upon a finding by the City of Canton Engineering Department that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this UDC, the City of Canton Engineering Department may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this UDC and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The City of Canton Engineering Department shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City of Canton Engineering Department; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 109.04.06.B. 
I.  Application review fees. 
1)  The fee for review of any land disturbance application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city council. 
2)  Payment shall be made prior to the issuance of any land disturbance permit for the development. 
J.  Modifications for off-site facilities. 
1)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. 
a.  The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. 
b.  In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
2)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City of Canton Engineering Department which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
3)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Canton Engineering Department that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or 
f.  Violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.05 - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
A.  General. All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the volume of stormwater runoff generated. These practices should seek to use pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this section. 
B.  Performance criteria. 
1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. Stormwater practices must treat the first 1.2 inches of runoff from all storms and remove 80 percent of the post-development total suspended solid load from treated runoff. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City of Canton Engineering Department are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control; 
c.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be reduced or waived through the use of other structural and nonstructural measures that allow for infiltration of runoff. The storage volume may be reduced by the volume that is infiltrated. 
3)  Overbank flooding protection. 
a.  Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. 
b.  If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection B.2 above is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
5)  Structural stormwater controls. 
a.  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
b.  All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. 
c.  For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City of Canton Engineering Department before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. 
d.  In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Canton Engineering Department may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
e.  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
a.  The use of better site design and nonstructural stormwater management measures is encouraged to minimize reliance on structural stormwater management measures. 
b.  The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume and stream channel protection volume required under subsection B above (Performance criteria). 
c.  The applicant may, if approved by the City of Canton Engineering Department, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality and channel protection volume requirements. 
i.  For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. 
ii.  The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
7)  Drainage system guidelines. 
a.  Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. 
b.  Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
ii.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
iii.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.06 - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
A.  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
1)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Canton Engineering Department or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Canton Engineering Department. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
2)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
3)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
B.  Final inspection and as-built plans. 
1)  Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
a.  All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. 
b.  The as-built plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. 
c.  A final inspection by the City of Canton Engineering Department is required prior to final plat approval or issuance of C.O.S. 
2)  The as-built plan shall be provided to the City of Canton Engineering Department in both a paper and an electronic format. All as-built plans shall be based upon the state plane coordinate system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.07 - Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities and Practices. 
A.  Maintenance responsibility. 
1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this UDC. 
2)  The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant to this UDC for private stormwater management facilities, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sedimentation controls, and other protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance with approved plans. 
3)  A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of all stormwater management facilities and shall state the maintenance to be completed, the time period for completion, and who shall perform the maintenance. This maintenance agreement shall be included in the approved stormwater management plan. 
B.  Maintenance inspections. 
1)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. 
a.  In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Canton Engineering Department shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. 
b.  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. 
c.  If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Canton Engineering Department, may correct the violation as provided in subsection E below (Failure to maintain). 
2)  The City of Canton Engineering Department has the right to inspect all stormwater management systems. 
a.  Inspection shall occur during the first year of operation and at least once every three years thereafter. 
b.  In addition, a maintenance agreement between the owner and the City of Canton shall be executed for privately-owned stormwater management systems as described in section 109.04.04.F. 
3)  Inspection reports shall be submitted to and maintained by the City of Canton Engineering Department for all stormwater management systems. 
4)  Inspection reports for stormwater management systems shall include: 
a.  The date of inspection; 
b.  Name of inspector; 
c.  The condition of: 
i.  Vegetation or filter media. 
ii.  Fences or other safety devices. 
iii.  Spillways, valves, or other control structures. 
iv.  Embankments, slopes, and safety benches. 
v.  Reservoir or treatment areas. 
vi.  Inlet and outlet channels and structures. 
vii.  Underground drainage. 
viii.  Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay areas. 
ix.  Any nonstructural practices. 
x.  Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater management system. 
d.  Description of the need for maintenance. 
5)  After notification is provided to the owner of any deficiencies discovered from an inspection of a stormwater management system, the owner shall have 30 days or other time frame mutually agreed to between the City of Canton Engineering Department and the owner to correct the deficiencies. The City of Canton Engineering Department shall then conduct a subsequent inspection to ensure completion of repairs. 
6)  If repairs are not undertaken or are not found to be done properly, then enforcement procedures following section 109.04.08 below shall be followed by the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
C.  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City of Canton Engineering Department to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this UDC is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this UDC. 
D.  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
E.  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Canton, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Canton may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.08 - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  General. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this UDC or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
B.  Notice of violation. 
1)  If the City of Canton Engineering Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this UDC, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. 
2)  Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this UDC without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this UDC and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Canton Engineering Department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
C.  Penalties. 
1)  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
2)  Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Canton shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
3)  In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Canton may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The City of Canton Engineering Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Canton Engineering Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Canton Engineering Department may suspend, revoke or modify the land disturbance permit. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Canton Engineering Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City of Canton Engineering Department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Canton has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city of canton may impose a financial penalty in an amount permitted by municipal charter or state law for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this UDC, the City of Canton Engineering Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the Cherokee County Magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as permitted by municipal charter or state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.04.09 - Illicit discharge and illegal connection. 
A.  General provisions. 
1)  Purpose and intent. 
a.  The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. 
b.  This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
c.  The objectives of this section are to: 
i.  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
ii.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
iii.  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
iv.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
2)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
3)  Responsibility for administration. The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. 
B.  Prohibitions. 
1)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
a.  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
b.  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above (subsection B.1)a above): 
i.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
ii.  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the local enforcement authority as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
iii.  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
2)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal) separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
a.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
b.  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
c.  Improper connections in violation of this section must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city. 
d.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the local enforcement authority requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the local enforcement authority. 
C.  Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
1)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. 
2)  Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the local enforcement authority prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
D.  Access and inspection of properties and facilities. The local enforcement authority shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. 
1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the local enforcement authority. 
2)  The owner or operator shall allow the local enforcement authority ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
3)  The local enforcement authority shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the local enforcement authority to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
4)  The local enforcement authority may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the local enforcement authority. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the local enforcement authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the local enforcement authority access to a facility is a violation of this UDC. 
7)  If the local enforcement authority has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the local enforcement authority is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the local enforcement authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
E.  Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
1)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
2)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the local enforcement authority within three business days of the phone or in-person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
3)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
4)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this UDC. 
F.  Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
1)  Violations. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined herein or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
b.  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the local enforcement authority is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The local enforcement authority is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection F.5 below. 
2)  Notice of violation. Whenever the local enforcement authority finds that a violation of this section has occurred, the local enforcement authority may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
a.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
i.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
ii.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
iii.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
iv.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
v.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
vi.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the local enforcement authority by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
b.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
i.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
ii.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
iii.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
iv.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
v.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
vi.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
3)  Appeal of notice of violation. 
a.  Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the local enforcement authority. 
b.  The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. 
c.  Hearing on the appeal before the local enforcement authority or other appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
d.  The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
4)  Enforcement measures after appeal. 
a.  If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the local enforcement authority, then representatives of the local enforcement authority may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
5)  Costs of abatement of the violation. 
a.  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. 
b.  The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. 
c.  If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
6)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
7)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the local permitting authority shall deem appropriate, after the local permitting authority has taken one or more of the actions described above, the local permitting authority may impose a financial penalty in an amount permitted by municipal charter or state law for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
8)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the local permitting authority may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in (appropriate municipal, magistrate or recorders) court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as permitted by municipal charter or state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
9)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
10)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the local enforcement authority may seek cumulative remedies. 
11)  The local enforcement authority may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.00 - Stormwater utility. 
109.05.01 - Purpose. 
A.  The City of Canton is responsible for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the community; 
B.  The Canton City Council of is authorized by Article IX, section II, Paragraph 111(a)(6) of the Georgia Constitution to provide stormwater management throughout the incorporated area of the City of Canton; 
C.  The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act, placed increased emphasis on the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater management programs which address water quality impacts of stormwater runoff; 
D.  City council finds and concludes that substantial stormwater management program operational and capital investment needs exist; 
E.  Adequate and stable funding will be essential if the city is to meet its future stormwater management program operational and capital investment needs; and 
F.  It is the desire of the city council to proceed with the development, implementation, and operation of a utility for stormwater management accounted for in the city budget as a component of the water and sewer enterprise fund dedicated to stormwater management and to institute funding methods therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.02 - Findings. 
The Canton City Council makes the following findings: 
A.  The professional engineering analysis (stormwater management analysis prepared for the development of city's stormwater utility, 2005/2006) submitted to the city properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the city. 
B.  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems in Canton in concert with other water resource management programs. 
C.  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the corporate limits of Canton. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the corporate limits of Canton is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
D.  The stormwater needs in the City of Canton include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all property owners, citizens and residents of Canton in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering analysis. The service and benefit rendered or resulting from provision of stormwater management systems and facilities may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs, and risk exposure. 
E.  The City of Canton presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the city, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in Canton in concert with the management of other water resources in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
F.  The city council finds, concludes, and determines that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering and funding stormwater management services in Canton. 
G.  An equitable approach to funding stormwater management services and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service charges upon properties that is related to the burden of stormwater quality control service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city. Such schedule for service charges can be completed by other funding methods which address specific needs, including but not limited to allocations of special purpose local option sales taxes to stormwater drainage improvement projects. A service charge credit is an appropriate means of adjusting service charges in recognition that private stormwater systems and/or actions can effectively reduce or eliminate the burden of stormwater quantity and quality control service requirements and costs that property or properties pose for the city. Impervious area is the most important factor in influencing stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city, and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating stormwater service charges and associated credits. Gross area is another factor influencing the stormwater service area, mapping, and administrative requirements. In addition, the value to the stormwater utility of certain actions and practices performed by property owners and other stormwater utility customers may be recognized by credits based on other factors, including but not limited to the avoided cost of public information and education by the utility when public information and education about stormwater management is provided by the public school system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.03 - Determination and modification of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges may be determined and modified from time to time by the City of Canton so that the total revenue generated by said charges and any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility will be sufficient to meet the cost of services and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for consideration and improvements to the stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.04 - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning July 1, 2006 and shall be billed periodically thereafter to customers, except as specified exemptions and credits may apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.05 - Stormwater service charge. 
A.  In order to fully recover the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities while fairly and reasonably apportioning the cost among developed properties throughout the city, the following stormwater rates provided in subsection B below shall apply. 
B.  Developed and undeveloped land. All properties shall be billed based on the amount of impervious surfaces on the individual properties and the gross area of individual properties as represented in the following formula: Fee = (IRxIU). 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.06 - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
Except as in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The City of Canton Stormwater Utility Credit Manual specifies the design and performance standards of on-site systems, facilities, activities, and services which qualify for application of a service charge credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. 
A.  Railroad tracks shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
B.  Developed land such as individual detached dwelling units, including but not limited to multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants may receive stormwater service charge credit, as follows: 
1)  The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Credit Manual. 
2)  The stormwater service charge credit for single-family residential may be up to 50 percent. 
3)  The stormwater service charge credit for non-single-family residential may be up to 50 percent. 
4)  The stormwater service charge credit for each education institution may receive 100 percent. 
5)  The service charge credit is applicable to a property, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner/occupant reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
C.  Groups of detached dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association providing on-site systems, facilities, services, or activities which reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities may receive a stormwater service charge credit, as follows: 
1)  The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Credit Manual. 
2)  The stormwater service charge credit available to groups of detached dwelling units may be up to 50 percent of the service charge applicable to the individual properties, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the homeowner's association reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
D.  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the Stormwater Utility Credit Manual and/or upon continuing provision of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner/occupant or owners upon which the credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for non-compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.07 - Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, collections. 
The following requirements shall apply to stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies and collections: 
A.  A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. 
B.  Failure to receive a stormwater service charge bill is not justification for non-payment. 
C.  Regardless of the party to whom the stormwater service charge bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed or undeveloped land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. 
D.  If a customer is under billed or if no stormwater service charge bill is sent for developed or undeveloped land, the city may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. 
E.  A ten percent late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.08 - Stormwater utility service charges billed in common. 
A customer who believes the provisions of this section have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
A.  An appeal must be filed in writing with the City of Canton Department of Engineering. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
B.  Using the information provided by the appellant, the city manager or his duly authorized designee shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
C.  In response to an appeal the city manager or his duly authorized designee may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this section. 
D.  A decision of the city manager or his duly authorized designee which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the city manager within 30 days of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be delivered to the city manager by the appellant, stating the grounds for the further appeal. The city manager shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days. All decisions of the city manager shall be served on the customer personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the customer. 
E.  All decisions of the city manager shall be final. 
F.  The appeal process contained in this subsection shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city manager shall be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the Superior Court of Cherokee County, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.09 - Establishment of a utility and enterprise fund. 
A.  There is hereby established a stormwater utility within the public works department which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. 
B.  The city manager shall incorporate stormwater activities within the water and sewer enterprise fund in the city budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to rentals, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the city council. Any revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the enterprise fund, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the city council, upon recommendation of the city manager. 
C.  The city council hereby transfers to the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.10 - Scope of responsibility for the city drainage system. 
A.  The city drainage system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or man-made, with the political boundaries of the City of Canton which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. 
B.  The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which are: 
1)  Located within public streets, rights-of-way, and easements; 
2)  Subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or are 
3)  Located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities. 
C.  Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the City of Canton and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as the responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
D.  It is the intent of this section to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the City of Canton. The city of canton expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure to breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter by created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money, damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.11 - Requirements for on-site stormwater systems; enforcement methods and inspections. 
All property owners and developers of developed real property within the City of Canton shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all City of Canton development regulations and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From the date of the filing of such action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the General Execution Docket of the Superior Court of Cherokee County. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this section, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
109.05.12 - General financing policy. 
A.  It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility be equitably derived through methods which have demonstrated in a relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs and/or the level of service provided as a result of the provision of stormwater services and facilities. Service charges for stormwater management shall be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. The cost of stormwater services and facilities may include operating, capital investment, and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management requirements. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees, or licenses. 
B.  Service charge rates shall be designed to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management by the city, whether within or outside of the stormwater utility, including but not limited to plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges, and special assessments. To the extent practicable, credits against service charges and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by private owners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 110 - DESIGN STANDARDS: WATER SYSTEM 

110.01.00 - Generally. 
Chapter 110 also establishes standards and requirements for the provision of water infrastructure by all development in the City of Canton. This chapter contains requirements for water systems and cross connection controls. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.02.00 - Water system standards and requirements. 
110.02.01 - Pre-construction requirements. 
A.  Water pressure flow test. 
1)  A water pressure test must be run on the existing water line to determine the adequacy of water supply line for the project. 
2)  The test shall consist of a fire hydrant flow test and a 24-hour pressure test. 
3)  Test information shall consist of the following: 
a.  Static pressure and elevation of static gauge. 
b.  Recorded flow in GPM and residual pressure. 
c.  Maximum elevation in development. 
d.  Available flow at maximum elevation with 20 PSI residual pressure. 
e.  Twenty-four hour pressure chart. 
4)  An adequate supply of water for the proposed project must be available prior to the approval of any plans. Flow tests are valid for one year. 
5)  The City of Canton Fire Department will run the test at the developer's expense. 
6)  All projects which have flow test results with static pressure less than 35 psi will require a special design study to be accomplished and submitted to the city for approval to ensure no problems are encountered during peak demands. This study must be approved by the city prior to construction plan approval. 
7)  Plans shall not be stamped or approved until the flow test is completed. 
B.  Plan review process. 
1)  Preliminary plan requirements. 
a.  Preliminary plans shall include the portion of the county tax maps highlighting the land to be developed, the type of development, the number of units, the tie-in location and the general plan for water supply. The plans shall also include the name, address and telephone number of the developer or his representative. 
i.  Questions relating to adequate fire protection, multiple feeds, water supply and proposed location of connection(s) should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with detailed planning. 
ii.  The submittal for preliminary review must include all land to be developed although the land is to be developed in several phases or units. 
iii.  Adequacy determinations of the existing water supply system will be made for the entire project. 
b.  Developer/land owner must submit a set of preliminary plans for any proposed project to the City of Canton Engineering Department prior to submitting the construction plans. 
2)  Construction plan requirements. 
a.  The developer must then submit six paper copies of construction plans, plus the electronic data on disc, as outlined in these specifications, to the City of Canton Engineering Department for review. 
b.  All plans for water main projects shall bear a suitable title showing the name of the project. 
c.  Plans shall show the scale in feet, the north arrow, date, the name of the design professional, the design professional's signature and his registration stamp. All design professionals preparing construction plans and specifications must be registered in the State of Georgia as a professional engineer or a registered land surveyor. 
d.  If the project requires a water line extension of more than 500 feet to reach the project, a registered professional engineer must design and stamp the line extension. 
e.  The cover sheet shall include the owner's/developer's name, address, telephone number, and fax number, plus the design professional's name, address, telephone number, and fax number. The cover sheet shall also include the funding source if state or federally funded, and a detailed project location map. The cover sheet shall also show the numbers of the tax map and parcel in bold letters. 
f.  The plans shall be clear and legible. They shall be drawn to a scale which will permit all necessary information to be plainly shown. 
g.  Plans shall be submitted on 22-inch by 34-inch drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbols used. 
h.  Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (west zone feet). Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to mean sea level. Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum. All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99/03. All points are subject to verification by the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
i.  Water line locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII Text or EXCEL electronic format for each point. The developer shall provide ASCII or EXCEL spread sheet files for coordinate data (comma delimited). Each point I.D. (valves, water main, etc.) shall be shown at the correct location on the printed plans. 
j.  Water Mains along city, county or state roads and cross country shall be located at 50-foot intervals (ground and top of pipe). If water main is within the development and maintains a constant distance behind curb and constant depth, locate at all transitions (vertical and horizontal). 
k.  All fittings, tees and bends, valves, and air release valves shall also be located. All vertical locations shall be finished ground and top of pipe. The contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, tees, fittings, valves, elevation transitions, horizontal transitions and every 50 feet along the length of the water main (city, county or state roads and cross country) for the purpose of enabling the surveyor/engineer to locate the water main for "as-builts." The contractor will then be responsible for removing the vertical PVC sections after the as-built locations have been verified by the city. The ground, top of pipe, top of fitting and top of valve elevation of shall be located. The size and material of all pipes, valves and fittings shall be recorded. 
l.  All electronic point data shall include: 
i.  Point ID (see city staff). 
ii.  Northing. 
iii.  Easting. 
iv.  Ground elevation. 
v.  Top of pipe, valve or hydrant elevation. 
vi.  Point description (pipe, fitting or valve type and size). 
m.  Construction plans shall consist of the following: 
i.  Site plan showing the water layout only with project name, streets, street names, topography with contour lines at two-foot intervals, location map, lot layout (if subdivision) or building location (multi-family, commercial or industrial site), land lots, district and north arrow. Lot numbers shall run in consecutive order and there shall be no duplicate lot numbers within the project. Note if any other utilities are existing. Plan scale shall be a minimum of one inch equals 100 feet. Both the construction plans and "as-builts" ("as-built" plans document the final location of infrastructure and utilities) shall show station numbers along the alignment plus call out the specific stations of all features such as tees, crosses, fire hydrants, bends, etc. along with the point I.D. match lines shall be provided where necessary. 
ii.  Proposed pipe materials, sizes, lengths and alignment. 
iii.  Proposed service lateral locations. 
iv.  Location, type and size of water valves and air release valves (to be installed at highest points of system). 
v.  Thrust blocks where used. 
vi.  Fire hydrant locations. 
vii.  Water system materials. 
viii.  Location and sizes of existing water lines surrounding project, with nearest line valve in each direction from proposed connection. 
ix.  Detail of connection to existing water lines. 
x.  Proposed meter sizes and locations. 
xi.  Detailed plan of fire line meters, detector meters, compound meters, backflow preventers, etc. if applicable. 
xii.  Any other items incidental to the proposed system. 
xiii.  Details of special water line installations such as stream crossings, elevated lines on piers, bridges, pipe bedding, special highway crossings, railroad crossings, etc. 
xiv.  Show all right-of-way widths, easement widths and pavement widths. 
xv.  Plan and profile sheets shall be prepared with a horizontal scale of one inch equals 50 feet and a vertical scale of one inch equals ten feet. These scales also apply to any profile view of sanitary sewers. 
xvi.  Bench marks and control points shall be shown on the plan sheets. Horizontal and vertical coordinate data shall be provided for each bench mark and control point. The vertical datum used shall be the elevation above mean sea level. 
xvii.  A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbols used. 
xviii.  Each plan sheet should include a note stating the contractor must call the utilities protection center "call before you dig" telephone number (1-800-282-7411) four days before starting any excavation. 
xix.  All construction plans submitted for review of revisions requested by the city must list each revised item with a cloud around the revised area on the plan sheet and must identify which reviewing authority requested the revision. 
xx.  Each set of construction plans shall include a reproduction of standard detail W725 "call before you dig" detail (see chapter 112 of UDC) from the utilities protection center. 
n.  The general notes for water system construction shown in standard Detail W726 shall be included in each set of plans. See chapter 112 of this UDC. 
C.  Plan approval. Work shall not begin until plan approval is received from the City of Canton. The city engineer shall have final approval of the preliminary plans, construction plans and final plans. If a discrepancy occurs between the approved plans and this UDC, this UDC shall be the superseding document. The city engineer may modify or cause to be modified any plans that he believes are in the best interest and future integrity of the City of Canton. 
D.  Revisions to approved plans. 
1)  When any deviations from approved plans are proposed, the city engineer shall be notified for authorization. Revised plans should be submitted as soon as possible to the city engineer. Minor changes not affecting water system operation may be allowed in the field during construction by the city engineer. The city engineer shall have authority as to what constitutes a minor or major change. "As-built" drawings and the required electronic data on disc shall be furnished to the City of Canton Engineering Department at the completion of construction. 
2)  Any section or unit must be built in accordance with the plans. If the developer decides to phase a section off, a new set of plans showing the phase change will have to be resubmitted and approved. 
E.  Approval by other government agencies. No part of the plan approval process is intended to relieve the developer of the responsibility to comply with the minimum applicable standards of any appropriate local, state or federal regulatory agency. 
F.  Relocation of existing water and sewer facilities. All existing water or sewer facilities that have to be relocated, as might occur at roadway entrances, easements, elevation changes, etc., will be relocated by the developer's contractor at the developer's expense. The city will inspect all such work prior to acceptance. 
G.  Easement acquisition and utility encroachment permits. 
1)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to obtain any off-site easements required to connect the project to the existing water system. Easements will be conveyed to the City of Canton for all facilities which are to be conveyed to the city. This process must be started early enough to allow construction of the water mains before any building construction is to begin. No building permits, water meter or sewer tap applications shall be issued until off-site water mains and sewers have been constructed and accepted. This condition shall override any provision for speed up of house starts such as furnishing a bond to guarantee completion of the streets and other appurtenances. 
2)  Easement drawings shall be prepared for work outside the development prior to approval of the water system plans. The drawings shall be of a size suitable for legal recording and shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. The drawing must be clear and legible for printing. The drawing shall be at a reasonable scale and shall not be a reduced copy of the plan sheet. The drawing will show property lines, the name of property owners with the length of line encroaching on each property owner, size of line, width of permanent and construction easement, scale of drawing, north arrow, land lot and district numbers, and a tie to the nearest land lot corner. Any streets or other existing easements shall also be shown. Easement agreements referencing these drawings shall be prepared and attached to the drawings, signed by the property owners, and recorded at the Cherokee County Clerk of Superior Court's office. A copy of the recorded easement agreement shall be provided to the city before the construction plans are approved and stamped. 
3)  All easements shall allow adequate room to construct the water main and appurtenances. Permanent easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. Wider easements shall be required where water lines are deeper than normal. The maximum cross-slope of the permanent easement shall be ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.02.02 - Design criteria. 
A.  General. The criteria listed herein is not intended to cover all aspects of design, but rather to mention the basic guidelines and those particulars that are required by the City of Canton. 
B.  Water supply (all water supply systems). 
1)  Residential water supply for domestic use shall be in accordance with table 110-1 and provide a minimum pressure of 20 psi. 
2)  Exceptions may be made when deemed necessary by the city. Demand for other than residential to be determined for each specific development. 
3)  Residential developments that exceed 150 lots shall have an additional water connection to the existing city water system at each additional entrance. 
Table 110-1 Instantaneous Water Demands for Residential Areas 

 
C.  Water main extension requirements. 
1)  All specifications required by the city and by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources must be met by the developer. 
2)  Developers are required to extend all mains along their entire property frontage if the existing main is adjacent to the proposed development. The size of the main will be set in accordance with subsection D below. 
3)  If an existing main must be extended to serve a particular development, the developer will be required to pay all of the initial costs, including but not limited to contract prices, testing fees, engineering fees, etc. 
4)  In certain circumstances, the city may require a larger pipe size to be installed than is required by these standards, and the cost of this over sizing may be funded by the city. The developer may be required to pay all of the initial costs. If the purpose of the over sizing is to improve service to existing customers or part of the city's master plan for a network of large mains to transfer water around the city, the city may enter into negotiations with the developer to provide funding for the betterment. 
5)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the city to make main extensions or to furnish service to any person. 
D.  Minimum water main sizes. 
1)  Any system, whether served from an existing city water main or otherwise, shall have a minimum pipe size of eight inches. Actual sizes may be larger depending on the size required to meet the demand of the proposed development and/or the city's master water plan. 
2)  Where a water main extension from an existing city water main is required along an existing public right-of-way or future supply route, the size of pipe to be used will be either eight inches, or a size equal to the existing city main, if larger than eight inches, or the size required to meet the demand of the development, whichever pipe size is largest. The city may require a larger pipe size to be installed than is required by this standard. The cost of this over sizing may be funded by the city, in accordance with the line extension policy (subsection C above.) 
E.  Water main sizes. 
1)  Multi-family. Water mains shall be no less than eight inches in diameter for multi-family developments. 
2)  Large shopping centers, malls, etc. Water mains shall be no less than eight inches in diameter. 
3)  Commercial areas with less than 200,000 square feet. Water mains shall be no less than eight inches in diameter. 
4)  Motels, light industry and schools. Water mains shall be no less than eight inches in diameter. 
5)  Commercial areas with 200,000 square feet or more, heavy industry, large/tall buildings. Water mains shall be no less than ten inches in diameter. 
6)  Single-family. Single-family residential developments shall use a minimum of 8 inch water mains; larger size mains dependent on demand. 
F.  Fire protection. 
1)  Minimum flows. 
a.  Minimum flows shall meet the requirements of Appendix B of the latest edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
b.  Minimum residential flow: Seven hundred fifty GPM for 30 minutes. 
c.  The city may require these recommended flow/duration quantities prior to development of property. 
2)  Fire hydrants will be required as set forth in these specifications where a proposed system is to be served from an existing city water main or in any case where the city is to accept a new system for ownership and operation. 
3)  Fire protection—Hose lay. Hose lay distance is defined as being measured along the route a piece of fire apparatus must travel in laying a fire hose from the fire to the fire hydrant. 
4)  All plans for development must meet all applicable fire protection codes. 
5)  All requirements for design criteria and material and construction specifications must be met to secure a permit from the department of natural resources for construction. 
6)  Spacing of fire hydrants shall meet the requirements of Appendix C of the latest edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be located at all intersections and at the end of the line on all cul-de-sacs. 
b.  Water line extensions along existing roads/highways. 
i.  Fire hydrants shall be spaced not more than 1,000 feet apart. 
ii.  Installations requiring fire hydrants shall have a maximum spacing of 1,000 feet as measured along the roadway. 
iii.  Fire hydrants shall be required at the end of all dead-end lines such as those installed in cul-de-sacs. 
iv.  Fire hydrants shall be located on the back side of the right-of-way. 
v.  Fire hydrants shall be located at all intersections. 
vi.  Fire hydrants shall be located at or within 200 feet of the main entrance to the development. 
7)  Fire lines shall be metered per subsection J below. 
8)  Any vault that has a fire department connection must have a fire hydrant on the city water main side of the vault. 
G.  Sprinkler systems. 
1)  All in-house sprinkler systems shall have a double check detector assembly equipped with a by-pass meter assembly to monitor low flow. 
2)  All in ground sprinkler systems shall have a double check backflow preventer. 
H.  Disconnection of wells. 
1)  All wells in developments which supply water to distribution are to be disconnected. 
2)  It shall be the developer's responsibility to fill, plug, and seal the wells in such a manner which meets the requirements of the Georgia EPD rules for safe drinking water. 
I.  Location of water lines and fixtures. 
1)  Existing roads. 
a.  On existing roads, water mains shall be located on the south and west side of the road, within five feet of the edge of the right-of-way whenever possible. Water mains shall be installed so that the top of the pipe is a minimum of four feet below final grade, four feet below the edge of the pavement, or four feet below the ditch paralleling the road, whichever is deepest. Permission must be granted by the city to vary from this requirement. 
b.  Fire hydrants on existing roads shall be located as near to the right-of-way as practical or as required by the City of Canton or the Cherokee County DOT. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be located between the water line and the right-of-way. 
d.  All water mains located within right-of-way shall be polywrapped. 
2)  Existing state or federal highways and roads. 
a.  On existing county, state or federal highways and roads, water mains shall be located on the south and west side of the road whenever possible, and within five feet of the edge of the right-of-way. Water mains shall be installed so that the top of the pipe is a minimum of four feet below final grade, four feet below the edge of the pavement, or four feet below the ditch paralleling the road, whichever is deepest. Permission must be granted by the Georgia DOT and the city to vary from this requirement. 
b.  Fire hydrants on existing county, state or federal roads shall be located as near to the right-of-way as practical or as required by the Cherokee County DOT or Georgia Department of Transportation. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be located between the water line and the right-of-way. 
d.  All water mains located within county, state or federal highways and roads right-of-way shall be polywrapped. 
3)  New streets in subdivisions. 
a.  Water mains on new streets in subdivisions shall be located on the south and west sides of the streets, five feet from the back of the curb. Water mains shall be installed so that the top of the pipe is a minimum of four feet below final grade, four feet below the edge of the pavement, or four feet below the ditch paralleling the road, whichever is deepest. Permission must be granted by the city to vary from this requirement. 
b.  Fire hydrants on new streets shall be located between the water main and the right-of-way and as near to the right-of-way as practical. 
c.  The construction of the water main shall not begin until the rough grading is completed and all curbing is installed. 
4)  Service laterals. 
a.  Service laterals shall be located with a minimum bury equal to that of the main line within the right-of-way and reducing to a depth of 12 inches at the water meter location. 
i.  Service line size shall be one inch for single residential service and one inch for double residential service. 
ii.  All long side services for single-family residential shall be encased in two-inch PVC pipe. 
iii.  All long side services for developments other than single-family residential shall be encased in four-inch PVC pipe. 
iv.  All PVC casings for long side services shall be a minimum of two inches in diameter. 
v.  The contractor shall install the appropriate size service saddle and corporation stop at the main, service laterals and curb stops in meter boxes. 
vi.  For double residential services, the contractor shall provide a cut-off valve on the service on the water main side of the service tee, the service tee, all necessary bends and the curb stops in the meter boxes. The cut-off valve on the service shall be buried without a valve box. 
b.  If a three-inch meter is used for the development, the developer must install four-inch DIP from the main to the meter, and then utilize a four-inch by three-inch reducer at the meter. The city will not accept three-inch service material. 
c.  Any portion of service lateral located under pavement shall be encased in PVC pipe, extending a minimum of three feet beyond the edge of pavement and/or sidewalk on both sides of the road. Copper tubing shall be used for all services. A "W" shall be sawed into the curb where each service tap is made for permanent location. 
d.  At all common areas within residential or other developments, the developer shall include in the water plans a water service and meter at the edge of the street right-of-way. 
5)  Within commercial developments. Water mains within commercial, multi-family, industrial, office/institutional or school developments shall be installed so that the top of the pipe is a minimum of four feet below final grade, four feet below the edge of the pavement, or four feet below the ditch paralleling the road, whichever is deepest. Permission must be granted by the city to vary from this requirement. 
6)  Water valves. 
a.  Valves less than 16-inch shall be gate valves. 
i.  Valves 16 inches and larger in diameter shall be butterfly valves. 
ii.  Water valves at intersections shall be located behind the curb or edge of pavement. 
iii.  As a general rule, at intersections, the number of valves shall equal the number of streets leaving the intersection. (In other words, four valves where two roads cross and three valves where one road tees into another road.) The city may require valves in excess of this requirement if the water system layout warrants additional valves. 
b.  The maximum spacing of line valves shall be 1,000 feet. 
i.  The city may require closer spacing in high-density urban areas and subdivisions. Generally, the city will require a main line valve at every fire hydrant as a minimum. The required spacing shall be at the discretion of the city based on individual development circumstances. 
ii.  Unless at an intersection, line valves shall be located at fire hydrants. 
iii.  Concrete valve markers are required at all line valves and at the end of every dead-end line. 
c.  All fire hydrants shall be provided with a six-inch gate valve between the water main and the hydrant. 
i.  Wherever possible, the gate valve for a hydrant shall be connected to the main by using a locked hydrant tee. 
ii.  Wherever possible, the developer shall connect the gate valve to the hydrant by using a locked hydrant adapter or anchor coupling. 
iii.  When connections using locked hydrant fittings are not feasible, the connections shall be rodded together. 
d.  All valves shall be provided with valve boxes. 
i.  Each valve box shall have a concrete collar. 
ii.  These collars must be a minimum of three and one-half inches thick. They shall be square and sized 24 inches by 24 inches. 
iii.  Pre-cast collars may be used, provided that they are grouted in place to the valve box. 
iv.  The box is to be flush with or a maximum of one inch above the finished grade. 
v.  The edge of the valve box is to be one-half inch above the edge of the concrete collar. 
7)  Gate valves and line plug. 
a.  A gate valve and a minimum of 36 linear feet of pipe shall be provided at the end of all lines for phased developments, and at locations where the water main may be extended in the future for water system improvements. 
b.  The end of the line shall be provided with a M.J. plug and a thrust collar. A valve marker will be placed directly above the plug. 
8)  Air release valves. 
a.  Air release valves (ARV) shall be located where appropriate as determined by the design professional responsible for the water system design. 
b.  All ARV locations are subject to the approval of the city. In general, within subdivisions, ARV's are not necessary as long as services are located at the water main high points. 
c.  Valve markers are required at each A. and V. assembly. 
9)  Road crossings. 
a.  At all road crossings, the water main shall be encased in steel casing. The water main inside the casing shall be restrained with "Field Lok" or "Fast-Grip" gaskets. The ends of the casing shall be sealed with brick to secure the position of the main. 
b.  Steel casings shall be sized as follows in table 110-2: 
Table 110-2 Steel Casing Size 

 
10)  Polyethylene encasement. 
a.  Ductile iron water mains shall be provided with black polyethylene encasement whenever the water main either crosses or is in close proximity to a steel gas main. 
b.  Ductile iron water mains shall be provided with black polyethylene encasement whenever the water main is installed along a city, county, state or federal roadway. 
c.  Ductile iron pipe (DIP) installed in low-lying damp areas and in areas where anode beds are known to exist shall also be provided with polyethylene encasement. 
d.  The length of the encasement shall be in accordance with DIPRA recommendations. 
e.  The city engineer shall have final authority over the required length of the encasement during the plan review process. 
11)  Easements. 
a.  Water mains that are located off the right-of-way shall have a minimum 20 feet wide permanent easement. 
b.  The maximum cross-slope of the permanent easement shall be ten percent. 
c.  See section 110.02.01.G regarding the requirements for water line easements. 
12)  Acceleration/deceleration lanes. Where applicable, if an acceleration lane or a deceleration lane is to be constructed and will cover or encroach over existing non-DIP water mains, it is the developer's responsibility to relocate the existing main out from under the proposed pavement and replace the existing main with ductile iron pipe. (See detail W720 "Blow-Off Assembly" in chapter 112.) 
13)  Dams. Water mains shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the toe of a dam. 
J.  Fire line metering requirements. 
1)  All double check detector assembly, compact fire line assembly, or factory mutual fire line meters as required will be handled by the developer under the supervision of the city inspectors. The cost of installation will be at a rate established for each individual site. 
2)  All existing un-metered fire service systems having private fire hydrants, hand hose connections, or sprinkler heads on private property are required to have an underwriter approved double check detector assembly, compact fire line assembly, or factory mutual fire line assembly with the proper backflow device installed as part of the fire service system. 
3)  Persons making applications for new fire service connections with private fire hydrants, hand hose connections, or sprinkler heads will be required to have an underwriter approved double check detector assembly, compact fire line assembly, or factory mutual fire line assembly with the proper backflow device installed as part of the fire service system. 
4)  The contractor shall install a curb stop that can be locked in the on or off position on all two-inch and smaller double check detector assembly (DCDA) connections. 
5)  When unauthorized (i.e., non-fire fighting water and/or water use without prior notification and approval of the city) is used through the detector meter, the customer will be notified and given 60 days to repair the leak or flow problem. If the meter continues to show usage after the next 60-day reading cycle the customer will then be charged an illegal hook-up fee determined by the city. The city will then determine if a compact fire line assembly or factory mutual fire line meter will need to be installed. If the repair is not made within the given time, this will result in notification to the fire district office and possible disconnection of fire protection water service until corrective action is taken and approved by the city. 
6)  If the normal usage of the development is such that the service meter required to serve the development is larger than two inches, the city shall require that the developer install an eight-inch or larger compact fire line meter assembly and vault to serve both the normal usage and the fire line needs of the development. If the normal usage of the development is such that a two-inch meter or smaller can be used to serve the development, the developer will be allowed to use a two-inch or smaller meter for the normal usage and a detector meter assembly on the fire line. 
7)  When unauthorized water is used through a detector meter in three or more billing periods in one calendar year, it shall be replaced with a factory mutual fire line meter. Unauthorized use of water is defined as non-fire fighting water and/or water use without prior notification and approval of the city. The regular monthly fire service standby charge shall be continued for fire service installations having a detector or factory mutual fire line meter. The water that is measured by the detector meter will be billed at five times the normal water charge. If the services of legal council are required to collect bills, the cost of council shall be added to the billing. 
8)  The detector meters on the backflow preventers shall be Neptune T-10 with E-Coder Register compatible with the city's meter reading equipment. 
9)  All domestic water supplies must be metered with a proper meter. 
10)  Installation of detector meters or factory mutual fire line meters as required will be the responsibility of the developer under supervision of the city's inspectors. 
11)  The city shall have the right to cut off water service to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with these provisions upon proper notification of 60 days. 
K.  Water pump stations. Where pump stations are required to serve a development, the developer's design professional shall prepare and submit detailed plans, specifications and calculations for the city's review. Design requirements shall be discussed in the preliminary stages of plan review. Each case shall be reviewed individually, and the city shall retain the right to require changes to the pump station design or materials at the city's discretion. 
L.  Water mains on private roads. The city may accept for ownership water mains installed along roadways that are not dedicated for public use (i.e., are without public right-of-way) if the property owners dedicate a permanent easement to the city. 
M.  Protection of water supply and other utilities. 
1)  Cross connection control. 
a.  The City of Canton has an established cross-connection program to prevent the entry of contaminants or pollutants into any area of the potable water supply through the control of cross connections. 
b.  It is illegal to introduce any substance into or to have any cross connections with the potable water supply. 
c.  There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sanitary sewer which would permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable water supply. 
d.  See also the cross-connection control program section of this chapter. 
2)  Separation between water main and sanitary sewer mains. 
a.  Whenever possible, water mains should be laid at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or proposed sanitary sewer main. Should conditions prevent a separation of ten feet, the lines shall be laid in separate trenches. In either case, the elevation of the invert of the water main shall be at least 12 inches above the crown of the sewer. These distances are measured edge to edge. 
b.  When water mains cross over sewer mains, the water main shall be laid so that the invert of the water main shall be at least 18 inches above the crown of the sewer. The two pipes shall be installed such that a full length of pipe will be centered over the crossing so that all joints will be separated as much as possible. Ductile iron pipe shall be installed for both mains. 
c.  In the rare circumstance when the 18-inch clearance between the water and sewer mains cannot be maintained, the DIP mains shall be installed as described in the paragraph above with the joints as far apart as possible, plus both mains shall be placed in casing for a distance of ten feet on each side and grout each end of casing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2017-07, 3-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
110.02.03 - Materials for water line construction. 
A.  General. 
1)  All materials used in the work including equipment shall be new and unused materials of a reputable U.S. manufacturer conforming to the applicable requirements of these specifications, and no materials shall be used in the work until they have been approved by the city. 
2)  Any reference to a AWWA, ANSI, ASTM or other such specification shall mean the latest revision published. 
3)  Any pipe, solder or flux used in the installation or repair of the water lines shall be lead free. Pipes and fittings shall not contain more than 8.0 percent lead and solder and flux shall not contain more than 0.2 percent lead. 
B.  Water main. 
1)  Ductile iron pipe. 
a.  Ductile iron pipe shall be used for all water mains, except where the city engineer approves otherwise. 
b.  Ductile iron pipe shall be thickness class 50, designed in accordance with AWWA C150 and manufactured in accordance with AWWA C151. 
c.  Ductile iron pipe shall have an outside bitumastic coating per AWWA C151. It shall have an inside standard cement lining with bituminous seal coat per AWWA C104. 
d.  Pipe joints. 
i.  Except where restrained, flange, or mechanical joints are specified, straight pipe joints shall be push on, rubber gasket type such as Fastite as manufactured by American Ductile Iron Pipe or alternate acceptable to the city conforming to AWWA C111. 
ii.  Pipe shall be in 18-foot to 20-foot nominal lengths with standard deflection pipe sockets. 
iii.  Where restrained joints are shown, the joints shall be "flex-ring" type as manufactured by American Ductile Iron Pipe, TR Flex as manufactured by U.S. Pipe or alternate acceptable to the city. 
e.  Where river crossing pipe is required, the pipe shall be "flex-lok boltless ball joint pipe" as manufactured by American Ductile Iron Pipe or alternate acceptable to the city. 
f.  Where specified, flanged pipe shall meet AWWA C151 specifications and be used with fittings meeting AWWA C110 or AWWA C153. 
g.  Certificates of conformance with the foregoing specifications shall be furnished with each lot of pipe supplied. 
2)  Copper tubing for water service laterals. 
a.  Service lateral pipe shall be copper service pipe, type K, soft temper, seamless copper tubing, conforming to ASTM B-88. Compression joints will be used. 
b.  Service line size shall be one inch for single residential service and one inch for double residential service. Service line size shall be one inch minimum for all other types of developments. 
c.  All service lines smaller than four inches in diameter shall be copper. Service lines four inches in diameter and larger shall be ductile iron. 
3)  PVC casing for services. 
a.  Long side service lines shall be bored and encased in PVC pipe. 
b.  PVC casing pipe used for long-side services shall be schedule 40 and a minimum of two inches in diameter for residential developments and four inches in diameter for all other type developments. 
4)  Casing pipe. 
a.  Casing pipe, where required under the street, shall be smooth steel pipe conforming to ASTM A-139, Grade B, electric fusion welded steel pipe. 
b.  The pipe shall have minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi. 
c.  The exterior and interior of the pipe shall have a bitumastic varnish coating. 
d.  Minimum wall thickness: 0.250 inch or as required by the DOT or other governing body having jurisdiction over the crossing. 
5)  Ductile iron pipe fittings. 
a.  Fittings shall be ductile iron and furnished in accordance with AWWA C110 or AWWA C153, and shall be a minimum of 350 psi pressure class rating. 
b.  Joints shall be mechanical joint with retainer glands conforming to AWWA C111, except where approved otherwise by the city. 
c.  Cement mortar lining conforming to AWWA C104 or fusion-bonded epoxy coating conforming to AWWA C116 shall be furnished for fittings. 
C.  Fire hydrants. 
1)  All fire hydrants shall comply in all respects with city standards and shall be designed and manufactured to comply with the requirements of AWWA C502. 
2)  The hydrants shall be designed for 250 pounds working pressure. 
3)  The hydrants shall be of simple design, easy to operate, effectively and positively drained and protected from damage by freezing, and convenient for repairing and replacing parts. 
4)  Hydrants shall be equipped with one four and one-half-inch diameter pumper nozzle and two two and one-half-inch diameter hose connections, which shall have threads meeting the latest requirements of the state fire insurance commission. 
5)  Hydrants shall have a safety flange on the barrel and a safety coupling on the valve stem to prevent damage to barrel and stem in case of traffic accident. Safety coupling shall be set two inches to six inches above the finish grade. 
6)  Hydrants shall be Mueller Company's Super Centurian traffic model, M&H Style 129 traffic model or U.S. Pipe Metropolitan 250, Model 94. 
7)  The connection at the base of the hydrant shall be mechanical joint with ductile iron retainer gland for six-inch ductile iron pipe. The valve opening shall meet the requirement of the AWWA Specifications for a five and one-quarter-inch hydrant. The valve, valve seat and inner working parts shall be easily accessible. The height from the surface of the ground to the bottom of the hose nozzle shall be no less than 24 inches. 
8)  Each hydrant shall be neatly painted with Sherwin Williams Product No. C19387 Chrome Aluminum Spray Enamel paint. 
9)  Each hydrant shall be tested to 200 psi. The first test shall be made with the valve closed. The second test shall be made with the main valve open but all nozzles closed. While the test is being carried on, the hydrant shall be subjected to a hammer test. Any hydrant showing defects by leakage, sweating, or otherwise shall be rejected. The barrel and all parts shall withstand these tests. These tests shall be made in the field after the hydrants are installed. 
10)  Leads from the main line to the fire hydrant shall use six-inch ductile iron pipe and shall have a six-inch gate valve between the main line and fire hydrant. The valve shall be connected to the main line by using a locking (anchoring) hydrant tee. Retainer glands or steel rods must be used to insure adequate connection of fire hydrant to valve. When the hydrant is close enough to the valve to allow its use, the hydrant shall be connected to the valve by using an anchor coupling acceptable to the city. 
D.  Valves and accessories. 
1)  Gate valves. 
a.  Valves 16 inches and smaller shall be gate valves. 
b.  The valves shall be of non-rising stem design, and have an iron body, bronze mounted, resilient seated, meeting all requirements of AWWA C509 or AWWA C515. 
c.  All interior ferrous surfaces of valves shall have a fusion-bonded epoxy coating meeting the requirements of AWWA C550. 
d.  Valves shall be designed for a minimum working pressure of 250 psi and shall have two-inch square operating nuts, except in meter vaults where handwheels shall be installed. 
e.  Valves for pipe smaller than four inches in diameter shall have handwheels suitable for use inside standard valve boxes. 
f.  Valves shall open when turned counter-clockwise. 
g.  Valves sized two inches through 12 inches shall be Mueller Co. A-2360 with mechanical joints or alternate acceptable to the city. 
h.  Fourteen-inch and 15-inch valves shall be Mueller Co. A-2361 with mechanical joints or alternate acceptable to the city. 
i.  Mechanical joints shall be fitted with retainer glands. 
j.  Where flange joints are used, flanges must meet the requirements of AWWA C115. 
2)  Butterfly valves. 
a.  Valves larger than 16 inches in diameter shall be butterfly valves. 
b.  All butterfly valves shall be bubble-tight closing at the rated pressure with flow in either direction, and shall be satisfactory for applications involving throttling service and frequent operations or operations after long periods of inactivity. 
c.  Valves shall meet the full requirements of AWWA C504, for 250 psi working pressure and shall be suitable for above ground or buried service. 
d.  All interior ferrous surfaces of valves shall have a fusion-bonded epoxy coating meeting the requirements of AWWA C550. 
e.  Valve bodies shall be equipped with integrally cast mechanical joint ends meeting AWWA C111. Mechanical joints shall be furnished with retainer glands. 
f.  Butterfly valves installed underground shall come equipped with a manual operator. This manual operator shall be of the traveling nut, self-locking type and shall be designed to hold the valve in any intermediate position between fully open and fully closed without creeping or fluttering. Operators shall be equipped with mechanical stop-limiting devices to prevent over travel of the disc in the open and closed positions. 
g.  Valves shall open when turned counter-clockwise. Operators shall be fully enclosed and designed for buried operation. 
3)  Valve boxes. 
a.  Valves boxes for valves shall be approved standard cast iron adjustable shaft boxes having a minimum shaft diameter of five and one-quarter inches. 
b.  The casing shall be coated with two coats of bitumastic paint. 
c.  The lids of all boxes shall bear the word "water" or the letter "W". 
4)  Air and vacuum relief valve assemblies. 
a.  The valve shall be a combination air/vacuum- double orifice automatic air release valve with two-inch connection to the pipe line. 
b.  The valve shall be of one-piece body design. 
c.  The internal parts shall have a small orifice within tripod for small air discharge and a big orifice within bonnet of base housing for main air discharge and allow air to enter in the event of a vacuum condition. 
d.  The material of the body and the flow shall be Delrin (Poloximethylene, POM). 
e.  The valve sealing is rubber made of EPDM. 
f.  The valve shall have a protection cap of PE. 
g.  Air and vacuum valves shall be manufactured by H-TEC or alternate acceptable to the city. 
h.  Valves shall be a minimum of one inch. 
i.  Gate valves between water main and air release valve shall be bronze, solid wedge with screw connection equal to Jenkins Company Figure 325J or alternate acceptable to the city. 
j.  Meter box shall be equal to the NDS Style D-1200 or alternate acceptable to the city. 
5)  Tapping sleeves. 
a.  Tapping sleeves for existing water mains sized four inches through 12 inches shall be either an American Flow Control Series 2800, or a Ford Stainless Style FAST Tapping Sleeve or alternate acceptable to the city. Sleeves shall have a flanged connection to the tapping valve. 
b.  Tapping sleeves for existing water mains sized larger than 12 inches in diameter shall be an American Flow Control Series 1004 or alternate acceptable to the city. The sleeve shall be mechanical joint type with a flanged connection to the tapping valve. It shall be capable of withstanding a working pressure of 250 psi for the pipe size and type shown. 
6)  Tapping valves. Tapping valves shall be American Flow Control Series 2500, mechanical joint by flanged ends, 250 psi, or alternate acceptable to the city. 
7)  Pipe connection couplings. 
a.  Pipe connections between new pipe and existing pipe shall be made with Dresser Style 90 long steel couplings for pipe sizes two inches and below. 
b.  For pipe sizes above two inches, M.J. solid sleeves (long style) shall be used. 
c.  Spacer rings must be used at all solid sleeve locations. A spacer ring is defined as a short section of pipe cut to fit into the gap between the two plain ends of pipe at the sleeve location. 
d.  Field joints shall be made to insure permanently tight joints under all reasonable conditions of expansion, contraction, shifting, etc. 
8)  Curb stops. 
a.  All metal parts of curb stops shall be made of bronze. 
b.  The stops shall be Ford B43-332W with padlock wings or alternate acceptable to the city for copper service pipe. 
c.  The stop shall be operated with a combined cap and tee and shall open when turned counter-clock wise. 
d.  The stop shall be compression joint inlet with meter swivel nut outlet. 
9)  Service line couplings. 
a.  Service line pipe couplings shall be compression style Ford C44 or alternate acceptable to the city. 
b.  Branch connection shall be one inch by three-quarters inch by three-quarters inch Ford Y44-243 or alternate acceptable to the city. 
c.  A cut-off valve (such as a Ford B44-444 Curb Stop) shall be installed on the water main side (the one-inch side) of the wye and shall be buried without a valve box. 
d.  Female compression adapters shall be a Mueller-H-15451 or alternate acceptable to the city. 
e.  Male compression adapters shall be a Mueller-H-15428 or alternate acceptable to the city. 
10)  Corporation stops. 
a.  Corporation stops shall have AWWA tapered threaded inlet and compression joint outlet connection for copper service pipe. 
b.  All metal parts of the stop assembly shall be made of bronze. 
c.  The stop shall be operated with a tee head and shall open when turned counter-clockwise. 
d.  Corporation stops for copper service line pipe outlets shall be Ford FB1000 or alternate acceptable to the city. 
11)  Electric conductive wire. 
a.  Where PVC pipe is allowed to be installed, electric conductive wire shall be placed in the trench one foot above the pipe. 
b.  The tracer wire shall be 12-gauge, plastic coated copper wire suitable for this purpose. 
c.  Foil tape will not be acceptable. 
12)  Meter boxes for single-family residential (subdivisions). 
a.  Meter boxes shall be manufactured by Star Pipe Products or alternate acceptable to the city and shall be of cast iron, oval shape and have minimum inside dimensions of 19 inches by ten inches and shall be at least 11½ inches deep. 
b.  Lids shall fit snugly. Lids shall be banded together with a steel strapping and painted with black asphaltic paint before shipping. 
c.  The combined weight of the box and lid shall be not less than 60 pounds. 
d.  The lid shall be of cast iron and shall be designed to rest firmly on the seat inside the box and over-hang to prevent dirt from falling into the seat. 
e.  The lid shall be easily removed and replaced. 
13)  Service saddles—Double strapped. 
a.  Double strapped service saddles are required for services two and one-half inches and smaller in diameter and shall be Ford F202 double strap clamps suitable for use with ductile iron or PVC pipe or alternate acceptable to the city. See subsection D.5 above regarding the requirements for four-inch and larger diameter taps. 
b.  If a three-inch meter is used for the development, the developer must install four-inch DIP from the main to the meter, and then utilize a four-inch by three-inch reducer at the meter. 
c.  The city will not accept three-inch service material. 
14)  Meters and backflow preventers. 
a.  All meters two inches and smaller will be installed by the city in boxes located at the edge of the right-of-way. All meters three inches and larger will be installed by the developer under the supervision of the city engineer. All meters three inches and larger shall be in vaults located at the edge of the street right-of-way or proper easement shall be provided. No meter will be set until the meter set fee is paid and a building permit issued for the lot requesting service. Services shall be sized and located as shown in detail W724 "Water Line Maintenance Sign" (see chapter 112). All meters must register in gallons and programmed to read in thousand gallon units. 
b.  Except as elsewhere provided, all meters, service connections, and other equipment furnished by or for the city shall be and remain the property of the city. The city will, at its own expense, make routine tests of meters when it considers such tests. 
c.  All meters must be installed with at least five times the pipe diameter of straight pipe the same size as meter on the inlet and outlet side to permit proper calibration. 
d.  All three-inch and larger meters shall be a Neptune T-10 with E-Coder Register. 
e.  Each register shall compatible with the city's meter reading equipment. 
f.  All meter installed inside vaults must be level parallel, vertical, and horizontal to the meter vault. 
g.  A Number 57 stone gravel bed (four-feet minimum) or a positive drain shall be required underneath all vaults for drainage. All bedding must be level for proper functioning of the meter. 
h.  Stand-on pipe supports are required underneath the meter and wheel valves for support of the weight. 
i.  All openings or holes in the vault will be required to be enclosed with concrete and made water tight. 
15)  Polyethylene tubing for ductile iron pipe. 
a.  Where required by the city, polyethylene encasement tubing shall be manufactured of virgin polyethylene material conforming to the requirements specified in AWWA C105, section 4.1.1 for linear, low density polyethylene film. 
b.  The polyethylene film shall have a minimum thickness of eight mil. 
c.  Black polywrap shall be used for water mains and green polywrap shall be used for sewer force mains. 
16)  Valve markers. 
a.  One concrete valve marker shall be furnished and set at each line valve. 
b.  The marker shall be made of 3,000 PSI concrete, and shall be four feet long and four inches on each side, with two #3 reinforcing bars as shown on the detailed drawings. 
c.  The markers shall be set an even number of feet between the center line of the valve and the center line of the aluminum disc in the top of the marker, and the distance in feet between the valve and marker shall be stamped in the marker at the time of setting. 
17)  Valve box collars. 
a.  Each valve box shall have a concrete collar. These collars must be a minimum of three and one-half inches thick. They shall be square and sized 24 inches by 24 inches. 
b.  Precast collars may be used, provided that they are grouted in place to the valve box. 
c.  The box is to be flush with or a maximum of one inch above the finished grade. 
d.  The edge of the valve box is to be one-half inch above the edge of the concrete collar. 
18)  Concrete for thrust blocks and thrust collars . Concrete for thrust blocks and thrust collars shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
19)  Subgrade stabilizer stone. Stabilizer for subgrade shall be either approved crushed stone or gravel, uniformly graded from one-quarter inch to three-quarter inch in size. 
20)  Retainer glands. Retainer glands for mechanical joints shall be EBAA Mega-Lug or alternate acceptable to the city. 
21)  Locked fire hydrant tee and adapter. Locked fire hydrant tees and adapters (anchor coupling) shall be submitted to the city for approval. 
22)  "Fast-Grip" gaskets. Inside of all casings and wherever else required by the city, DIP water main joints shall be slip joint restrained by using American Pipe "Fast-Grip" gaskets, U. S. Pipe "Field-Lok" gaskets or alternate acceptable to the city. 
23)  Nitrile (NBR) gaskets. In areas where underground fuel storage tanks are located or are known to have been located and as directed by the city, the DIP water main joints shall use American Pipe "Nitrile (NBR)" (Acrylonitrile Butadiene) gaskets or alternate acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.02.04 - Construction methods. 
A.  Excavation general. 
1)  It is the responsibility of the general contractor, any subcontractor, their employees, and inspectors of job sites to observe all safety regulations. Deficiencies in safety measures noted should be immediately reported to the contractor's superintendent, so that immediate corrective measures can be taken by the contractor. It is, however, the contractor's responsibility to conform to all safety regulations and practices as pertain to his construction site. The contractor shall contact the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Region IV, Atlanta, Georgia for any assistance needed to complying with the appropriate regulations. 
2)  All unsuitable excavated material must be properly disposed of in a manner acceptable to the city and in a manner that will not adversely affect the environment. It shall be expressly understood that these standards are for the installation of all underground water mains and appurtenances. All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of the AWWA Specifications except as otherwise specified herein. 
B.  Erosion and sedimentation control. 
1)  All erosion and sedimentation control methods shall be in compliance with the local, state, and federal regulations, the Manual for Erosion Control in Georgia and the EPD requirements regarding the NPDES storm water monitoring permits (see the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control section of chapter 107 of this UDC). 
2)  The contractor shall designate one individual to be responsible for the implementation and maintenance of erosion and sedimentation controls on a 24-hour, everyday basis. The contractor shall furnish the city the individual's name, address, and 24-hour telephone number. This information shall be updated as is necessary. 
C.  Clearing and grubbing. 
1)  Areas for water system construction shall be cleared and grubbed. 
2)  All trees, shrubs, stumps, brush, paving and other waste material must be removed from the site. No trees or stumps shall be pushed beyond the right-of-way or buried nor shall any timber beyond the right-of-way damaged. 
3)  On water line extensions to the development, the road right-of-way shall be cleared to the width necessary for trenching and pipe laying operations. All stumps and roots within the trench dimensions shall be grubbed to such depths and widths as will enable the trenching to be done. 
4)  The contractor shall remove only such trees on or along the work as the city engineer and community development director permits, and shall carefully protect all other trees adjacent to the work. The contractor shall not permit excavating machinery or trucks to scrape the bark or tear the limbs from the trees, nor connect ropes or guy cables to them. 
D.  Trench excavation. 
1)  It is the responsibility of those installing water mains and related appurtenances to conform to OSHA regulations during trench excavation. OSHA publications are available to assist the contractor in having a safe construction site). Publications from OSHA can be obtained by contacting OSHA Publications Distribution, Washington, D.C. The city assumes no liability or responsibility for unsafe trench conditions. 
2)  Trenches shall have a minimum width of 12 inches plus the diameter of the outside of the bell of the water main and the depth thereof shall be such that the water mains shall be installed so that the top of the pipe is a minimum of four feet below final grade, four feet below the edge of the pavement, or four feet below the ditch paralleling the road, whichever is deepest. Permission must be granted by the city to vary from this requirement. Maximum trench width at the top of the pipe shall not be more than the outside diameter of the bell plus two feet. The sides of the trench above the pipe shall be sloped or benched as necessary to maintain stability. Minimum pipe cover shall be as shown on the approved plans. 
3)  Pipe trenches shall be straight and true to grade and in the location shown on the plans. Trenches shall be dug so that the pipe can be laid to the alignment and depth required, and the trench shall be of such width and shall be braced and drained so that the workmen may work therein safely and efficiently. Chocking under the pipe will not be permitted. All joints shall be as specified herein. Excavation must be made under the bell of each pipe so that the entire length of the pipe will lie uniformly on the bottom of the trench and the pipe weight shall not rest on the bells. 
4)  Trenches shall be free of water during the work. Whenever water is present in the trench, it shall be removed in a manner satisfactory to the city and enough backfill shall be placed on the pipe to prevent floating. Any pipe that has floated shall be removed from the trench and re-laid later during dry conditions. Pipe shall not be laid in wet trench conditions that preclude proper bedding, or on frozen trench bottom, or when, in the opinion of the city, the trench conditions or the weather are unsuitable for proper installation. 
a.  The contractor shall do all necessary pumping or bailing, build all drains and do all other work necessary at his own expense to keep the trenches clear of water during the progress of the work. 
b.  Structures will not be built or pipe will not be laid in water, and water shall not be allowed to flow over or rise upon any concrete, masonry or pipe until the same has been inspected and the concrete or joint material has thoroughly set. 
c.  All water pumped, bailed or otherwise removed from the trench or other excavation shall be conveyed in a proper manner to a suitable place of discharge where it will not cause injury to the public health or to public or private property or to work completed or in progress, or to the surface of the streets or cause any interference with the use of same by the public. 
5)  All changes in grade shall be made gradually. At points of interference with storm sewers and cross drains on DOT right-of-way, the pipe will be run under the conflicting utility unless the water main can be installed above the storm sewer while maintaining both the required one foot separation and the required cover specified in section 109.05.04.D.2 above. Where the water main crosses beneath a storm sewer, there shall be a minimum of 12-inch clearance between the main and the storm sewer. 
6)  In laying pipe across water courses, the top of the water main or casing shall be a minimum of four feet below the creek or river bed. Four feet of cover shall be maintained over water mains crossing ditches or depressions of any kind. Railroad crossings shall be installed according to American Railway Engineering Association requirements. 
7)  Where necessary, the line shall be lowered at valves so that the top of the valve stem is approximately three feet below the finished grade. The trench shall be deepened to provide a gradual approach to all low points of the line. 
8)  Excavation will not be made under highways, streets, alleys or private property until satisfactory arrangements have been made with the city, county, state or owners of the property to be crossed. 
a.  All excavated material shall be placed so as to not interfere with public travel on the streets and highways along which the lines are laid. 
b.  All work shall be performed to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. 
c.  Adequate temporary bridges or crossings shall be constructed and maintained where required to permit uninterrupted vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
d.  No more than 100 feet of trench shall be opened on any line in advance of pipe laying. The city engineer shall have the right to limit the amount of trench open at any one time to less than 100 feet if he believes the reduced limits are necessary. 
9)  All excavations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all OSHA, City of Canton, and Georgia Department of Transportation requirements so as to protect the public and workers from hazard. 
10)  When possible, all crossings of paved highways or driveways shall be made by boring or jacking the pipe under the pavement and shall be done in such manner as not to damage the pavement or sub-grade, unless the casing or pipe is in solid rock, in which case the crossing shall be made by the open cut method, wet bore or by tunneling. 
a.  Wherever streets, roads, or driveways are cut, they shall be immediately backfilled and compacted after the pipe is laid and shall be maintained in first-class condition as passable at all times until repaved. Backfilling, compaction, dressing and clean-up shall be kept as close to the line laying crew as is practical, and negligence in this feature of the work will not be tolerated. 
b.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public and private property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to as near as original condition as possible or better in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
11)  In excavation and backfilling and laying pipe, care must be taken not to remove or injure any water, sewer, gas or other pipes, conduits or other structures without an order from the designer. When an obstruction is encountered, the contractor shall notify the designer who will have the owners of the obstruction adjust same or make necessary changes in grade and/or alignment to avoid such obstruction. Any house connection, drains or other structures damaged by the contractor shall be repaired immediately. 
12)  All excavation shall be placed on one side of the trench, unless permission is given by the city to place it on both sides. Excavation materials shall be so placed as not to endanger the work and so that free access may be had at all times to all parts of the trench and to all fire hydrants or water valve boxes, etc. 
13)  Excavations adjacent to existing or proposed buildings and structures, or in paved streets or alleys shall be adequately protected by the use of trench boxes, sheathing, shoring and bracing to support the sides of the excavation and to prevent cave-ins of the excavation, or the undermining or subsequent settlement of adjacent structures or pavements. Underpinning of adjacent structures shall be done when necessary to maintain structures in safe condition. 
14)  Construction occurring around active sewer systems shall be done in such a way so as to prevent the passage of wastewater onto the ground. Absolutely no wastewater shall be allowed to spill onto the ground. 
E.  Rock excavation. 
1)  Wherever rock is encountered in the excavation, it shall be removed by suitable means. Drilling and blasting operations shall be conducted with due regard for the safety of persons and property in the vicinity and in strict conformity with requirements of all ordinances, laws and regulations relative to the handling, storing and use of explosives. 
2)  The developer is fully responsible for filing for and acquiring any blasting permits which may be required by those agencies with such jurisdiction. Before blasting, the contractor shall cover the excavation with heavy timbers and mats in such a manner as to prevent damage to persons or the adjacent property. Rock excavation near existing pipelines or other structures shall be conducted with the utmost care to avoid damage. The contractor shall be wholly responsible for any damage resulting from blasting, and any injury or damage to structures or property shall be promptly repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the city and property owner. 
3)  Rock in trenches shall be excavated over the horizontal limits of excavation and to depths as follows in table 110-3: 
Table 110-3 Rock Excavation Requirements 

 
4)  The space below grade for pipe lines shall then be backfilled with subgrade stabilizer or other approved bedding material and compacted. 
5)  In rock excavation, the backfill from the bottom of the trench to one foot above the top of the pipe shall be finely pulverized soil, free from rocks and stones. The rest of the backfill shall not contain over 50 percent broken stone, and the maximum sized stone placed in the trench shall not exceed two inches in diameter. Excess rock and fragments of rock larger than two inches in diameter shall be loaded and hauled to disposal. If it is necessary, in order to comply with these specifications, selected backfill shall be borrowed and hauled to the trenches in rock excavation. Sides of the trench shall be trimmed of projecting rock that will interfere with backfilling operations. Rock excavation by blasting shall be at least 75 feet in advance of pipe laying. 
F.  Subgrade and bedding. 
1)  The bottom of the trench shall be accurately cut to grade so that the pipe will have a longitudinal bearing on undisturbed soil for the full length of the pipe, except for such distances that are necessary for bell holes. 
2)  If the soil at the bottom of the trench is in such condition that it cannot be properly shaped or graded, due to the hardness of the soil and in all cases where rock or shale is encountered at sub-grade, the trench shall be refilled with suitable backfill material to the required sub-grade elevation, thoroughly tamped with mechanical tampers and shaped to fit the outside of the pipe as specified in the preceding paragraph. Wherever water is encountered in conjunction with the additional sub-grade excavation, the backfill shall consist of sub-grade stabilizer stone. 
3)  In the event that a trench is excavated below grade, the contractor shall refill the trench to the proper grade with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
a.  Allowable soils shall be dry course-grained soils ranging from well-graded gravel-sand mixtures with little or no fines to clayey sands and sand-clay mixtures with appreciable amounts of fines. 
b.  All soil materials shall have 100 percent passing a one and one-half-inch sieve and a maximum of 55 percent passing a no. 200 sieve. The maximum volume change allowable shall be 15 percent. 
c.  Allowable soils shall be class I and class II as defined in section 810 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges. 
4)  All gravel or crushed stone used for class "C" bedding shall have a gradation equal to or smaller than #57 stone in order to limit the void area, and all the material must pass a one and one-half-inch sieve. Where sand or other acceptable soil is used, it shall be spread over the trench bottom, compacted to at least 90 percent maximum density and shaped before placing the pipe; after the pipe is placed, additional material shall be compacted under the haunches and for the full trench width as described above. 
G.  Installation of water main. 
1)  Pipe and accessories shall at all times be handled with care to avoid damage. Proper and suitable tools and equipment for the safe and convenient handling and laying of pipe shall be used. Whether moved by hand, skidways or hoists, material shall not be dropped or bumped. Great care shall be taken to prevent the pipe from being damaged, particularly the cement lining on the interior of ductile iron pipe. Each joint of pipe shall be unloaded opposite or near the place where it is to be laid in the trench. All pipe shall be carefully examined for cracks and other defects. All such material that is defective in manufacture, has been damaged in transit, after delivery or in installation, shall be removed from the job site and replaced with new material. 
2)  All pipe shall be laid straight, true to line and grade. Bell and coupling holes shall be dug in the trench and the pipe shall have a continuous bearing with the trench bottom between bell or coupling holes. No shimming or blocking up of the pipe shall be allowed. When the work is not going on, all pipe openings shall be securely closed by the insertion of the proper size plug and caulking so that dirt and debris will not be washed into the pipe in case of rain. The inside of the pipe shall be clean and free of trash and dirt, and if necessary a swab or brush shall be used to clean the pipe before lowering it into the trench. All pipe and fittings shall be kept clean until completion of the work. 
3)  Water mains shall be joined by "push-on" joints using elastomeric gaskets to affect the pressure seal. The spigot end of the pipe and the inside of the bell shall be thoroughly cleaned and the gasket inspected to see that it is properly placed. Lubricant shall be applied to the spigot end of the pipe and it shall be inserted into the bell of the adjoining pipe to the stop mark on the pipe, and the assembly shall be made as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. Lubricant used must be non-toxic and supplied or approved for use by the pipe manufacturer. 
4)  Restrained joints shall be provided where specified on the approved plans and shall be of the type specified in section 110.02.03.B above. Assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. While the typical bedding required for water mains is type 3, all restrained pipe and bends shall have type 4 bedding. 
5)  Water shall not be allowed to run or stand in the trench before the trench has been backfilled. The contractor at no time shall open up more trench than his available pumping facilities are able to dewater. 
6)  Where allowed by the city, PVC water mains shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of ASTM D 2774, latest revision. Where PVC pipe is installed, electric conductive wire shall be placed in the trench one foot above the pipe. 
7)  Ductile iron water mains shall be wrapped in black polyethylene tubing where required by the city. Polyethylene tubing shall be installed in accordance with AWWA C105, Method A, latest revision. 
8)  At changes in direction of the main and at other points shown on the plans or directed by the city, the line shall be adequately blocked with concrete or restrained in some other manner approved by the city. The city engineer shall be notified by the contractor before blocking is placed. Prior to blocking any joint or fitting with concrete, that joint or fitting shall be wrapped with polyethylene film in such a manner that the concrete will not stick directly to the pipe but that the load bearing capacity of the blocking will not be affected. 
9)  For water mains, the contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every 50 feet along the length of the water main for the purpose of enabling the surveyor to determine the water main elevation for "as-builts." The contractor will then be responsible for removing the vertical PVC sections after the as-built locations have been verified by the city. The PVC shall be capped by approved method to prevent trash from entering the PVC prior to the depth being measured. 
H.  Backfilling trenches. 
1)  Backfill material shall consist of fine, loose earth containing sufficient but not excessive moisture content for thorough compaction. 
a.  Material that is too dry for adequate compaction shall receive a prior admix of sufficient water to secure adequate moisture content. 
b.  Material having excessive water content shall not be placed at any time. 
c.  Backfill material shall be free of large clods, stones, vegetable matter, debris, and other objectionable material. 
d.  All unsuitable excavated material and excess material must be properly disposed of in a manner that will not adversely affect the environment. 
e.  After the pipe has been laid, backfilling shall be done in two distinct operations. 
i.  In general, all backfill beneath, around and to a depth of 12 inches above the top of the pipe shall be placed by hand in four-inch layers for the full width of the trench and thoroughly compacted by hand with vibratory equipment. 
ii.  The remainder of the backfill shall be placed in six-inch layers and compacted to the top of the trench, either by pneumatic hand tamps, hydro-tamps, or other approved methods. 
iii.  Care shall be taken so that the pipe is not laterally displaced during backfilling operations. 
iv.  The backfill lifts shall be placed by an approved method in accordance with that hereinafter specified. 
v.  Backfill materials shall be the excavated materials without bricks, stone, or corrosive materials. 
2)  Backfill under permanent concrete or bituminous pavement or floors and as elsewhere specified or indicated on the plans shall be approved bank-run sand or compacted graded aggregate free from large stones and containing not more than ten percent by weight of loam or clay. This backfill shall be compacted to 95 percent as determined by the standard proctor test from pipe bedding to one foot above the pipe, and the remainder of the trench up to the concrete trench cap shall be compacted to 100 percent as determined by the standard proctor test. Mechanical vibrating equipment shall be used to achieve the required compaction. 
3)  Backfill under gravel or crushed stone surfaced roadways and surface treated type bituminous roadways shall be the approved suitable excavated material placed as described above for the full depth and width of the trench. Backfill shall be free from large stones and contain no more than ten percent by weight of loam or clay. This backfill shall be compacted to 95 percent as determined by the standard proctor test from pipe bedding to one foot above the pipe, and the remainder of the trench shall be compacted to 100 percent as determined by the standard proctor test. Mechanical vibrating equipment shall be used to achieve the required compaction. 
4)  Backfill in unpaved areas shall be compacted with mechanical vibrating equipment to 98 percent as determined by the standard proctor test. Backfill material from pipe bedding to ground surface by shall be excavated earth free from large stones and other debris. 
5)  Where sheeting is used in connection with the work, it shall not be withdrawn before the trench is sufficiently filled to prevent damage to banks, road surfaces, adjacent pipes, adjacent structures or property. When the removal of sheeting endangers adjoining improvements, it will be left in place. 
6)  All costs of compaction testing shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
I.  Thrust restraint for pressure lines. 
1)  Reaction blocking. 
a.  Underground piping installed around curves and at all unsupported changes of direction, all tees, wyes, crosses, plugs and other like fittings shall be solidly and properly blocked with high early strength concrete against solid earth to take the reaction of the main pressure and to prevent lateral movement of the pipe or fittings when under pressure. 
i.  Concrete for reaction blocking shall be class A concrete and shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. 
ii.  The contractor shall allow the concrete to set up for a minimum of four hours before backfilling. The blocking, unless otherwise shown, shall be so placed that the pipe and fitting joints will be accessible for repair. 
b.  Reaction blocking shall be constructed in conformance with the standard detail drawings in chapter 112 of this UDC. Prior to blocking any joint or fitting with concrete, that joint or fitting shall be wrapped with polyethylene film is such a manner that the concrete will not stick directly to the fitting, but that the load bearing capacity of the blocking will not be affected. 
c.  The sizing of the thrust block bearing area given in the detailed drawings is based on a soil strength of 2,000 PSF and a water pressure of 250 PSI. The design professional preparing the water main design shall verify the soil conditions before the thrust block design is implemented. 
2)  Retainer glands. Mechanical joint fittings and valves on ductile iron pipe shall be installed with retainer glands where specified herein. 
3)  Rodding/straps. 
a.  Where blocking cannot be poured against undisturbed earth, the contractor shall pour concrete deadmen with threaded rods and/or metal straps coming out of the deadmen and connecting to the valve/fitting for restraint. 
b.  The rods and metal straps shall be coated with an approved bitumastic coating prior to backfilling. 
c.  Vertical bends shall be restrained with threaded rods and concrete deadmen as shown in the standard detail drawings in chapter 112 of this UDC. 
4)  Restrained joints. 
a.  Where approved by the city, another option to using concrete blocking in restricted areas is the use of restrained joints. 
b.  Restrained joints shall be provided where specified on the approved plans and shall be of the type specified in section 110.02.03.B above. 
c.  Assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
d.  While the typical bedding required for water mains is type 3, all restrained pipe and bends shall have type 4 bedding. 
J.  Setting fire hydrants. 
1)  Fire hydrants shall be placed at the locations shown on the plans. 
a.  Gate valves for fire hydrants shall be connected directly to the main by means of a "locked hydrant tee." All other connections between the main and the fire hydrant shall be mechanical joint with ductile iron retainer glands. 
b.  Fittings shall be restrained by a "locked hydrant adapter" whenever the fire hydrant is located close enough to the main to allow its use. 
c.  Not less than four cubic feet of No. 5 or No. 57 stone shall be placed around the base of the hydrants, as shown in the standard detail drawings in chapter 112. 
d.  Before placing the hydrants, care shall be taken to see that all foreign material is removed from within the body. 
e.  The stuffing boxes shall be tightened and the hydrant valve opened and closed to see that all parts are in first class working condition. 
f.  All hydrant openings shall be kept capped, except when hydrant is being worked on. 
2)  When a fire hydrant has been constructed but is not yet in service, the contractor shall provide and attach to the fire hydrant a flag or collar indicating that the fire hydrant is not in service. Said flags or collars shall remain on the fire hydrant until it is put into service. Whenever an existing fire hydrant is taken out of service, whether temporarily or permanently, it shall be equipped with a flag or collar indicating that it is not in service. The contractor shall provide and install flags or collars as required and shall notify the fire department whenever the operating status of any fire hydrant changes. 
3)  Fire hydrants shall only be operated with a specifically designed fire hydrant wrench. If the contractor observes any other contractor or person operating a fire hydrant with an unapproved fire hydrant wrench, he shall report that fact to the city immediately. 
4)  It is the contractor's responsibility to insure that all new facilities are maintained in new condition until final completion of the project and acceptance by the city. Fire hydrants with damaged operating nuts shall not be accepted. 
K.  Setting valves and fittings. 
1)  Valves and fittings shall be placed where shown on the plans. 
a.  Valves shall be set plumb, and shall have cast iron valve boxes. 
b.  The valve boxes shall be placed directly over the valve and set plumb, the top of the box being brought to the surface of the ground. 
c.  After the boxes are in place, earth shall be filled in the trench and thoroughly tamped around the box. 
d.  After all settlement has taken place, a concrete collar shall be constructed for each valve box. 
2)  Fittings shall be properly braced to insure that they will not be blown off or broken loose under the greatest possible working pressure. 
a.  All fittings shall be mechanical joint unless specified otherwise. 
b.  In situations where there is insufficient undisturbed earth to act as a bearing surface or where otherwise directed by the city, fittings shall be restrained by the use of threaded rods or other method acceptable to the city. 
c.  Line valves shall be supported and restrained by concrete blocking and threaded rods as shown in the detailed drawings. 
3)  Valve stem extensions shall be installed where the valve operating nut is more than three feet below the finished grade. The valve stem extension shall be of sufficient length to place its operating nut at a depth between two and three feet below finished grade. 
L.  Marking location of valves and the end of the main. 
1)  Each main line water valve shall be marked by cutting a letter "V" in the curb. The "V" shall be turned to point toward the valve. The letter height shall be six inches. 
2)  Concrete valve markers shall be set for main line water valves with an even number of feet between the center line of the valve and the center line of the aluminum disc in the top of the marker, and the distance in feet between the valve and marker shall be stamped in the marker at the time of setting. 
3)  A concrete valve marker shall be placed directly over the end of any water main stubbed out for future use or any dead end main. The letters "EOL" shall be cast into the top of the marker or stamped into the aluminum disc in the top of the marker. 
M.  Placing of steel casing pipe. 
1)  Casing pipe shall be installed at the locations required by the city. Unless directed otherwise, the installation procedure shall be the dry bore method. The hole is to be mechanically bored and cased through the soil by a cutting head on a continuous auger mounted inside the casing pipe. The installation of the casing and boring of the hole shall be done simultaneously by jacking. Lengths of casing are to be full circumference butt-welded to the preceding section installed. Excavation material will be removed and placed at the top of the working pit. 
2)  Jacks for forcing the casing pipe through the roadbed shall have a jacking head constructed in such a manner as to apply uniform pressure around the ring of the pipe. The casing to be jacked shall be set on guides, braced together, to properly support the section of the pipe and direct it to the proper line and grade. In general, roadbed material shall be excavated just ahead of the pipe, the excavated material removed through the pipe, and the pipe then forced through the roadbed into the excavated space. 
3)  Where pipe is required to be installed under railroads, highways, streets or other facilities by jacking or boring methods, construction shall be done in a manner that will not interfere with the operation of the facility, and shall not weaken the roadbed or structure. 
4)  The use of water or other fluids in connection with the boring operation will be permitted only to the extent necessary to lubricate cuttings. Jetting will not be permitted. 
5)  The diameter of the excavation shall conform to the outside diameter and circumference of the casing pipe as closely as practicable. Any voids which develop during the installation operation shall be pressure grouted. 
6)  The casing shall be jacked from the low or downstream end. At each end of the casing pipe the void between the carrier pipe and casing shall be sealed with brick and mortar. Any pipe damaged in jacking operations shall be removed, and replaced by the contractor at their expense. 
7)  After the steel casing pipe has been installed, the DIP carrier pipe shall be installed in the casing pipe. Care shall be exercised at all times to protect the coating and lining of this pipe and to maintain tight, full-seated joints in the carrier pipe. Where the carrier pipe is 24 inches in diameter or less, joint gaskets shall be "Field-Lok" gaskets or approved equal inside of the casing. 
N.  Connection to the existing city water system. 
1)  All persons desiring a tap must make application at the city at least seven working days prior to the date the tap is to be made. 
2)  The contractor shall furnish the following information when making application: 
a.  Approved plan for the project. 
b.  Copy of street or highway permit if available. 
c.  Meter size or detector check applications if for apartments, shopping centers, or residential developments. 
d.  Billing address and purchase order if required. 
e.  Plan and profile of meter installation larger than two inches. 
3)  The city will schedule the tap to conform to their work schedule and notify the contractor so that he can complete his preparation. 
4)  The contractor shall furnish the following at site: 
a.  Tapping sleeve and valve installed on the line and ready for tapping. 
b.  Proper traffic control devices and person(s) to direct traffic if required. 
c.  Backhoe or lift capable of handling the tapping machine. 
d.  Minimum of three people to assist with the work. 
5)  The contractor will be billed for the tap plus an hourly rate for the city's operator, his helper, truck, and any other equipment used if made by city forces. 
O.  Water line tap made by private contractor on city line. 
1)  The city shall be notified one week prior to date tap is to be made. 
2)  City personnel shall supervise the tap and associated work by private contractor. 
3)  All taps shall be made on wet line. 
4)  All taps to be made with saddles or tapping sleeves. 
P.  Interruption of water supply during construction. 
1)  Interruptions of water service will not be allowed without the permission and supervision of city personnel. 
2)  Residents and building occupants shall be informed of the date, time of cutoff and the duration of stoppage. Failure to do so will make the contractor liable for any damages reported to the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
a.  Four days' notice shall be prepared and given to the affected customers and must be coordinated with the city. 
b.  When it is necessary to schedule a water outage for any construction, signs must be posted at least four days in advance to notify the public. 
c.  In some cases, the water outage may need to be scheduled for nights or weekends to lessen the inconvenience to businesses or schools. 
d.  See standard detail No. W724 "Water Line Maintenance Sign" in chapter 112 for sign requirements. These signs are to be provided and installed by the developer. 
Q.  Railroad crossings. 
1)  All railroad crossings shall conform to the requirements of the American Railway Engineering Association Manual for Railway Engineering. 
2)  The contractor shall secure permission from the railroads to schedule the work so as not to interfere with the operation of the railroads. The contractor shall be held responsible for any delays or damages occurring to the railroads. 
3)  The contractor will furnish the railroad with such additional insurance as may be required, cost of same to be borne by the contractor, together with the costs for flagmen, watchmen, temporary work of any nature, safety devices and any other items that may be imposed by the railroad. 
R.  Highway crossings. 
1)  The contractor shall be responsible for coordinating and scheduling all construction work in the Georgia State Highway right-of-way with the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
2)  Work along and across Georgia State Highway right-of-way shall conform to Georgia DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges. The developer is required to obtain all necessary permits. 
3)  Traffic control within the Georgia State Highway right-of-way shall comply with section 107.09 of the State of Georgia DOT Standard Construction Specifications, or Sections 104.05 and 107.07 of the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, latest editions. 
S.  Stream crossings. Crossing streams shall be done in compliance with the federal, state and local laws and permit requirements. The methods described below are subject to change due to more recent regulations implemented by the varying government agencies. The developer is liable for knowing and complying with the most stringent regulations in force at the time of construction. 
1)  The suggested method of crossing a river, stream, creek, impoundments, or wet weather ditch is with a bore under the creek or river with a minimum of four feet of cover between the lowest point in the stream and the top of outside diameter of the casing. Casings and ductile iron pipe are required for all stream crossings and shall extend a minimum of 20 feet beyond the vegetative buffer (city or state buffer, whichever is wider) on each side. An open cut of the stream is allowable if no endangered species are affected and if the developer obtains permission from the various governing agencies. If the stream is open cut, concrete collars or encasement must be provided at all joints for ductile iron pipe with less than four feet of cover. 
2)  Design engineer is responsible for checking and designing against floatation. 
3)  The stream bed and sides at the crossing site shall be protected from erosion in accordance with the latest edition of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
4)  Where streams are allowed to be open cut, the construction in stream beds shall follow the following guidelines: 
a.  Construction in and around stream beds must adhere to the current regulations of the Georgia EPD, the Corps of Engineers, the City of Canton and the U.S. Department of Fish and Wildlife. The design engineer and contractor are responsible for knowing and complying with these regulations. Any item published within these specifications that is in conflict with stream bed protection regulations is hereby deemed invalid, unless the specification herein is considered more stringent by the reviewing agency. 
b.  Fording of live streams with construction equipment will not be permitted, unless specifically approved in writing. Unless otherwise approved in writing, mechanized equipment shall not be operated in live streams except as may be required to construct temporary diversion structures, and temporary or permanent structures. 
c.  Erosion control measures shall be installed prior to performing any stream crossings. All work should be performed when stream flows are at their lowest, and all work should be performed as quickly and safely as possible. As soon as conditions permit, the stream bed shall be cleared of all falsework, debris, and other obstructions placed therein or caused by the construction operations. 
d.  Erosion control measures can include, but is not limited to, the following items: 
i.  Silt fencing, two rows of type C. 
ii.  Erosion control checkdams. 
iii.  Channel diversion through temporary storm drain pipe. 
iv.  Rock filter dams. 
v.  River stone in the creek bed. 
vi.  Geotextiles for stream bank restoration. 
vii.  Special vegetative installations. 
e.  The construction and installation of the various structures listed above are detailed in the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia or the Georgia Department of Transportation Standards and Construction Details, both of which are available for purchase by the contractor. All measures must be approved by the NRCS and the EPD. 
T.  Replacement of pavement. 
1)  General. 
a.  Contractor shall fully restore and replace all pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other surface structures removed or disturbed, to a condition that is equal to or better than the original condition in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
b.  Contractors which are utilizing the roadway shoulders for construction are required to stabilize the earth shoulders every three days as a maximum time period. They are required to stabilize the shoulder before leaving the work area on any particular day if rain is forecast within the next 24 hours. 
2)  Pavement cuts. 
a.  All paved roads will be bored and cased. A bore must be attempted before consideration will be given to cutting the street. 
b.  Existing roadways shall not be open cut unless permission is granted by the City of Canton Engineering Department, Cherokee County Engineering Department, or Georgia DOT Submittal of an authorization letter from the City of Canton Engineering Department, Cherokee County Engineering Department, or Georgia D.O.T is required. 
c.  One lane of traffic shall be maintained open at all times. Construction work shall be limited to time between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
d.  The contractor shall furnish traffic control devices and certified personnel to direct traffic, if required. 
e.  The above requirements may be altered with the written approval of the City of Canton Engineering Department in extenuating circumstances. 
f.  Assuming that a road bore has been attempted and failed, or that the developer has received permission to open cut a road, pavement replacement shall meet the current specifications as required by the City of Canton, Cherokee County or Georgia DOT. 
g.  The contractor shall adhere to the Georgia DOT Specifications for the Installation of Safety Barricades, section 107.09 during construction in the roadway or shoulder. 
h.  Where possible, all pipe under existing paved driveways will be either free bored or installed in casing. 
U.  Location and protection of existing underground utilities. 
1)  It is the responsibility of the contractor to locate and protect all underground utilities and structures. No utility or structure is to be moved or disturbed without the approval of the utility company or the owner of the structure. Any damage caused by waterline installation to any utility or structure shall be immediately reported to the city engineer and repaired at the contractor's expense. 
V.  Clean-up. 
1)  The contractor shall remove all unused material, excess rock and earth, and all other debris from the construction site as closely behind the work as practical. If the contractor fails to maintain clean-up responsibilities as directed by the city's representative, the city may choose to use their own forces to do so, followed by an invoice to the developer for the city's work. 
2)  All trenches shall be backfilled and tamped before the end of each work day. 
3)  Prior to requesting the "completion of water main construction" inspection, the contractor shall do the following: 
a.  Remove and dispose of in an acceptable manner all shipping timbers, shipping bands, spacers, excess materials, broken material, crates, boxes and any other material brought to the job site. 
b.  Repair or replace any work, trees, lawns, shrubs, fences, flower beds, drainage culverts or other property damaged during the water line construction. All items damaged beyond repair shall be replaced with "in-kind" or better material that existed prior to construction. 
c.  Insure that all valves have been located and are fully open. Adjust all valve boxes to grade and pour concrete collars around all valve boxes outside paved areas. 
d.  Insure that fire hydrants are set to grade and that connections are open. 
e.  All easement areas shall be cleared of trees, stumps and other debris and left in a condition such that the easement can be maintained. 
f.  All shoulders, ditches, culverts, and other areas impacted by the water main construction shall be at the proper grades and smooth in appearance. 
W.  Grassing. 
1)  A uniform stand of grass or mulch for erosion protection is required over all road shoulders and water main easements prior to the city's acceptance of the water main. Grass shall be as defined and planted in conformity with the temporary and permanent disturbed area stabilization of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, most current edition. 
2)  Grass seed shall be selected based on the type of seed suitable to the area and season of year. Refer to the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia for grass growing schedule, selection of grass seed, fertilizers, lime, inoculants, mulching, etc. 
3)  The contractor shall provide water for irrigation from the nearest available metered source. The soil must be thoroughly wet to a depth that will insure germination of the seed. Water must be applied at a rate not causing runoff or erosion. 
4)  Growth and coverage on areas grassed shall be considered in reasonably close conformity with the intent of this requirement when a viable stand of grass covers at least 98 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. The contractor shall repeat all work, including plowing, fertilizing, watering, and seeding as necessary to produce a satisfactory stand. 
5)  The contractor or developer shall do all maintenance work necessary to keep all planted areas in satisfactory condition until the work is finally accepted. This shall include mowing, repairing washes that occur, reseeding, and water as required to produce a healthy and growing stand of grass. Mowing will be required to remove tall and obnoxious weeds before they go to seed. 
X.  Standard detailed drawings. Installation of fire hydrants, water valves, valve boxes, meters, long side services, water lines, etc. shall be made in accordance with the standard detailed drawings in chapter 112 of this UDC. 
Y.  Barricades. 
1)  The contractor shall provide, erect and maintain all necessary barricades, suitable and sufficient red lights, danger signals and necessary precautions for the protection of the work and the safety of the public. 
2)  Streets closed to traffic shall be protected by effective barricades on which shall be placed acceptable warning signs. 
3)  Barricades shall extend completely across the street which is to be closed, and shall be illuminated at night by lights not farther than five feet apart, and lights shall be kept burning from sunset to sunrise. 
Z.  Fences. 
1)  The contractor shall temporarily remove fences on or crossing the right-of-way for such periods of time only as are necessary to perform clearing, grubbing, trenching, pipe laying and backfilling operations. 
2)  Gaps made in fences shall be closed in a substantial manner at night and during any suspension of work. 
3)  Upon completion of the pipe line, fences shall be restored to as good condition as before disturbed. 
AA.  Rip-rap. 
1)  Where required, stone rip-rap shall be dumped and hand placed to form a compact layer. 
2)  Stone rip-rap shall be placed to a thickness of not less than eight inches and not more than 18 inches, to the length and width shown on the plan or as directed by the city engineer. 
3)  A geotextile liner shall be installed between the soil and the stone. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.02.05 - Water line inspection, testing and acceptance. 
A.  Inspection. 
1)  Inspection will be done and scheduled as received by the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
2)  The city engineer shall be notified when specific inspections are required so that the inspection time can be scheduled. 
3)  The contractor shall present the following when requesting a final project inspection: 
a.  The size and length of all lines installed including services. 
b.  A completed project information form (see figure 2). 
c.  As-built plans and electronic data prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection E below ("as-built" record drawings). 
4)  Under no circumstances shall any buildings and plumbing fixtures be connected to the main until the main is inspected and approved by the city. 
5)  Upon request, the contractor shall furnish the city engineer with appropriate copies of the manufacturer's certification that the materials to be used meet the materials requirements of these specifications. The city inspector may reject any materials not meeting specifications or any faulty or damaged materials. Any materials so rejected just be removed from the project immediately and must be prominently marked so that they can be spotted on this or any other project. 
6)  Authorized representatives of the City of Canton, which may include appropriate county, state or federal agencies, shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
7)  The city engineer shall be notified by 8:30 a.m. of each workday when work is scheduled unless authorized otherwise. 
8)  The city engineer may at any time direct that he/she be allowed to see any pipe work, bedding, fire hydrant, tee, valve or other appurtenance. If the city engineer so directs, all pipe work shall be left open until the city engineer views the work. The trench may be backfilled with the approval of the city engineer if the work is not inspected by the close of the working day. Valves, fire hydrants, tees, thrust blocking or lot services shall not be backfilled without the approval of the city engineer. 
9)  The contractor shall complete the project and shall have cleaned up the job site prior to requesting a final project inspection. The city engineer may terminate the inspection and direct further work at any time he feels that the project is not substantially complete and ready for inspection. The contractor shall furnish adequate personnel to check for open valves and give assistance needed by the city engineer. 
10)  The representative of the City of Canton Engineering Department will normally visually inspect all water lines and appurtenances for conformance to the specifications and will check the measurements shown on the "as-builts" for accuracy. The representative will perform pressure and leakage tests to insure all lines are watertight. The representative shall also supervise a disinfection test. 
a.  Any of the following tests may also be required at the discretion of the city engineer: 
i.  Fire hydrant/hammer test (see section 110.02.03.C). 
ii.  Trench compaction tests. 
b.  Any defects found by these tests must be corrected before construction of the project may proceed. 
11)  A punch list shall be issued for corrective work if needed. However, the city engineer shall not perform the contractor's work by finding all of his problems before the project is reasonably complete. 
B.  Compaction testing. 
1)  All trenches shall be subject to compaction testing after backfilling and shall meet the compaction requirements set forth in section 110.02.04.H. 
2)  All trenches failing to meet compaction requirements shall be excavated and re-compacted and retested. This process shall continue until a passing test is achieved. 
3)  All costs of compaction testing shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
C.  Fire hydrant and valve testing. 
1)  All fire hydrants shall be tested per section 110.02.03 and flushed to check the operation of the hydrant. 
2)  All valves shall be located and their operation checked. All valves shall be left fully open. 
D.  Water system testing. 
1)  General. 
a.  All lines designed to operate under pressure shall be successfully tested. Tests of installed piping shall consist of a pressure and leakage test and a disinfection test. 
b.  All piping to be tested must satisfactorily comply with these tests before being eligible for acceptance. In general, tests shall be conducted in accordance with AWWA C600 and C651 except as otherwise herein specified. 
2)  Pressure and leakage testing. 
a.  After all piping has been placed, each section between line valves shall be tested by the developer's contractor in the presence of the city engineer or his designated representative and tests shall be continued until all leaks have been made tight to the satisfaction of the city. The contractor shall furnish all necessary meters, pumps, gauges, bulkheads, and other materials and appliances necessary to conduct the test as herein required. Every precaution must be taken to valve-off or otherwise protect control equipment in or attached to the pipe line to prevent damage thereto. 
b.  Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If hydrants, blow-offs or air release valves are not available at the high places, the contractor shall make the necessary taps at points of highest elevation before the test is made and insert plugs before the test has been completed. 
c.  Prior to the pressure test, pipe laid in trenches shall be backfilled adequately to secure the pipe during the test. Any observed leakage shall require corrective measures to pipe lines and/or joints to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
d.  The city will furnish the necessary water for testing and disinfection of the lines; however, any water lost through breakage of lines or unnecessary or excessive flushing of lines will be charged to the contractor at the current residential rate. 
e.  All lines shall be tested to a pressure of one and one-half times the working pressure at the lowest point of the system to be tested. Test duration shall be two hours. However, test pressure shall not exceed pipe, valve and/or thrust-restraint design pressures. The city engineer or his representative may require a 24-hour test if he so desires. Test pressure shall not vary by more than plus five psi for the duration of the test which may require periodic pumping (in which case the added water will be counted as part of the leakage). Lines shall be tested in sections between the valves. The rate of leakage shall not exceed 13.5 gallons per 24 hours per inch diameter per mile of water main. (See table 110-4.) 
Table 110-4 Leakage Tabulation 

 
f.  Any section of the line not meeting the above test shall have the leaks found and corrected at once and re-tested until the leakage falls within the limits specified above. Leakage testing must be witnessed and approved by the city. 
3)  Disinfection. After leakage testing and all necessary repairs have been made, the contractor shall flush and disinfect all potable water mains and equipment installed in strict accordance with AWWA Standard for Disinfecting Water Mains, C651, latest revision. 
a.  The method of disinfection shall be the continuous — feed method as per AWWA C651, latest revision, section 4.4.3. Care shall be taken in filling the mains so that entrained air is drawn from the pipes at all high points so as to permit intimate contact of the disinfection agent with the entire inside surface of the pipe and appurtenances. The potable water shall be chlorinated so that after a 24 hour holding period in the main, there will be a free chlorine residual of not less than ten mg/L at all points in the system when tested with a standard orthotolindine solution. 
b.  The form of chlorine shall be a one percent solution made from either sodium hypochlorite or calcium hypochlorite which shall be measured and pumped into the pipeline. Water must be flowing during the feeding operation and the injection point must be located so that the flow of water will disperse the chlorine throughout the pipeline. AWWA C651 requires the injection point be located at a point not more than 10 feet from the point of connection to the existing water supply. The chlorine should be fed at a constant rate such that the water will have not less than 25 mg/L free chlorine. Table 110-5 gives the amount of chlorine required for each 100 feet of pipe of various diameters to produce a 25 mg/L concentration. 
Table 110-5 Chlorination Tabulation 

 
c.  After 24 hours, the line shall be flushed until the chlorine content is not more than two parts per million. When this step is completed, the developer will notify the city engineer so as to schedule the taking of the water sample for the bacteria test. If the samples show evidence of contamination upon testing, the above procedure of disinfection shall be repeated until approved samples are obtained. No connections shall be made to the existing system until all of the samples have been tested and approved by the city engineer. The developer may be required to add additional taps for bleeding purposes at the ends of water mains or wherever necessary for taking samples. 
d.  The contractor shall dechlorinate the highly-chlorinated water being flushed from the water main to open areas where the discharge will not damage the roadbed or adjacent property. 
e.  The chlorine residual of water being disposed may be neutralized by treating the water with one of the chemicals listed in table 110-6: 
Table 110-6 Chemical Required* 

 
*  Amounts of chemicals required to neutralize various residual chlorine concentrations in 100,000 gal (378.5 m 3 ) of water. 
E.  "As-built" record drawings. At the completion of the water line installation and when requesting the final project inspection, the city engineer shall receive from the contractor three sets of printed "as-built" plans and electronic data prepared in accordance with the following requirements: 
1)  Attached to the "as-builts" shall be a completed project information form (figure 2), which includes the name of the project, the project location, the developer's name and telephone number, the contractor's name and telephone number, the street names, the water main size for each street, the length of the water main for each street, the pipe material used on each street, the cost of the water facilities for each street, and the work start date and work completion date for each street. 
2)  Three sets of "as-built" plans shall be submitted to the city engineer. 
a.  The plans shall show all water information "as-built" in the field and any field changes made to the approved plans. 
b.  In the event "as-builts" cannot be made available at the completion of the line, the city engineer may authorize the continuation of the construction; however, the final inspection cannot be conducted and the conditional approval letter cannot be written until "as-builts" are received. 
c.  In the event that the designer does not perform the field staking, the contractor must furnish certification from a licensed engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of all as-built information presented. This certification and the certification of the engineer/land surveyor preparing the "as-builts" must be shown on the drawings. 
d.  "As-built" drawings shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Stationing of the water main alignment and the various water system appurtenances shall be required on the "as-builts" as well as the construction drawings along with the point I.D. 
e.  The "as-built" drawings shall meet the same requirements as the plans for review. 
f.  The printed version of the as-built water plan shall show the correct location and point I.D. of water mains at all transitions (vertical and horizontal) at 50-foot intervals along city, county, state or federal road ways), fire hydrants, fittings, tap location(s), valves, meters, and lot services. 
3)  "As-built" plans shall be submitted on 22-inch by 34-inch drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "AutoCAD" drawing electronic format. 
a.  The monumentation and the calculations used to reference and determine the coordinate system for locations shall be supplied at the same time that "as-built" plans are submitted. 
b.  As-built information for utility locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
4)  Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (west zone feet). Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to mean sea level. Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum. All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99/03. All points shall be verifiable by the City of Canton Engineering Department control network. All horizontal and vertical locations shall have no translation, rotation or angle adjustment. All points are subject to verification by the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
5)  The information submitted electronically for water mains, including correct locations of the water main, point I.D. of water mains at all transitions (vertical and horizontal) at 50-foot intervals along city, county, state or federal roadways), fire hydrants, valves, fittings, main line taps, master meters, and fire line meters, shall include: 
a.  Point I.D. (see City of Canton Engineering Department staff). 
b.  Northing. 
c.  Easting. 
d.  Ground elevation. 
e.  Top of pipe, valve or hydrant elevation. 
f.  Point description (pipe, fitting or valve type and size). 
6)  The following are specific guidelines for the preparation of the printed version of the "as-built" drawings: 
a.  Water "as-built" shall be a separate plan. 
b.  No contour lines. 
c.  Location of service, meter and backflow preventer shall be shown. 
d.  Road names shall be on plans. 
e.  The center of all fire hydrants shall be located horizontally and vertically as described above. 
f.  All lots shall be numbered. 
g.  Printed "as-builts" shall be clear and legible. 
h.  Roads shall be shown on all plans. 
i.  "As-built" shall be in large clear print on plans. 
j.  Drawings sheet shall be no larger than 22 inches by 34 inches. 
k.  Scale shall be no larger than one inch equals 20 feet, no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet for cross-country lines and one inch equals 50 feet for congested areas. 
l.  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of the entire subdivision with said phase outlined shall appear on the plans. 
m.  Ground water and solid rock encountered during construction shall be noted on "as-builts." 
n.  Water point I.D.'s (valve I.D., water main points, etc…) shall be on plans, electronic data and ASCII or EXCEL data file. All point I.D.'s shall correspond. 
7)  As-built water plans for commercial, multi-family, school and industrial sites shall show the following at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet: 
a.  Location, size and elevation of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and fire lines and of any easements required. 
b.  Location and size of all fire mains and location of all fire hydrants. 
c.  Location, size and number of dwelling units and buildings. 
8)  The "as-builts" must be printed from the AutoCAD files supplied to the City of Canton Engineering Department concurrently with the "As-Builts." These plans shall have been corrected to show all field changes made to the approved drawings. Hand marked copies prepared by the contractor will not be accepted for "as-builts." 
9)  As-built drawings shall include the site plan, construction plan sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Plan of fire meters or detector meters should be shown if applicable. "As-builts" is to be stamped in large clear print on plans. 
10)  The City of Canton shall have the right to withhold water meters until the "as-builts" have been submitted as required. 
11)  Final plat and/or final plans will not be approved or signed by the City of Canton until "as-builts," easement drawing and easement agreements have been completed and submitted to the City of Canton Engineering Department. 
F.  Acceptance. Please refer to figure 1 for the procedures related to the final approval and acceptance of water and sanitary sewer facilities: 
Figure 1 
City of Canton 
Maintenance Bond/Letter of Credit 
Administrative Policy & Procedures 
General 
• All new developments must submit to the City a maintenance bond or letter of credit prior to approval of the final plat for residential developments or the acceptance of the as-built drawings for all other developments. 
• Once the water and sewer infrastructure is in place and approved, the developer must submit a maintenance bond or letter of credit in a form acceptable to City of Canton Engineering Department staff, prior to the city's approval of the final plat or as-built plans. 
• The maintenance bond or letter of credit amount will be generally determined by the linear feet of water and linear feet of sewer infrastructure within the development. 
• Maintenance bonds or letters of credit shall be for a period of 12 months from the receipt of Final Plat approval for residential developments or acceptance of as-built drawings for all other developments. 
Approval of Infrastructure for Final Plat Recording 
1) Upon the completion of the water and/or sewer construction, the developer shall contact the City of Canton Engineering Department requesting a final inspection of infrastructure. 
2) If the City Engineer finds, upon inspection, that all infrastructures meet the requirements of the City of Canton Unified Development Code (UDC), he/she shall provide written notice of acceptance to the developer. 
3) If the City Engineer finds, upon inspection, that infrastructures do not meet the requirements of the City of Canton UDC, the City Engineer shall provide the developer with written notice detailing the reasons for rejections of the infrastructure. 
4) Once the City Engineer finds that all infrastructures meet the requirements of the City of Canton (UDC), the City Engineer shall require the developer to post maintenance bond or letter of credit. 
5) Once a maintenance bond or letter of credit has been posted, the City Engineer will approve the final plat for residential developments or accept the as-built drawings for all other developments. 
6) Final plat will not be signed or as-built drawings will not be accepted until a satisfactory maintenance bond or letter of credit has been posted. 
No Exceptions. 
Maintenance Bond/Letter of Credit Amount 
1) The maintenance bond or letter of credit amount will be determined generally by the linear footage of water line and/or the linear footage of sewer line within the development. 
2) Per foot amount will be determined by the City Engineer taking into account the current economic climate as well as the cost of materials, labor and fuel. 
3) The minimum maintenance bond and/or letter of credit amount required for a development shall be $5,000 for water and $5,000 for sewer. 
Approval of Water and Sewer System for City Acceptance 
1) The 18-month maintenance period will allow the City Engineer to assure compliance with the City of Canton UDC development specifications. The developer shall be required to contact the City Engineer in writing at the end of the 9-month period to initiate the City's punch list. 
2) The City Engineer shall prepare a single punch list to the developer affording a 60-day period in which to make all necessary repairs. The developer shall be required to contact the City Engineer in writing at the end of the 60-day period after all punch list items have been completed. The City Engineer shall have 30 days to make its final review for approval and shall notify the developer in writing of the results of this inspection. An extension of the bond may be granted at the discretion of the City Engineer. The developer shall pay for any additional inspections required by the developer's failure to complete punch list items prior to final approval. 
3) If any punch list items are not completed by the developer within the specified period of time or extensions the maintenance bond or letter of credit shall be utilized to pay for the full cost of the repairs. Should the amount of the maintenance bond or letter of credit be inadequate to pay for the full cost of the repairs, the City of Canton shall have the authority to collect the remaining amount from the developer. 
Official Acceptance/Release of Bond or Letter of Credit 
1) At the time that the work is inspected and found free from defects, the City Engineer shall provide the developer with written "Final Approval" for the acceptance of the water and sewer infrastructure. 
2) Upon the issuance of final approval, the City of Canton shall release the maintenance bond or letter of credit. 
Lift Station Maintenance Bond 
1) All new subdivisions or commercial developments that include wastewater lift station(s) will be required to post a maintenance bond or letter of credit for each lift station. 
2) The amount of the maintenance bond or letter of credit will be in amount as determined by the City Engineer. 
3) The maintenance bond or letter of credit will be for an 18-month period from the date of acceptance a limited warranty deed for the fee simple ownership of the real property upon which the pump station is constructed. 
4) The maintenance bond or letter of credit will be released following the expiration of the 18- month maintenance period and upon final inspection and final approval of the lift station. 
5) The developer shall provide a detailed construction cost report to the City of Canton Engineering Department upon completion of construction of any lift station prior to the acceptance of as-built drawings. 
Figure 2 
City of Canton 
Project Information Form 
Water System Facilities 

(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.03.00 - Cross-connection control program. 
110.03.01 - General provisions. 
A.  Introduction. 
1)  A cross-connection can be generally defined as a physical connection between two otherwise separate piping systems or vessels, one of which contains potable water and the other does not. There are two main approaches to provide against actual or potential cross-connections, the "fixture outlet" approach and the "containment" approach. 
2)  With the "fixture outlet" approach, cross-connection control protective devices are placed at internal high hazard locations within the customer's internal water system as well as at all locations where cross-connections exist at the "last free-flowing outlet." This approach entails extensive cross-connection survey work on behalf of the water purveyor as well as constant policing of the plumbing within each customer's premises. In a large water supply system, fixture outlet protection is virtually impossible to achieve and police due to the quantity of systems involved, the complexity of the plumbing systems inherent in many industrial sites, and the fact that plumbing changes are made within industrial and commercial establishments that do not require approval or permitting. 
3)  The "containment" approach isolates the customer from the water main at all service connections, utilizing a minimum number of backflow devices throughout the system. Although this approach does not protect the customer within the building, it does effectively remove the possibility of contamination to the public water supply. 
4)  Due to the number of commercial customers and the difficulties associated with "fixture outlet" protection, the "containment" approach will be employed by the City of Canton for protection of the public water supply. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the City of Canton Cross-Connection Control Program includes the following: 
1)  To protect the public water supply served by the City of Canton Water System from the entry of contaminants or pollutants into the system through the control of cross-connections. Control of contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water system shall be accomplished by isolation and containment at the service connection. 
2)  To promote and encourage the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems. 
3)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection. 
C.  Authority. The Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water (391-3-5-13) state that a water supplier has the responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources or any contaminants from entering the public water system. In partial fulfillment of this responsibility, the rules require that the water supplier develop a written program for the elimination and prevention of all cross-connections when requested by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EDP). 
D.  Applicability. The provisions of backflow prevention by isolation and containment are applicable to any customer or system supplied by the City of Canton's water distribution system including irrigation sprinklers, fire protection systems, residential systems, and other service connections. 
E.  Responsibilities. 
1)  The Council of the City of Canton is responsible for establishing regulations regarding the control of cross-connections to the public distribution system. 
2)  The city engineer is responsible for the enforcement of these regulations in an effort to protect the public water supply system through the prevention of backflow or back siphonage of contaminants or pollutants. This responsibility begins with the production of water and extends throughout the distribution system to the service connection, applying to new construction as well as to existing customers and situations. 
3)  The City of Canton Building Department is responsible for enforcing the city's adopted plumbing code regulations in an effort to prevent backflows on the customer's premises from entering the customer's own potable water system. This responsibility extends to both new and existing customers. 
4)  The water customer is responsible for complying with the city regulations including maintenance, testing, and reporting on certain devices. 
a.  Customers are required to allow on-site inspections to verify compliance with the city's cross-connection control program. 
b.  The customers have a dual responsibility for protecting the water in their own system from degradation due to conditions originating on their premises and for protecting the quality of water in the public distribution system. 
c.  The customer is liable for any health hazard due to backflow from unprotected cross-connections on their premises. 
d.  The customer is responsible for the costs of procurement, installation, testing, and maintenance of al backflow prevention devises on their premises and serving their premises. 
F.  Reference material. The manuals listed below provide information relating to cross-connection control and backflow prevention. 
1)  Cross-Connection Control Manual, U.S. EPA Office of Water, June 1989, EPA 570/9-89-007. 
2)  Cross-Connection Control Manual, Ninth Edition. The EPA Cross Connection Control Manual defines, describes, and illustrates typical cross-Connections and suggest simple methods and devices to eliminate them. 
3)  Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control, AWWA Manual M14, 2nd edition, 1990. The AWWA manual sets forth criteria for the selection and installation of backflow prevention devices and outlines procedures and techniques for maintenance and inspection of these devices. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.03.02 - Implementation. 
A.  Hazard assessment. 
1)  Two degrees of hazard are considered, as determined by whether the impurities potentially involved are contaminants or pollutants. The two degrees of hazard, health and nonhealth, are defined below based on definitions given in the AWWA Manual M14 2nd edition: 
a.  Health (contaminants). A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that could, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death, illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
b.  Nonhealth (pollutants). A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that generally would not be a health hazard, but would constitute a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the domestic water supply. 
2)  Chapter 4 in the AWWA Manual M14 provides guidance for the assessment of hazard and selection of backflow protection assemblies for premises isolation. Information from the chapter is summarized in table 110-7. Chapter 5 of the AWWA Manual M14 and chapter 2 of the EPA Cross-Connection Control Manual provide additional examples and illustrations of customer types and typical cross-connections that pose hazards to the public water supply system. 
Table 110-7: Guidance for the Assessment of Hazard and Selection of Assemblies for Premises Isolation 

 
B.  New customers. 
1)  The city building department shall review all plans for new construction and shall advise developers of regulations in advance and determine that appropriate protection measures and devices are proposed. 
2)  New construction will be inspected for City of Canton plumbing code compliance by inspectors in the city building department to determine that individual cross-connections are isolated from the public water supply. 
3)  The city will inspect all new service connections for cross-connection control compliance and determine the degree of hazard to the public water supply. Based on the hazard assessment, the city will require the customer to install an appropriately selected backflow prevention device. 
4)  Devices required by either the city building department or the cross-connection control program will be installed at the developer, builder, or owner's expense. 
5)  The city will refuse service in cases of noncompliance. 
C.  Fire protection systems. 
1)  If the service connection to a premise is intended to be used for fire protection it shall be classified and/or defined as follows in table 110-8: 
Table 110-8 Fire Protection Systems — 1 

 
2)  The terminology and definitions for types of fire protection systems presented in table 110-9 shall also be applicable. 
3)  Sprinkler systems shall be further classified in accordance with table 110-10. 
4)  Standpipe systems shall be further classified as follows in accordance with table 110-11. 
Table 110-9 Fire Protection Systems — 2 

 
Table 110-10 Sprinkler System Classifications 

 
Table 110-11 Standpipe System Classifications 

 
5)  Fire protection systems as defined by the International Fire Code shall be contained from the City of Canton Water System by backflow prevention devices that have approvals as required and are classified or listed by the Underwriters Laboratories and Factory Mutual Insurance as follows: 
a.  Class I, II, III sprinkler systems and nonhazardous standpipe or combined systems shall be contained by the installation of a double detector check valve (DDC BFP). 
b.  Class IV, V and VI sprinkler systems and hazardous standpipe or combined systems shall be contained by the installation of a reduced pressure zone detector check (RPDC BFP). 
c.  Class systems with combination hazards shall be contained from the public water mains by procedures applicable to the component that requires the higher degree of protection. 
6)  Single detector checks that are used on nonhazardous fire protection systems class I, II, or III may not considered as a component part of a DDC BFP. Specifically, the addition of a second single check to one of these devices may not be substituted for a DDC assembly that is approved for backflow prevention. 
7)  It is intended that the approved DDC BFP be in lieu of, not in addition to, the checking devices already required by the Standard Plumbing Code in the supply to class I, or II, or the DCV BFP already required on class III nonhazardous systems, and that the approved RPDC be in lieu of the RPZ already required on hazardous systems. The only additional checking device intended is a three-quarter-inch DCV or RPZ BFP in the three-quarter-inch copper bypass line, in conjunction with the bronze detector meter. 
8)  The purpose of certain checking devices used, or likely to be used, with fire protection systems is given below to call attention to those that are approved for use as backflow prevention devices and those that are not. 
Table 110-12 Fire Protection System Checking Devices Approved for Use as Backflow Prevention Devices 

 
9)  The shutoff valves required for periodic testing of the backflow prevention device shall be outside stem and yoke (OS&Y), FDA-approved fused epoxy coated inside and out, with resilient seats, and the inlet valve shall include an approved test cock on the upstream side. All components shall be listed for fire protections service by Underwriters Laboratories and Factory Mutual. The exception is that ball valves may be utilized for shut off means on pipe sizes below two inches as approved by the cross-connection program administrator. 
10)  The city has a designated cross-connection control program administrator. The program administrator shall coordinate and perform site inspections, provide customer notifications, and maintain all correspondence and records. The record system shall facilitate the monitoring of the following: 
a.  Installation date of assemblies; 
b.  Location of assemblies; 
c.  Inspection and testing of assemblies; 
d.  Performance of licensed testers; 
e.  Calibration of testing devices. 
11)  Tasks to be performed annually: 
a.  Update list of potential sources of contaminants and pollutants; 
b.  Notify customers of testing requirements for installed backflow prevention devices; 
c.  Update list of approved backflow devices and approved tests. 
D.  Backflow prevention devices. 
1)  Selection. 
a.  Backflow prevention devices shall be selected based on the degree of hazard assigned to the customer as follows: 
i.  Those customers that are categorized under the health degree of hazard shall be required to install an approved reduced-pressure zone backflow-prevention assembly (RPZ) and have the device tested for proper operation annually. 
ii.  Those customers that are categorized under the nonhealth degree of hazard shall be required to install an approved double check valve assembly (DCVA) and have the device tested for proper operation annually. 
b.  Refer to the hazard assessment section (see subsection A above) of this section for guidelines regarding the selection of backflow prevention devices for particular customer types. 
c.  Lawn sprinkler systems are open to the atmosphere and are not classified as a pressure type cross-connection. However, due to the special nature of the system, if no chemicals are injected into the system, the minimum protection against backflow shall include a double check valve assembly. If chemicals are injected or connections are made so that chemicals could be injected easily, minimum protection shall include a reduced pressure zone type backflow prevention device. 
d.  Water being introduced into a vessel, tank, tanker truck, or miscellaneous other containers from any connection to the City of Canton Water System shall be through a method approved by the city engineer. Drawing 5 of chapter 112 of this UDC shows three approved methods for filling tanks. 
2)  Approval devices. 
a.  All backflow prevention devices shall be approved in accordance with the applicable standards of the American Society of Sanitary Engineering, the American Water Works Association, and the University of Southern California Foundation of Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. Final approval acceptable devices will rest with the program administrator. A list of approved devices is maintained by the Canton Engineering Department. 
b.  If no standard yet exists for particular device, or if the device is a derivative on one covered by a national standard, the program administrator shall determine whether the device shall be allowed on the water service connection. 
3)  Installation of devices. 
a.  The location of all backflow prevention devices shall be in an area that provides a safe working environment for testing and maintenance. The area shall be readily assessable, dry, and free from dirt, extreme cold or heat, and electrical hazards. 
b.  Facilities that require a continuous, uninterrupted water supply shall install backflow prevention devices in parallel for testing and maintenance purposes. In no case shall a bypass arrangement be installed without approval of the cross-connection program administrator. 
c.  Backflow prevention devices equipped with atmospheric vents, or with relief openings, shall be so installed and so located as to prevent any vent or any relief opening from being submerged. They shall be installed in the position as recommended by the manufacturer, and shall be protected from freezing. Illustrations of typical installations of backflow prevention devices can be found in chapter 112 of this UDC. The following guidelines shall govern the installation of backflow prevention devices: 
i.  Backflow prevention device—Double check valve assembly (DCVA). This device shall not be buried in earth but may be installed below ground in a pit provided ball valve test cocks fitted where brass plugs are used. A positive shutoff valve shall be near the inlet and outlet sides of the device, and three ball valve test cocks provided on the device. A fourth test cock shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shut-off valve. When below ground, a union or flange shall be near the inlet and outlet sides. No intervening connections shall be between the shut-off valves and the backflow prevention device. 
ii.  Backflow prevention device—Reduced-pressure zone assembly (RPZ). This device shall not be installed below ground. Where relief valve discharge could cause water damage, it shall be piped via an air gap, or a funnel, at the vent/relief port to a floor drain or other approved location. A positive shutoff valve shall be near the inlet and outlet sides of the device, and three approved test cocks provided on the device. A fourth test cock shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shutoff valve. A bronze strainer with 20-mesh stainless steel screen shall be included between the inlet shutoff valve and the device on sizes through two-and-one-half-inch. No intervening branch connection(s) shall be between the shutoff valves and the backflow prevention device. When the reduced pressure zone device is installed in a line subject to periodic no-flow conditions and the supply pressure is subject to fluctuations, an auxiliary directional check with soft disc, capable of functioning in any installed position of the RPZ, shall be provided between the inlet shutoff valve and RPZ head to lock the supply pressure in, and percent discharge through the vent/relief port. When a water pressure-reducing valve is required in the same line with the RPZ device, it is usually possible to locate the reducing valve upstream of the device and take advantage of the check valve effect of the reducing valve. In such case, the auxiliary directional check would be required. 
iii.  Note: A thermal expansion control device shall be installed between a backflow prevention device and a water heater to limit the static pressure increase due to thermal expansion of the heated water. Providing and installing thermal expansion control device shall be the sole responsibility of the owner/occupant of the property. Testing procedures are outlined in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, from the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research published by the University of Southern California. 
d.  Maintenance and testing of devices. 
i.  Customers are responsible for maintaining backflow prevention devices in roper working order. Customers with RPZ and DCVA backflow prevention devices shall have the devices tested on an annual basis, or following repairs and/or clearing of devices. The city shall keep records of the testing, maintenance and repair of RPZ and DCVA backflow prevention devices and shall send out notices to customers when annual inspections come due. 
ii.  Field testing and repair of these devices shall be by a person who is certified to understand the design and intended operation of backflow prevention devices. Tester must provide credentials of certification to the city for approval by the city. A list of approved testers is maintained by the Canton Engineering Department. 
E.  Emergency notification procedures. 
1)  Initial signs of possible contamination of the public water system may be complaints from customers or direct notification from a customer knowledgeable of a contamination incident. 
2)  A cross-connection may contaminate only the customer's plumbing system. This is usually the case unless the pressure in the water distribution system is less than on the customer's property. Evidence of contamination may be discoloration of the water and/or the water may have an odor present. Although these are the simplest signs to look for, not all chemicals may be as easy to detect. 
3)  City personnel shall use the following notification and operation procedures in the event of a possible contamination to the water system. 
a.  Required information. The following information will be obtained for transmission to the city manager and the cross-connection control program administrator by the first city employee either on the scene or receiving information of a contamination incident: 
i.  Location, time, and date of incident. 
ii.  Name of person(s) or company and phone number. 
iii.  Name and phone number of person(s) with any information of incident. 
iv.  Type of material involved, if known. 
v.  Physical description of contamination. Color of water, odor, taste? 
b.  Notification of city personnel. 
i.  Notify city manager. 
ii.  Notify cross-connection control administrator. 
iii.  Notify building inspectors as needed. Building inspectors will be notified and requested to assist in locating the source of contamination. 
iv.  Notify water treatment plant personnel. Water treatment plant personnel shall be notified as to the type of emergency, so that they may assist in the location, identification, and correction of any cross-connection which may affect the supply system. Laboratory personnel from the plant will be required to take samples of the contaminated water for analysis. 
c.  Notification of EPD. 
i.  Notify the Environmental Protection Division. 
ii.  The emergency response program phone numbers are (800) 241-4113, (404) 656-4863 and (404) 656-6905. 
d.  Notification of Cherokee County Department of Public Services. 
i.  Notify health department personnel. 
ii.  Health department personnel will be notified and requested to respond in the event of an emergency, so that they may assist with the identification and treatment of the contamination. 
e.  Notification of the public. If an incident or emergency warrants public notification the following person(s) are authorized to make statements to the news media and shall be in charge of handling the emergency in the order listed: 
i.  Mayor of the City of Canton; 
ii.  City Manager of the City of Canton. 
4)  Operation procedures. 
a.  Upon arrival on the scene, the extent of the contamination should be assessed. It should be determined whether the contaminant has entered the public water system or if it is still contained on a customer's premises. 
b.  Service crew(s) shall be dispatched to the scene. Service crew(s) shall locate and turn off the customer's water service at the meter and fire line valves where the source of contamination is identified. Service crew(s) shall be prepared to close all necessary valves to isolate a section of the distribution system when instructed to do so. If the distribution system is contaminated, the contamination shall be contained in the smallest are possible. 
c.  City personnel will personally notify each customer as the water service to each customer is shut off. Personnel from the police and fire departments may be required to assist in the notification of the Individual premises located within the affected area. The local paper and radio stations will be used when appropriate, as authorized by the city manager. 
d.  A laboratory technician shall be dispatched to the backflow site. The laboratory technician shall collect the necessary samples and make provisions for further testing. 
e.  Samples shall be taken to determine the type of contaminant and to what extent the contamination exists. Samples will be taken to the water system laboratory and may be sent to the state lab for identification. The city manager shall be kept informed of the results, so that the area of contaminated water can be isolated. Samples should be taken outside of the isolated area to ensure that the contaminant is contained. 
f.  After the contaminant is identified, the cross-connection and the place of occurrence shall be located. All drinking fountains should be turned off. Water service shall be discontinued at the place of occurrence until an approved backflow prevention device is installed and tested. 
g.  Service crews shall start flushing the water system upon the city manager's order to do so and shall continue flushing lines until lab tests show the contaminant to be at a safe level for human consumption. If necessary, the water mains will be resterilized using chlorine and/or treated with other chemicals to remove the residual effects of the contaminant. 
F.  Public awareness. General methods that the city may use to inform its customers of the potential dangers from illegal and improper cross-connection include the following: 
1)  Written descriptions of potential cross-connection locations and the need to protect the public water system can be included as special interest articles for newspaper and local publications. 
2)  Providing speakers for civic clubs, political bodies and other functions. 
3)  Providing informational pamphlets to be distributed at schools and other locations. 
4)  Scrolling text messages about backflow prevention can be put on the government access channel of the local cable TV. 
5)  Public service announcements on local radio stations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.03.03 - General conditions and enforcement. 
A.  Request for inspection. The applicant for a building sewer connection permit shall notify the City of Canton Building Department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the city wastewater system. The connection and testing shall be made in the presence of the building inspector or his representative. 
B.  Guarding excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all OSHA and Georgia Department of Transportation requirements so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to a good as new condition in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
C.  Restoration of disturbed public property. 
1)  A three-day notice is required. 
2)  All water or wastewater construction work conducted on the public right-of-way or any public property shall be conducted only with proper permission from the City of Canton Engineering Department. The developer shall be required to post a bond with the city so that proper restoration of the disturbed are is assured. All disturbed areas as a result of such construction shall be restored to a condition that is "as good as new." The scheduling of such construction activities shall be as approved by the city manager if such scheduling approval is determined to be in the public's best interest. 
D.  Backflow prevention. 
1)  When required. All wastewater treatment plants, and water plants, commercial businesses, industries, or institutions shall be required to install backflow prevention mechanisms. Additionally, approved backflow preventers or vacuum breakers shall be installed with all plumbing fixtures or equipment for which the potable water supply outlet may be submerged without the protection of a minimum air gap. The particular backflow prevention devices utilized in any given situation shall be as specified in the plumbing code or as approved by the city. 
2)  Minimum required air gap. The minimum required air gap shall be measured vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or line of the fixture or receptacle into which it discharges. The minimum required air gap shall be twice the effective opening of a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than three times the effective opening away form a wall or similar vertical surface in which cases the minimum required air gap shall be three times the effective opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum required air gap be less than is provided in the plumbing code. 
E.  Temporary water supply standpipes in elbows only. 
1)  All standpipes installed for the purpose of providing temporary water supply at any given location shall be installed on a 90-degree elbow. 
2)  Tees, crosses and wyes or other connecting device shall not be utilized. 
3)  When the permanent water connection is made, the temporary elbow shall be removed. 
F.  Capping and sealing of discontinued water and sewer connections. All water and sewer connections for which service has been discontinued as a result of the demolition of the structure being served by the connection, or for any other reasons, shall be properly and permanently capped and sealed to prevent the entrance of ground or surface water in the case of sewers and the escape of potable water in the case of water lines. 
G.  Location of water meters. 
1)  All water meters shall in installed at an easily accessible location on or near the property line of the premises being served adjacent to the public right-of-way. Water meters shall not be installed behind enclosed fences, in pave driveways, in paved parking areas or sidewalks. 
2)  Generally, the city shall locate meters at or near the customer's curb or property line. When it is impractical to locate meters at or near the customer's curb or property line, the city may locate a meter in any other reasonable convenient or accessible place which affords protection against damage. 
3)  When meters are grouped, the city shall tag each meter to identify the customer whose services are measured by that meter. 
H.  Wastewater lift stations. 
1)  All wastewater lift stations installed in the city which serve two or more buildings shall be designed and constructed in strict conformity to the wastewater lift station specifications sections of chapter 111 of this UDC. 
2)  Engineering plans shall be prepared for all wastewater lift stations and such plans shall be approved by the city water system prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.03.04 - General use of public water and wastewater facilities. 
A.  General. 
1)  Unauthorized connections prohibited. 
a.  No person shall make an authorized water or sewer connection nor obtain unauthorized water or wastewater services. 
b.  Persons so make unauthorized connections or obtaining unauthorized service shall be subject to a fee as set forth in the city water and wastewater fee schedule, published separately. 
2)  Requirements to prevent cross-connections. 
a.  The construction and operation of all water and wastewater system piping shall be in such a manner so as to control cross-connections or the possibility thereof. 
b.  It is the intent of section 110.03.00 to protect the public health by providing regulations whereby the possibilities for the contamination of the water supply due to cross-connections with the wastewater system are greatly reduced or eliminated. 
3)  Malicious damage to equipment. 
a.  No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the water or wastewater facilities. 
b.  Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. 
B.  Water system. 
1)  Conditions for use of private wells (see City of Canton Industrial Pretreatment Program Manual). 
2)  Responsibility for meter and meter box. 
a.  All meters shall be installed, tested, repaired, and removed by the city. 
b.  Except as elsewhere provided, all meters, service connections, and other equipment furnished by or for the city shall be and remain the property of the city. 
c.  The city will, as its own expense, make routine tests of meters when it considers such tests. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
110.03.05 - Powers and authority of city employees. 
A.  Right to enter premises. 
1)  Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city and authorized representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and identification shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this appendix and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow these persons ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
2)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager or designee will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
3)  The city manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
4)  The city manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated frequently to ensure their accuracy. 
5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be the responsibility of the user. 
6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this UDC. 
B.  Notice of violation. 
1)  When the city manager or designee finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of section 110.03.00, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. 
2)  Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
3)  Nothing in section 110.03.00 shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without a notice of violation first being issued. 
C.  Show cause hearing. 
1)  The city manager may order a user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of section 110.03.00, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
2)  Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
3)  The notice of the meeting shall be served at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
4)  A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
D.  Compliance orders. 
1)  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this section 110.03.00, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. 
2)  If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided in the compliance order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. 
3)  Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. 
4)  A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation, Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
E.  Cease and desist orders. 
1)  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this section 110.03.00, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements. 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
2)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
F.  Emergency suspensions. 
1)  The city manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop and actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to health or welfare of persons. The city manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
2)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. 
a.  In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. 
b.  The city manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the period of endangerment has passed. 
3)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the environmental remediation. 
4)  A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
G.  Civil penalties. 
1)  The city manager may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
2)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
3)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
H.  Criminal prosecution. 
1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of section 110.03.00, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or 12 months in prison for each offense. 
2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or 12 months in prison for each offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications on any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to section 110.03.00, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable, by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or 12 months in prison for each offense. 
I.  Remedies nonexclusive. 
1)  The remedies provided for in this section are not exclusive. The city manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. 
2)  Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
J.  Water supply severance. 
1)  Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of section 110.03.00, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. 
2)  In the event of such terminations under section 110.03.05, the city shall retain all rights to collect unpaid bills or amounts owed by the terminated user according to law or other provision of the section. 
a.  Such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served. 
b.  Past due amounts shall bear interest at the same rate as would unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
3)  Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
K.  Public nuisances. 
1)  A violation of any provision of section 110.03.00, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city manager. 
2)  Any persons creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
L.  Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The city manager shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
M.  Notification delivery of enforcement actions. 
1)  Written notice personally delivered or placed in the U.S. mail by certified mail to the person's last known address shall be deemed sufficient notice for all enforcement actions in section 110.03.00 with the exceptions included in section 110.03.00. 
2)  Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. 
3)  With respect to code violations regarding nonpayment of amounts due under section 110.03.05, only notice mailed to the person's last known address of the amount owed and the date upon which payment is due shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 111 - DESIGN STANDARDS: SEWER SYSTEM 

111.01.00 - Generally. 
The purpose of chapter 111 is to establish standards and requirements for the provision of sanitary sewer infrastructure by all development. This chapter contains requirements for sanitary sewer systems, wastewater lift stations and wastewater treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.00 - Sanitary sewer standards and requirements. 
111.02.01 - Availability. 
A.  Connection to live sewers. 
1)  Any single-family or multi-family dwelling, commercial or industrial establishment shall be connected to public sewer when sewerage lines are available for connection. 
2)  Connection shall be at the cost of the property owner. 
B.  Availability shall be defined as follows: 
1)  Sewerage shall be considered available to an existing single-family dwelling when the dwelling can be connected by gravity flow to a line in any public right-of-way or easement that passes the property at any point. 
2)  Sewerage shall be considered available to any new single-family dwelling when the dwelling can be connected by the installation of 200 linear feet of gravity flow line from the nearest point of the property. 
3)  Sewerage shall be considered available to any new subdivision when trunk sewers have been extended into the drainage basin. Sewerage shall also be considered available when trunk sewers are constructed under a current funding program. Trunk sewers are those sewers recognized in the facilities plan, or other planning documents of the city. When trunk sewers are to be funded under future bond programs, sewerage will not be considered available. 
C.  To determine the availability of sewerage to any multi-family dwelling, commercial or industrial tract the sewage effluent for the development will be converted to its equivalent number of single-family dwellings. For comparison purposes, a single-family dwelling generates an effluent of 400 gallons per day of sewage. 
D.  Dry sewerage systems. 
1)  In cases where the city is to expend bond funds within a drainage basin in two years but said sewers are not available at present, the developer will be required to install dry lines to serve any structure to be built in the development. These lines will collect at a single point at the property line at the lowest point on the property or at a point designated by the Engineer. The installation of dry lines does not in any way relieve the requirements of the Cherokee County Health Department for approving septic tanks in the development. 
2)  No dry sewers shall be used until such time as trunk sewers are constructed to an acceptable treatment facility. 
3)  No pumping and hauling of sewage is allowed. 
4)  Septic tanks placed on the lots shall be located at a point to facilitate future connection of the home to the tap provided. 
E.  Sewerage not available. 
1)  Connection to a public sanitary sewer system is required in each zoning district unless noted in chapter 112 of this UDC. 
2)  If sewerage is not available nor shall be available in a zoning district that does not require a connection to a public sewer system, a 20-foot permanent and 60-foot construction sanitary sewer easement shall be shown on the plans and dedicated to the City of Canton for future use, in those areas where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to a creek or branch whose drainage area is 200 acres or greater. The City of Canton may at its option require additional easements. 
3)  Minimum easement widths to be dedicated are 20 feet for permanent easements and 60 feet for construction easements, with the construction easement centered on the permanent easement. Also, in the event that a trunk or interceptor greater than 15 inches is expected to pass through the development, the construction easement width shall be increased to the amount required for construction of the expected sewer. 
a.  All easements are to be checked in the field and must be adequate for the purpose they are dedicated. Also, consideration must be given for expected building locations and the easement shall be located for the least possibility of conflict before the sewer may be constructed. 
b.  No structures shall be built on dedicated easements and the city will not be responsible for the removal of fences that are placed on dedicated easements in the event the sewer is constructed. Septic tanks in these type developments shall be placed in a location to facilitate tie -on of structure to the sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.02 - Sewer types and funding. 
A.  Building sewers are used to convey wastewater from the buildings to lateral sewers, or any other sewer except another building sewer. These sewers are privately funded. Typically, these lines extend from the building to the property line where they tie into a lateral system. 
B.  Lateral sewers form the first element of the public wastewater collection system and are usually in streets, rights-of-way, or special easements. They are used to collect wastewater from building sewers and convey it to a main sewer. The minimum lateral sewer size is eight inches. In new subdivisions these sewers are privately funded. 
C.  Main sewers are used to convey wastewater from one or more lateral sewers to trunk sewers or to intercepting sewers. These sewers are a minimum of eight inches in diameter and can extend beyond the property boundaries of subdivisions. 
D.  Trunk sewers are large sewers that are used to convey wastewater from main sewers to treatment or other disposal facilities or to large intercepting sewers. 
E.  Intercepting sewers are large sewers that are used to intercept a number of main or trunk sewers and convey the wastewater to treatment or other disposal facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
111.02.03 - Sewer tap fees. 
A.  A connection fee shall be paid to the City of Canton before any structure is connected to the system. The connection fee shall be calculated as follows: 
1)  The tap fee for single-family and multi-family dwellings shall be that which is in effect at the date that a building permit is purchased. 
2)  The fee for all other uses shall be calculated based on a comparison of the expected sewage effluent of that user with a typical single-family residence. If the comparison results in an amount less than a single-family residence, the tap fee shall be the same as a single-family residence in that basin. 
B.  For comparative purposes, a single-family residence is expected to generate 400 gallons per day (gpd) of sewage. The tap fees for the following common discharges will be calculated by comparing their flow based on the table of estimated flows (see table 111-1) with the flow expected from a single-family residence. 
Table 111-1 Table of Estimated Flows 

 
C.  The tap fee for any service will be determined by the best information available to the City of Canton. Any discharger of process waste will be responsible for furnishing estimates of the amounts and strength of the waste to be discharged. The tap fee for dischargers of process waste will be subject to an upward adjustment if it is found that the fee was underestimated. Dischargers of process waste will be responsible for the cost of an adequate number of tests to determine the average strength of their discharge. 
D.  Sewerage service fees. 
1)  The sewerage service rate shall be applicable only to residential service. 
2)  Commercial and industrial rates may be adjusted according to strength of waste and other criteria. 
3)  Prevailing rate schedules may be obtained from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.04 - Plans. 
A.  General. 
1)  All plans for sewerage works shall bear a suitable title showing the name of the project, the name of the sewer basin, and show the scale in feet, the north arrow, date, the name of the engineer, professional engineer signature, and his registration stamp. All engineers preparing construction plans and specifications must be registered in the State of Georgia as a professional engineer. 
2)  The plans shall be clear and legible. They shall be drawn to a scale which will permit all necessary information to be plainly shown. The plans shall be submitted on 22-inch by 34-inch or 30-inch by 42-inch drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in a "Cad" drawing format that is compatible with the city's GIS system. The datum used should be the elevation above sea level. 
B.  Plans of sewers. Plans for sewers shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, sections and supplementary views, and design drawings for all special fixtures. 
1)  Site plans. 
a.  The site plan shall show land lot lines, district and north arrow, lot layout, and existing and proposed building locations. The site plan shall also show all existing and proposed streets and their names, all streams, water courses, and storm drains, and the discharge points for all drainage structures. The site plan shall show the topography with contour lines at suitable intervals. On the site plans, show the sewer layout with existing and proposed lines, line designations and direction of flow. Also show the size of all lines and the locations of proposed services. 
b.  The design of cross country sewer lines and force mains shall be based on field run surveys. The site plan for cross country sewer lines and force mains need not show contour intervals, but the profiles shall be based on mean sea level elevation. Site plans for lift stations shell show existing and proposed contours. 
c.  In the event the subdivision is developed in phases, the final construction plans for sewers may be submitted in phases. However, at the time the first phase is submitted, the engineer will submit one copy of the preliminary layout of the entire seer system. This layout will show all lines required to serve any lots to be developed and any surrounding property that may be served through the property. The site plans for each phase shall contain a location plan showing the relationship of the phase to the total project and surrounding streets and sewer outfalls. 
2)  Plan and profile sheets. 
a.  Profiles should have a horizontal scale of not more than 100-foot per inch for cross country lines and 50-foot per inch for congested areas. The vertical scale shall ne be more than 10-foot per inch. The plan view should be drawn to the corresponding horizontal scale. The plan view should normally be shown on the same sheet as the profile. In any case, both plan and profile should have line designations, station numbers, manhole numbers and any other indexing necessary to easily correlate the plan and profile view. 
b.  Plan and profile sheets shall show the following: 
i.  Location of streets, sewers, and drainage easements. 
ii.  Profile of ground surface, the grade of the sewer between each manhole, size and material of pipe, length between manholes, invert of sewer in and out of each manhole, and rim elevation of each manhole. All manholes shall be numbered on the plan and correspondingly numbered on the profile. Station numbers shall be shown for each manhole. The profile of adjacent parallel streambeds and of adjacent lake surfaces, low buildings, and lots shall be shown on the profile. 
iii.  Locations of all special features such as connections to existing sewers, concrete encasements, collar walls, pipe sections, elevated sewers, piers, special manhole covers such as vented outfall covers or sealed covers, etc. 
iv.  All known existing structures both above and belowground which might interfere with the proposed construction, particularly water mains, gas mains, storm drains, utility conduits, etc. 
C.  Detail drawings. Special detail drawings made to scale to clearly show the nature of the design shall be furnished to show the following: 
1)  All stream crossings and storm drain outlets with elevations of the streambed and of normal and extreme high and low flow water levels. 
2)  Details of special sewer joints and cross sections. 
3)  Details of special sewer appurtenances such as manholes, service connections, elevated sewers, piers, pipe bedding special highway crossings, railroad crossing, etc. 
D.  Plan approved. 
1)  All plans must be submitted to the engineering department. Approval will be given to the design for construction at that time provided design meets the specifications of the city. Once plans are approved, three approved sets shall be submitted to the engineering department. 
2)  The City of Canton Utilities Engineer may, if he feels it is in the best interest and future integrity of the city, modify or cause to be modified any plans. 
3)  If a discrepancy occurs between the approved plans and the City of Canton sewer specifications, the specifications shall be the superseding document. 
E.  Revisions to approved plans. 
1)  When any deviations from approved plans affecting capacity, flow or operation of units are made, the utilities engineer shall be notified for authorization. Revised plans should be submitted as soon as possible to the city manager and/or his designated representative. Minor changes not affecting capacities, flows or operation may be allowed in the field during construction by the city manager and/or his designated representative. 
2)  The utilities engineer shall have final authority as to what constitutes a minor or major change. "As-built" plans clearly showing changes shall be submitted to the utilities engineer at the completion of the work. 
F.  As-built drawings. 
1)  At the completion of the sewer lines and before the inspection, the contractor will furnish three sets of printed "as-built" plans and electronic files of the project. 
2)  The "as-built" plans shall show all field changes made to the approved plans. 
3)  In the event "as-built" drawings cannot be made available at the completion of the sewer line, the utilities engineer may authorize the continuation of the construction; however, the final inspection cannot be conducted and the conditional approval letter cannot be written until "as-built" drawings are received. 
4)  In the event that the designer does not perform the field staking, the contractor must furnish certification from a licensed engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of all elevations, grades, manhole locations, and service locations. This certification and the certification of the engineer/land surveyor preparing the "as-built" drawings must be shown on the drawings. 
5)  "As-built" drawings shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Stationing of the sewer gravity and force main alignments, manholes and service laterals shall be required on the "as-built" drawings as well as the construction drawings. The "as-built" drawings shall meet the same requirements as the construction plans for review. 
6)  "As-built" drawings shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch or 30-inch by 42-inch drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in a "Cad" drawing electronic format that is compatible with the city's GIS system. The following are specific guidelines for the preparation of the "as-built" drawings: 
a.  Sewer "as-built" shall be a separate plan. 
b.  No contour lines. 
c.  Approximate depth of lateral should be shown. 
d.  Any lateral that does come out at a 90-degree angle shall show its distance from property pins. 
e.  Road names shall be on plans. 
f.  All measurements of laterals should be kept between manholes and both sides shall add up to the distance between manholes. 
g.  The center of all manhole rims shall be located horizontally and vertically as described above. 
h.  All lots are to be numbered. 
i.  Printed "as-builts" are to be clear and legible. 
j.  Profiles are to be included in all "as-builts." 
k.  Roads shall be shown on all plans. 
l.  "As-built" is to be in large clear print on plans. 
m.  Scale no larger than one inch equals 20 feet, no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet for cross-country lines and one inch equals 50 feet for congested areas. 
n.  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of the entire subdivision with said phase outlined shall appear on plans. 
o.  Line designation shall be used for correlation between profiles and plan view. 
p.  Ground water and solid rock encountered during construction will be noted on "as-builts." 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.05 - Design of sewers. 
A.  Generally. 
1)  Sewers shall be designed as separate sanitary sewers only in which rainwater from roofs, streets, and other areas and groundwater from foundation drains are excluded. 
2)  Overflows from sewers shall not be permitted. 
B.  Design period. 
1)  Sewer systems should be designed for the estimated ultimate tributary population. Tributary population is considered to be all areas upstream of the discharge point of the system being designed. 
2)  Sewers will be designed and installed to the uppermost property line of the development being served. 
3)  Consideration shall be given to the maximum anticipated capacity of institutions, industrial parks, etc. 
C.  Design factors. 
1)  In determining the required capacities of sanitary sewers, the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  Maximum hourly sewage flow. 
b.  Additional maximum sewage or waste flow from industrial plants. 
c.  Ground water infiltration. 
d.  Topography of the area. 
e.  Depth of excavation. 
2)  New sewer systems shall be designed on the basis of an average daily flow of sewage of not less than 400 gallons per household per day. Sewers should be designed to carry the per capita flow when flowing one-half full. Normally, all sewers shall be designed with a peaking factor of not less than 2.5 and this may be increased upon the direction of the reviewing engineer. When deviation from the foregoing per capita rates is demonstrated, a description of the procedure used for design shall be included. 
D.  Details of design and construction. 
1)  Size. No sewer shall be less than eight inches after leaving the uppermost property line to be served. 
2)  Depth. 
a.  Any sewers installed in the street shall be sufficiently deep to provide five feet of cover at the inlet end of all service laterals at the street right-of-way, and over any part of the main or service within the street right-of-way. 
b.  Any sewers on off street easements shall have a minimum of three feet of cover unless cast iron or ductile iron pipe is used. Filling over the pipe to obtain minimum cover is not allowed if the fill will impede the natural flow of surface water or will cause an erosion problem. 
3)  Slope. 
a.  All sewers shall be so designed and constructed to give mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two feet per second based on Kutter's formula using an "n" value of 0.013. Table 111-2 lists the minimum slopes which should be provided; however, slopes greater than these are desirable: 
Table 111-2 Minimum Slope Requirements 

 
b.  These minimum slopes will be used only when sufficient flows are expected to maintain a velocity of two feet per second and maintain a cleaning action in the line. Sewers shall be laid with uniform slope between manholes. Sewers on 20 percent slope or greater shall be cast iron or ductile iron pipe and shall be anchored securely with concrete anchors to prevent displacement by erosion or shock. Maximum slope of sewers shall be 30 percent and sewers shall be designed at less than 20 percent whenever possible. 
4)  Increasing size. When a small sewer is connected to a large one at a manhole, the connection shall not be lower than matching the 0.8 depth point of both sewers to the same elevation. For example, when connecting an eight-inch pipe to a 60-inch pipe a point 6.4 inches above the invert of the eight-inch pipe shall not be lower than a point 48 inches above the invert of the 60-inch pipe. Match crowns of the two pipes whenever possible. 
E.  Gravity sewer pipe. 
1)  All sanitary sewer pipe up through 15-inch diameter must be polyvinyl chloride (PVC), ductile iron pipe (DIP), or steel pipe, except where DIP or steel pipe is designated. 
2)  For 18-inch diameter pipe and above, the contractor may have the option of using either high-density polyethylene (HDPE), PVC, reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), DIP or steel pipe, except where DIP or steel pipe is specifically shown on the plans. 
3)  All pipe shall be constructed with a minimum class "C" bedding. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.06 - Materials. 
A.  Ductile iron pipe (DIP). 
1)  General. 
a.  Ductile iron sewer pipe shall be required at all utility crossings with less than two feet of clearance, in cross country locations where cover is less than three feet, in streets where cover is less than five feet, in fills, and where PVC sewer pipe has more than 18 feet of cover. 
b.  Ductile iron pipe shall be designed in accordance with AWWA C-150. The thickness and class of the pipe shall be governed by AWWA C-150. 
c.  Pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C-151 and shall have an outside bitumastic coating per AWWA C151 
d.  Pipe shall be coal tar epoxy lined and seal coated with approved bituminous seal coat in accordance with AWWA C151, latest revision. 
2)  Coal tar epoxy lining materials. 
a.  The lining material for ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be Koppers Bitumastic No. 300-M coal tar epoxy, Sikagard 62 or approved equal. Two coats of different colors, each eight to ten dry mils thick shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations to obtain a minimum dry film thickness of 16 to 20 mils. Each pipe joint shall be marked with the date the coating was applied and its numerical sequence of application on that date. A permanent marker of identifiable color shall be used. The coating shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of five days at temperatures of 70 degrees Fahrenheit to 100 degrees Fahrenheit before pipe installation. The contractor shall submit test reports verifying the dry film thickness and the thoroughness of the coating. 
b.  Each joint shall be thoroughly sealed with the epoxy coating material during installation to provide a continuous coating throughout the pipe and allowed to cure. 
3)  Joints. DIP joints shall be of the bell and spigot type with push-on joints, conforming to AWWAC-111 or mechanical joints. 
B.  Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC). 
1)  General. The contractor shall provide un-plasticized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic gravity sewer pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM D3034 (latest revision) in the sizes shown unless otherwise indicated on the contract documents. 
2)  Materials. 
a.  Pipe and fittings shall meet the requirements as specified under ASTM D3034 (latest revision) for pipe through 15 inches and ASTM F679 for pipe 18 inches through 27 inches. 
b.  All pipe and fittings shall be suitable for use as a gravity sewer conduit. 
c.  Bell joints shall consist of an integral wall section with elastomeric gasket joint that provides a watertight seal. Standard laying lengths shall be 20 feet (± one inch). 
d.  The pipe shall be capable of passing all tests that are detailed in this specification. 
e.  Minimum wall thickness shall be as shown in table 111-3: 
Table 111-3 Minimum Wall Thickness (PVC Pipe) 

 
3)  Fittings. 
a.  All fittings and accessories shall be manufactured and furnished by the pipe supplier. 
b.  Fittings shall have bell and/or spigot configurations compatible with that of the pipe and shall have an equivalent wall thickness. 
4)  Pipe and fittings tests. 
a.  The contractor will be required to furnish a written outline of the manufacturer's quality control program for the engineer's approval prior to shipping any pipe to the project. 
b.  Before installing any pipe the contractor shall furnish written certification that all pipe through 15 inches meets ASTM Specification D3034 and for 18 inches through 27 inches must meet ASTM F679. 
c.  At least one sample from each 100 pieces of pipe furnished shall be subjected to each test outlined under section 8 of ASTM D3034. The samples will be tested by an independent laboratory approved by the city engineer, and a certified copy of results will be furnished to the city engineer. 
d.  If any test is not met, then nine additional tests of that property will be ordered, and if any of those nine tests are not met, the manufacturer will not be allowed to furnish materials for this project. 
e.  The cost of all testing shall be included in the contractor's bid proposal and no pipe shall be installed until the testing is complete and approved by the city engineer. 
5)  Pipe stiffness. 
a.  Minimum "pipe stiffness" (F/Y) at five percent deflection shall be 46 psi for all sizes, when tested in accordance with ASTM Standard Method of Test D2412 (latest edition), to determine the "External Loading Properties of Plastic Pipe by Parallel Plat Loading." 
b.  There shall be no evidence of splitting, cracking, or breaking at a deflection of up to 30 percent of the original diameter. 
6)  Fusion quality. There shall be no evidence of flaking, swelling, or disintegration when the pipe material is tested in accordance with ASTM D2152, "Quality of Extruded Poly (Vinyl Chloride) pipe by Acetone Immersion." 
7)  Joint tightness. 
a.  Pipe and fitting joints shall comply with ASTM D3212 (latest edition) for "Joints for drain and Sewer Plastic Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals." 
b.  Joint assemblies shall not leak when subjected to both an internal and external hydrostatic test at equivalent pressures of 10.8 psi gauge for a period of one hour. Pipes shall be tested in straight alignment, axially deflected position, and by shear load test as otherwise defined in paragraphs 7.2, 7.3, and 7.4 of ASTM D3212. 
8)  Installation. 
a.  PVC pipe will be installed in accordance with ASTM D2321 (latest revision). 
b.  In any area where the pipe is below existing ground water level, the contractor will embed PVC pipe in sand or graded gravel. No special compaction requirements will be necessary; however, the sand or gravel must extend from six inches below the pipe to 12 inches above the pipe, and the material must be firmly placed under the pipe haunches. 
c.  When embedding PVC pipe in friable, compressible soils (e.g., silt, clay, sandy clay, silty clays, etc.), special care must be exercised to provide a uniform (undisturbed or fully compacted) trench bottom. Additionally, the backfill must be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor in six- to eight-inch lifts to 12 inches above the top of the pipe. Initial backfill shall be compacted to the densities outlined in D2321. The engineer may require up to ten random compaction tests to insure compliance with D2321. If any material tested is less than the required density, the contractor shall re-compact said material at no additional cost to the owner, and the engineer shall then have the right to additional compaction tests at the expense of the contractor to insure compliance with D2321. 
d.  The contractor shall use SDR-35, for pipe with zero to 20 feet of fill. PVC pipe cannot be used with more than 20 feet of fill. 
9)  Deflection limit. 
a.  Vertical deflection of installed pipe shall not exceed seven and one-half percent of the un-deflected diameter as defined in table X1.1 of ASTM D3034. 
b.  Each segment of line (except service lines) will be tested at the end of each month just prior to submitting for payment on that segment. Upon completion of the pipe laying, and at least 30 days after installation (to allow for settling), the pipe will be tested again for final acceptance. The test shall be performed by the contractor pulling a mandrel of specified dimensions through the pipeline. 
C.  High density polyethylene pipe (HDPE). 
1)  General. 
a.  This subsection covers the requirements of high density polyethylene profile wall gravity sewer and drain pipe fittings in nominal sizes 18 inches through 96 inches with integral bell and spigot gasketed and welded joints. 
b.  HDPE pipe is acceptable only for trenchless technology applications and for small diameter (less than four-inch) force mains. HDPE pipe shall not be specified for open-cut gravity sewers. 
2)  Classes. 
a.  Class selection for high density polyethylene profile wall sewer pipe shall be a minimum of class 160 for pipe with zero to 20 feet of fill. 
b.  Polyethylene pipe cannot be used over 20 feet deep. 
3)  Material. 
a.  Pipes and fittings shall be manufactured from high density polyethylene resin compound which shall meet the requirements of type III, class C, category 5, grade P 34 per ASTM D 1248. Materials meeting the requirements of ASTM D3350 with a cell classification PE 334433C or higher are also suitable. The pipe shall contain a minimum of two percent carbon black as an ultraviolet inhibitor. 
4)  Pipe dimensions. 
a.  The average inside diameter and the minimum wall thickness of the waterway of the pipe shall comply with ASTM F894 for RSC class 160 pipe. 
5)  Joints. 
a.  The pipe shall be produced with bell and spigot end construction. Joining shall be accomplished by use of neoprene rubber gaskets complying with the physical requirements as specified in ASTM F477. 
b.  Joints shall be in accordance with ASTM D3212 and withstand an internal operating pressure of 50 psi. 
6)  Pipe stiffness. 
a.  The profile wall shall be substantially strong to protect against any diametrical deformation. 
b.  All polyethylene profile wall pipe shall have a minimum specific pipe stiffness of 46 psi at a deflection of five percent of the internal diameter when tested and calculated in accordance with ASTM D24212 (latest edition). 
7)  Retest and rejection. 
a.  If the results of any tests do not meet the requirements of this specification, the tests may be conducted again in accordance with agreement between purchaser and seller. 
b.  In retesting, the product requirements of this specification shall be met and the test methods designated in this specification shall be followed. If upon retest failure occurs, the quantity of product represented by the tests shall be rejected. 
8)  Deflection limit. 
a.  Vertical deflection of installed pipe shall not exceed seven and one-half percent of the un-deflected diameter as defined in table X1.1 of ASTM D3034. 
b.  Each segment of line (except service lines) will be tested at the end of each month just prior to submitting for payment on that segment. Upon completion of the pipe laying, and at least 30 days after installation (to allow for settling), the pipe will be tested again for final acceptance. The test shall be performed by the contractor pulling a mandrel of specified dimensions through the pipeline. 
D.  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). 
1)  General. The work included in this subsection includes furnishing all labor, equipment, and materials required to install, test, and inspect reinforced concrete (ASTM C-76) pipe sewers, including all risers, plugs, fittings, and bedding, as shown on the drawings and/or specified herein. 
2)  Quality assurance. 
a.  The contractor must submit to the owner and engineer the concrete pipe manufacturer's evidence of a working quality control program for approval, prior to any pipe being manufactured. The program and standards of manufacturing must be established and well defined. The program must include the minimum following requirements: 
i.  A full-time quality control technician. 
ii.  A complete and working quality control laboratory capable of testing and recording the requirements set forth in these specifications for concrete pipe. 
iii.  Written documentation of the concrete pipe manufacturer's performance on a recent sewer project. The performance results must be from a tested and approved installation of the pipe material set forth in this specification from either the owner and/or engineer stating that the pipe tested and met the requirements. 
iv.  A zero defect program for daily material testing and finished product testing to assure quality control as the pipe is being manufactured and shipped for this particular project. 
v.  Provide the services of a competent factory representative of the pipe manufacturer for purposes of supervising and/or inspecting the installation of pipe. This service shall be for the duration of the project. 
vi.  Provide equipment and labor to air test each joint of pipe (30-inch diameter and larger) as it is installed. Joint tester shall be "Cherne Large Diameter Joint Tester" or equal. This testing shall in no way relieve the contractor from the responsibility of performing infiltration/exfiltration tests. 
3)  Testing of concrete pipe . 
a.  Concrete gravity pipe (ASTM C-76) used on this Project shall meet all materials and testing requirements of ASTM C-76, ASTM C-443, and ASTM C-497 (except where modified herein). Manufacturer shall secure the services of an independent testing laboratory to conduct the tests. Testing laboratory shall be approved by the Engineer prior to conducting any tests. All testing costs shall be paid for by the pipe manufacturer. 
b.  Testing shall be in job lots (a job lot is a continuous run of one size of pipe for this project) for a maximum of six percent of pipe quantity or a minimum of five percent of pipe quantity. The test specimen will have a minimum of two joints for pipe of 16-foot laying length. For pipe of 12-foot laying length, the maximum number of joints shall be seven and the minimum number shall be two. Bulkheads will be included in this joint count. 
c.  A representative of the owner will be present to witness all tests that are conducted at the manufacturer's site and shall record all results. Manufacturer shall notify the engineer at least 48 hours prior to conducting any tests. 
d.  The following test shall be required: 
i.  Pipe barrels shall be subjected to an internal hydrostatic pressure of ten psi for ten minutes. Pipe joints shall be subjected to an internal hydrostatic pressure of 13 psi for ten minutes. The testing of the joints will be in the straight and deflected alignment. 
ii.  The manufacturer shall conduct three external load crushing strength tests per job lot. This test shall be by the three-edge bearing method. The test may be taken to ultimate load. 
iii.  Absorption tests shall be conducted as per ASTM C-497. The absorption rate of the sample from the pipe wall shall not exceed six percent. 
e.  If any test specimen fails to pass any of the above tests, two additional test specimens shall be chosen at random from the job lot and tested. If either of those two specimens fails the test, then the entire job lot is subject to rejection. If the manufacturer requests further testing, then every section of pipe in the job lot must be tested. 
f.  In addition to the above tests, manufacturer shall conduct tests to determine alkalinity of cover concrete. 
g.  Each pipe shall be clearly marked as required by the governing ASTM standard specifications to show its class, date of manufacture, and the name of trademark of the manufacturer. 
h.  Any pipe or specials which have been broken, cracked or otherwise damaged before or after delivery or which have failed to meet the required tests, shall be removed from the site of the work and shall not be used therein. 
4)  Guarantee. 
a.  The contractor shall provide a guarantee against defective materials and workmanship in accordance with the requirements of the section entitled "guarantees and warranties" of these specifications. 
5)  Material. 
a.  All concrete pipe and fittings 12 inches in diameter and larger shall be reinforced concrete sewer pipe conforming to the latest requirements of ASTM C-76 with the following modifications: 
i.  All concrete pipe with zero to 20 feet of fill shall be a minimum of class III with 4,500 psi concrete. 
ii.  All pipe with 20 to 30 feet of fill shall be class IV with 4,500 psi concrete. 
iii.  All pipe with 30 feet of fill and over shall be class V with 5,500 psi concrete. 
b.  Pipe shall have circumferential reinforcement as required for the particular class of pipe furnished. The bell and spigot of the joint shall contain circumferential and longitudinal reinforcement. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be centrifugally cast or vibrated, horizontally or vertically cast or made on a packerhead machine and shall be furnished in lengths not more than 20 feet and not less than eight feet, except where short lengths are required for construction conditions. Reinforced concrete pipe shall have bell and spigot joints suitable for the use of a rubber gasket to be provided as a part of this item. 
c.  Concrete pipe for sanitary sewers shall have bell and spigot joints consisting of self-centering steel joint rings securely attached to the pipe reinforcing steel. The steel joint rings shall be suitable for use with a rubber O-ring type gasket to be provided as part of this item. 
d.  Bell and spigot joints consisting of self-centering steel joint rings shall have the joint rings securely attached to the pipe reinforcing steel. The rings which form the joint shall be made so that they will join with a close, sliding fit. The joint surfaces shall be such that the rubber gasket shall be confined on all sides and shall not support the weight of the pipe. 
i.  The spigot ring shall have an external groove accurately sized to receive the gasket. Special section steel for spigot rings shall conform to ASTM A-283, grade A, or ASTM A-306, grade 50. 
ii.  The bell ring shall be flared to permit gradual deformation of the gasket when the joint is assembled. Minimum thickness of bell rings shall be three-sixteenths-inch. Bell rings one-fourth-inch or thicker shall conform to ASTM A-283, grade A, or ASTM A-306, grade 50. Bells less than one-fourth-inch thick shall conform to ASTM A -570, Grade A. 
iii.  Each ring shall be precisely sized by expansion beyond the elastic limit of the steel and then gauged on an accurate template. All exposed surfaces of both rings shall be protected by a corrosion-resistant coating of zinc applied by an approved metallizing process after proper cleaning. 
6)  Lining. 
a.  The coal tar epoxy system shall be Koppers 300 M, Porter Tarset, Wise Chem CTE 200, Amercoat 78, Protecto 101 or equal. 
b.  The interior concrete or mortar surfaces of pipe and fittings are to be sandblasted and painted with one coat of a high-build, coal tar epoxy system or two coats of a standard coal tar epoxy system. The dry film thickness of the total system shall be 16 mils minimum on concrete or mortar surfaces and on steel joint ring surfaces. 
c.  Sandblasting shall result in a clean dry surface free of oil, grease, or other contaminants. Any air pockets over one-fourth-inch in diameter and one-eighth-inch deep appearing on the concrete surface after sandblasting will be filled with an epoxy sand patching material such as those sold by Sherwin-Williams, Glidden, or Moran. The epoxy sand patch should be troweled prior to the application of the coal tar epoxy. 
d.  Any steel surfaces to be painted should be sandblasted, solvent cleaned, or wire brushed prior to painting. Application of the coal tar epoxy shall be by brush, roller, or spray system using equipment recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy system. The temperature during application and curing of coal tar epoxy shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy. Time between coats (if applicable) shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy. 
e.  If the inside joint recess will be mortared and painted with coal tar epoxy in the field, the pipe supplier shall not paint the inside vertical surfaces at the ends of the pipe. When the inside joints will not be mortared in the field, the pipe supplier shall paint the inside vertical concrete or mortar surfaces at each end of the pipe. 
f.  The paint shall be extended continuously over the front lip of the steel spigot ring and a minimum of two inches onto the sealing surface of unrestrained bell rings so that all interior joint surfaces which can be exposed to the fluid inside the pipe are coated. 
E.  Steel pipe. 
1)  Steel pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM A-139 grade B, AWWA C-200 and shall be coal tar lined three thirty-seconds-inch in accordance with AWWA C-203. The outer coating shall be sand/grit blasted, primed to Federal Specification TTP-86C. Pipe shall have a minimum wall thickness of 0.250 inches. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.07 - Precast concrete manholes. 
A.  General. 
1)  Precast concrete manholes shall consist of precast reinforced concrete sections with eccentric, (or flat slab for shallow manholes) top section and a base section conforming to the typical manhole details as shown on the standard detail drawings in chapter 112 of this UDC. 
2)  The wall thickness shall not be less than five inches. 
3)  Manholes over 12 feet deep shall be placed on a reinforced slab. 
4)  Flat top manholes will be approved only if the need for such can be demonstrated by the design engineer. 
5)  All manholes shall be water tight when completely built. 
6)  Safety platforms shall be constructed in manholes in accordance with OSHA regulations and the details in these specifications. 
B.  Manhole sections. Precast manhole sections shall be manufactured, tested, and marked in accordance with latest provisions of ASTM C478. 
C.  Manhole sections joints. Joints of the manhole sections shall be of the tongue-and-groove type, sections shall be joined using O-ring gaskets, flexible plastic gaskets conforming to the applicable provisions of ASTM C433, latest revision, or an approved bituminous mastic joint material. 
D.  Life holes. 
1)  Each section of the precast manhole shall have not more than two holes for the purpose of handling and laying. 
2)  These holes shall be sealed with cement mortar using one part portland cement to two parts clean sand, meeting ASTM C144, latest revision. 
E.  Manhole steps. 
1)  Manhole steps conforming to the applicable provisions of ASTM C478, latest edition, shall be of #4 steel reinforcing bars covered with Polypropylene Plastic or rubber and shall be supplied with depth rings and other necessary appurtenances. 
2)  Steps shall be similar to and of an equal quality to the "PS1-PF" by M. A. Industries, Inc. of Peachtree City, Georgia. 
3)  The step shall be factory built into the precast sections. 
4)  See the standard details in chapter 112 for a typical manhole step detail. 
F.  Pipe holes. 
1)  Holes in precast bases to receive sewer pipe shall be precast at the factory at the required locations and heights. 
2)  Knocking out of holes in the field is not permitted, however holes can be cored in the field with a coring machine. 
3)  All man holes shall have Kor-N-Seal (or equal) rubber boots for all pipe entries/exits. 
G.  Bases and inverts. 
1)  Manhole bases and inverts shall be constructed of 2,500 psi concrete in accordance with details on standard detail drawings in chapter 112 of this UDC and the trough shall have the same cross-section as the sewers which it connects. 
2)  The manhole base and invert shall be carefully formed to the required size and grade by gradual and even changes in sections. 
3)  Changes in direction of flow through the sewer shall be made to a true curve with as large a radius as the size of the manhole will permit. 
4)  The minimum drop through a manhole shall be 0.1 foot. 
H.  Manhole foundation. The manhole base shall be set upon a six-inch compacted (minimum thickness) mat of #57 crushed stone. 
I.  Brick. 
1)  Brickwork required to complete the precast concrete manhole shall be constructed using one part portland cement to two parts clean sand, meeting ASTM C144, thoroughly mixed to a workable plastic mixture. 
2)  Brickwork shall be constructed in a neat and workmanlike manner. 
3)  Cement mortar shall be used to grout interior exposed brick joints and faces. 
4)  No more than three courses of brick with nine-inch maximum total depth of bricks may be used to adjust manhole covers. 
J.  Frame and cover. 
1)  The cast iron frame for the manhole cover shall be set at the required elevation and properly anchored to the masonry. 
2)  Frames and covers shall be Neenah R-1776 or equal in compliance with the latest edition of ASTM 48. 
3)  Where manholes are constructed in paved areas, the top surface of the frame and cover shall be tilted, if necessary, to conform to the exact slope, crown and grade of the existing adjacent pavement. 
4)  In areas where manhole tops may be submerged by street runoff or high flood waters, the manhole lid shall be "self-sealing." 
5)  All covers shall have "SEWER" printed on them. 
K.  Masonry work. 
1)  Masonry work shall be allowed to set for a period of not less than 24 hours. 
2)  All loose or waste material shall be removed from the interior of the manhole. The manhole cover then shall be placed and the surface in the vicinity of the work cleaned off and left in a neat and orderly condition. 
L.  Location. 
1)  Manholes shall be installed, as follows: 
a.  At the end of each line. 
b.  At all changes in grade, size, or alignment. 
c.  At all intersections. 
d.  At distances normally not greater than 350 feet. 
2)  Spacing for eight-inch sewers can be more than 350 feet but not more than 400 feet and will be allowed only in isolated cases when, in the opinion of the reviewing engineer, it is impractical to install an additional manhole and when the extra distance will not impede maintenance of the line. Manhole spacing in sewers ten inches and larger will conform to Ten State Standards. In no circumstance will a spacing of greater than 300 feet be allowed when the slope exceeds ten percent cleanouts may be used only for special conditions and shall not be substituted for manholes nor installed at the ends of laterals greater than 150 feet in length. Manholes in cross-country areas shall be elevated so that the top is 18 inches above ground. 
M.  Drop manholes. 
1)  A drop pipe shall be provided for a sewer entering a manhole at an elevation of more than two feet above the manhole invert. 
2)  The drop pipe shall be of ductile iron materials. 
3)  All out-side 90 degree elbows shall have thrust block poured below the elbow. 
4)  "Outside drop manhole" will be noted on the construction plans at any time the drop exceeds two feet. Where the difference in elevation between the incoming sewer and the manhole invert is less than two feet, the invert shall be sloped to prevent solids deposition. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.08 - Casings. 
A.  Steel casing pipe shall be used for all cased piping where the carrier pipe is eight inches or greater in size. 
B.  Steel casing pipe shall have minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A139. It shall be fully coated on the exterior and interior with a coal tar coating. The casing pipe diameter shall be six to eight inches greater than the "bell" diameter of the carrier pipe. Minimum wall thickness shall be as shown in table 111-4. 
Table 111-4 Minimum Wall Thickness (Steel Casing Pipe) 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.02.09 - Construction methods. 
A.  Trench excavation. 
1)  It is the responsibility of those installing sanitary sewers, lift stations, waste treatment plants, and related appurtenances to conform to OSHA regulations, 29 CFR part 1926, subpart P, paragraph 1926.650 through 1926.653 during trench excavation. The city assumes no liability or responsibility for unsafe trench conditions. 
2)  Pipe trenches shall be cut straight and true to the lines and grades and in the location shown on the plans. The bottom of the trench shall be cut carefully to the required grade of the pipe except where bedding materials or cradles are shown, in which case the excavation shall extend to the bottom of the bedding or cradles as shown on the plans. 
3)  Bell holes shall be excavated at proper intervals so the barrel of the pipe will rest for its entire length upon the bottom of the trench and the pipe weight shall not rest on the bells. Bell holes shall be large enough to permit proper installation of all joints in the pipe. 
4)  Pipe trenches shall not be excavated more than 100 feet in advance of pipe laying, and all work shall be performed to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. Adequate temporary bridges or crossings shall be constructed and maintained where required to permit uninterrupted vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
5)  All excavations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all OSHA, Cherokee County and the Georgia Department of Transportation requirements so as to protect the public and workers from hazard. 
6)  Excavations adjacent to existing or proposed buildings and structures or in paved streets or alleys shall be adequately protected by the use of trench boxes, sheeting, shoring and bracing to prevent cave-ins of the excavation, or the undermining or subsequent settlement of adjacent structures or pavements. Underpinning of adjacent structures shall be done when necessary to maintain structures in safe condition. 
7)  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public and private property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to as near as original condition as possible or better in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
8)  Whenever water is present in the trench, it shall be removed in a manner satisfactory to the city and enough backfill shall be placed on the pipe to prevent floating. Any pipe that has floated shall be removed from the trench and re-laid later during dry conditions. No pipe shall be laid in wet trench conditions that preclude proper bedding, or on frozen trench bottom, or when, in the opinion of the city the trench conditions or the weather are unsuitable for proper installation. 
9)  Construction occurring around active sewer systems shall be done in such a way so as to prevent the passage of wastewater onto the ground. Absolutely no wastewater shall be allowed to spill onto the ground. 
10)  During the sewer line construction an effort shall be made to minimize the cutting of trees. 
B.  Rock excavation. 
1)  Drilling and blasting operations shall be conducted with due regard for the safety of persons and property in the vicinity and in strict conformity with requirements of all ordinances, laws and regulations relative to the handling, storing and use of explosives. Rock excavation near existing pipelines or other structures shall be conducted with the utmost care to avoid damage, injury or damage to structures or property shall be promptly repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the city and property owner. 
2)  Rock in trenches shall be excavated over the horizontal limits of excavation and to depths as shown in table 111-5: 
Table 111-5 Depth of Excavation Below Bottom of Sewer Pipe 

 
3)  The space below grade for pipe lines shall then be backfilled with #57 and smaller crushed rock, gravel, subgrade stabilizer or other approved bedding material and compacted. 
C.  Backfilling trenches. 
1)  Backfill material shall consist of fine, loose earth containing sufficient but not excessive moisture content for thorough compaction. Material that is too dry for adequate compaction shall receive a prior admix of sufficient water to secure adequate moisture content. Material having excessive water content shall not be placed at any time. Backfill material shall be free of large clods, stones, vegetable matter, debris, and other objectionable material. All unsuitable excavated material and excess material must be properly disposed of in a manner that will not adversely affect the environment. 
2)  All backfill beneath roads, sidewalks, or other critical areas shall be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor or as otherwise required by the DOT or other such agency having jurisdiction using mechanical tamping equipment in six-inch lifts. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to demonstrate to the city that 95 percent compaction has been obtained. 
D.  Installation of sewer pipe. 
1)  Pipe and accessories shall at all times be handled with care to avoid damage. Whether moved by hand, skidways or hoists, material shall not be dropped or bumped. The interior of all pipe shall be kept free from dirt and foreign matter at all times. Each joint of pipe shall be unloaded opposite or near the place where it is to be laid in the trench. 
2)  All such material that is defective in manufacture or has been damaged in transit or after delivery shall be removed from the job site. 
3)  Sewer pipes shall be joined by "push-on" joints using elastomeric gaskets to affect the pressure seal. The ends of pipe to be joined and the gaskets shall be cleaned immediately before assembly, and the assembly shall be made as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. Lubricant used must be non-toxic and supplied or approved for use by the pipe manufacturer. Sewer pipes shall be laid in the uphill direction with the bells pointing upgrade. Any variation from this procedure shall require approval from the city. 
4)  When pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of installed pipe shall be plugged by approved means to prevent entrance of trench water into the line. 
5)  No special laying conditions are required for ductile iron pipe (DIP) other than haunching and soil compaction to 12 inches above the spring line and any other conditions which are stipulated elsewhere in these specifications. 
6)  Bell holes shall be provided of sufficient size to allow ample room for making the pipe joints properly. The bottom of the trench between bell holes shall be carefully graded so that the pipe barrel will rest on a solid foundation for its entire length as shown on the plans. Each joint shall be laid so that it will form a close concentric joint with adjoining pipe and in order to avoid sudden offsets or inequalities in the flow line. 
7)  Water shall not be allowed to run or stand in the trench before the trench has been backfilled. The contractor at no time shall open up more trench than his available pumping facilities are able to dewater. 
8)  The following laying conditions shall be followed with PVC pipe: 
a.  By embedding PVC pipe in sand or graded gravel, no special compaction requirements will be necessary. However, the sand or gravel must extend from six inches below the pipe to twelve inches above the pipe and the material must be firmly placed under the pipe haunches. See the standard details in chapter 112. 
b.  When embedding PVC pipe in friable, compressible soils (e.g. silt, clay, sandy clay, silty clays, etc.), special care must be exercised to provide a uniform (undisturbed or fully compacted) trench bottom. Additionally, the backfill must be compacted to 95 percent Standard Proctor in six inch lifts to twelve inches above the top of the pipe. 
E.  Railroad crossings. 
1)  All railroad crossings shall conform to the requirements of the American Railway Engineering Association Manual for Railway Engineering, Part 5. The contractor shall secure permission from the railroads to schedule the work so as not to interfere with the operation of the railroads. The contractor shall be held responsible for any delays or damages occurring to the railroads. The contractor will furnish the railroad with such additional insurance as may be required, cost of same to be borne by the contractor, together with the costs for flagmen, watchmen, temporary work of any nature, safety devices and any other items that may be imposed by the railroad. 
F.  Highway crossings. 
1)  The contractor shall be responsible for the coordinating and scheduling of all construction work in the state highway right-of-way with the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
2)  Work along and across Georgia State Highway right-of-way shall conform to Georgia DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges. 
3)  The contractor is required to obtain all necessary permits. Traffic control within the state of Georgia right-of-way shall comply with section 107.09 of the State of Georgia DOT Standard Construction Specifications, or sections 104.05 and 107.07 of the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, latest editions. 
G.  Stream crossings. 
1)  Stream crossing shall be done in compliance with the federal, state and local laws and permit requirements. The methods described in this subsection are subject to change due to more recent regulations implemented by the varying government agencies. General requirements include the following: 
a.  The contractor is liable for knowing and complying with the most stringent regulations in force at the time of construction. 
b.  The suggested method of crossing a river, stream, creek, impoundments, or wet weather ditch is with a bore under the creek or river with a minimum of two feet of cover between the lowest point in the stream and the top of outside diameter of the casing. 
c.  Casings and ductile iron pipe are required for all stream crossings and shall extend a minimum of 20 feet beyond the vegetative buffer (state or city buffer, whichever is wider) on each side. 
d.  An open cut of the stream is allowable if no endangered species are affected and if the Developer obtains written permission from the various governing agencies. Written permission shall be submitted to the City of Canton. If the stream is open cut, concrete collars or encasement must be provided at all joints for ductile iron pipe with less than three feet of cover. Design engineer is responsible for checking and designing against floatation. Where streams are allowed to be open cut by variance, the construction in stream beds shall follow the following guidelines: 
i.  Construction in and around stream beds must adhere to the current regulations of the Georgia EPD, the Corps of Engineers, City of Canton Engineering and the U.S. Department of Fish and Wildlife. The design engineer and contractor are responsible for knowing, coordinating and complying with these regulations. 
ii.  All necessary permits and buffer variances must be acquired by the Developer prior to the final approval of the plans by the city. 
iii.  Any item published within this UDC that is in conflict with the EPD's stream bed protection regulations is hereby deemed invalid, unless the specification herein is considered more stringent by the reviewing agency. 
2)  Fording of live streams with construction equipment will not be permitted, unless specifically approved in writing. Unless, otherwise approved in writing, mechanized equipment shall not be operated in live streams except as may be required to construct temporary diversion structures, and temporary or permanent structures. 
3)  Erosion control measures shall be installed prior to performing any stream crossings. All work should be performed when stream flows are at their lowest, and all work should be performed as quickly and safely as possible. As soon as conditions permit, the stream bed shall be cleared of all false work, debris, and other obstructions placed therein or caused by the construction operations. 
H.  Jack and bore. 
1)  Jacks for forcing the casing pipe through the roadbed shall have a jacking head constructed in such a manner as to apply uniform pressure around the ring of the pipe. The pipe to be jacked shall be set on guides, braced together, to properly support the section of the pipe and direct it to the proper line and grade. In general, roadbed material shall be excavated just ahead of the pipe, the excavated material removed through the pipe, and the pipe then forced through the roadbed into the excavated space. 
2)  Where pipe is required to be installed under railroads, highways, streets or other facilities by jacking or boring methods, construction shall be done in a manner that will not interfere with the operation of the facility, and shall not weaken the roadbed or structure. 
3)  The use of water or other fluids in connection with the boring operation will be permitted only to the extent necessary to lubricate cuttings. Jetting will not be permitted. 
4)  The diameter of the excavation shall conform to the outside diameter and circumference of the casing pipe as closely as practicable. Any voids which develop during the installation operation shall be pressure grouted. 
5)  The pipe shall be jacked from the low or downstream end. At each end of the casing pipe the void between the carrier pipe and casing shall be sealed with brick and mortar. Any pipe damaged in jacking operations shall be removed, and replaced by the contractor at his expense. 
6)  After the steel casing pipe has been installed, the DIP carrier pipe shall be installed in the casing pipe. Care shall be exercised at all times to protect the coating and lining of this pipe and to maintain tight, full-seated joints in the carrier pipe. 
I.  Replacement of pavement. 
1)  Contractor shall fully restore and replace all pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other surface structures removed or disturbed, to a condition that is equal to or better than the original condition in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
2)  Pavement cuts. All pavement cuts on city roads shall be made by sawing prior to excavation to eliminate uneven and ragged edges. 
3)  Where sewer lines are installed in existing paved streets, the streets in which the sewer lines are installed shall receive a full width asphalt repaving in accordance with these specifications. 
J.  Location and protection of existing underground utilities. 
1)  It is the responsibility of the contractor to locate and protect all underground utilities and structures. 
2)  Utilities shall not be moved or disturbed without the approval of the utility company. 
3)  Any damage caused by sewer line installation to any utility or structure shall be immediately reported to the city and repaired at the contractor's expense. 
K.  Protection of water supply and other utilities. 
1)  The City of Canton has an established cross-connection program to prevent the entry of contaminants or pollutants into any area of the potable water supply through the control of cross connections. The following requirements shall apply. See also the cross-connection control program section in chapter 110 of this UDC. 
a.  It is illegal to introduce any substance into or to have any cross connections with the potable water supply. 
b.  There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sanitary sewer which would permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable water supply. 
2)  A horizontal separation of at least ten feet is required between water mains and existing or proposed sanitary sewer mains (measured edge to edge). Should conditions prevent a separation of ten feet, the lines shall be laid in separate trenches. In either case, the elevation of the crown of the sewer shall be at least 18 inches below the invert of the water main. 
3)  When sewers cross under water mains, the sewer shall be laid so that the crown of the sewer shall be at least 18 inches below the invert of the water main. The two pipes shall be installed such that a full length of pipe will be centered over the crossing so that all joints will be separated as much as possible. Ductile iron pipe shall be installed for both mains when clearance is less than two feet. 
4)  In the rare circumstance when the 18 inches clearance between the water and sewer mains cannot be maintained, the mains shall be installed as described in the paragraph above with the joints as far apart as possible and be constructed of ductile iron pipe. 
5)  When sewers are laid within public streets, the manholes and sewer lines shall normally be laid along the centerline of the street at a depth of not less than six feet from the pavement surface to the top of the pipe. In curves and other areas where this is not possible, the lines and manholes are to be installed within the confines of the curb to avoid conflict with the curb and other utilities. Ductile iron pipe shall be used for sewer lines crossing storm sewers with less than a two-foot clearance and at other times when directed by the city. 
L.  Sewer services. 
1)  A sewer service shall be provided for every existing or proposed lot or building. All services shall be shown on the construction and as-built drawings. A common service shall not be allowed for two or more buildings. The service shall extend to the property line of the lot being served and shall normally be within ten feet of the lower corner of the lot. Each service shall terminate with a six-inch PVC clean-out stubbed out of the ground and sealed with a temporary PVC cap. 
2)  After the curb and gutter are installed, a letter "S" shall be placed on the curb directly above the service. This shall be done by either casting the letter while the concrete is green or by saw cutting it into the curb. The letter shall be four inches to six inches tall. 
3)  The developer shall be responsible for serving all lots developed. On any lot where the service cannot be found, the developer shall be responsible for payment of the cost of installation of the service. Also, unless noted on the final plat, the service shall be low enough to serve the first floor elevation at building line. 
4)  The builder shall be responsible for the location of the service prior to the pouring of the foundation, driveway or other appurtenance. The city will not be responsible for any house built too low to be served nor for any service covered by construction. 
5)  No plumber or contractor will be allowed to connect to the sewerage system except to the end of the service provided for his connection. Also, any service provided will be utilized without the installation of additional services. The builder will be responsible for replacing the temporary PVC cap with a traffic rated brass cap flush with grade. 
6)  Any dumpster pad that has a drain that connects to the sanitary sewer line shall be covered in such a manner that will not allow any type of storm water to enter the sewer system. 
M.  Clean-up. 
1)  The contractor shall remove all unused material, excess rock and earth, and all other debris from the construction site as closely behind the work as practical. 
a.  If the contractor fails to maintain clean-up responsibilities as directed by the city's representative, the city may choose to use their own forces to do so, followed by an invoice to the developer for the city's work. 
b.  All trenches shall be backfilled and tamped before the end of each days work. 
2)  Prior to requesting the "completion of sewer main construction" inspection, the contractor shall do the following: 
a.  Remove and dispose of in an acceptable manner all shipping timbers, shipping bands, spacers, excess materials, broken material, crates, boxes and any other material brought to the job site. 
b.  Repair or replace any work, trees, lawns, shrubs, fences, flower beds, drainage culverts or other property damaged by the sewer line construction. All items damaged beyond repair shall be replaced with the same kind of material as existed prior to the damage occurring. 
c.  All easement areas shall be cleared of trees, stumps and other debris and left in a condition such that the easement can be maintained by bush-hog equipment. 
d.  All shoulders, ditches, culverts, and other areas impacted by the sewer line construction shall be at the proper grades and smooth in appearance. 
e.  All manhole covers shall be brought to grade. 
N.  Grassing. 
1)  A uniform stand of grass is required over all construction easements and sanitary sewer easements prior to the city's acceptance of the sewer. 
a.  Grass shall be as defined and installed or constructed in conformity with the temporary and permanent disturbed area stabilization of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition. 
b.  The grassing shall be maintained for by the contractor or developer until final acceptance of the sewer line and appurtenances by the city. 
2)  Grass seed shall be selected based on the type of seed suitable to the area and season of year. Refer to the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia for grass growing schedule, selection of grass seed, fertilizers, lime, inoculants, mulching, etc. 
3)  The contractor shall provide water for irrigation from the nearest available metered source. The soil must be thoroughly wet to a depth that will insure germination of the seed. Water must be applied at a rate not causing runoff or erosion. Growth and coverage on areas grassed shall be considered in reasonably close conformity with the intent of this requirement when a viable stand of grass covers at least 98 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. The contractor shall repeat all work, including plowing, fertilizing, watering, and seeding as necessary to produce a satisfactory stand. 
4)  The contractor or developer shall do all maintenance work necessary to keep all planted areas in satisfactory condition until the work is finally accepted. This shall include mowing, repairing washes that occur, reseeding, and water as required to produce a healthy and growing stand of grass. Mowing will be required to remove tall and obnoxious weeds before they go to seed. 
O.  Easement acquisition and utility encroachment permits. 
1)  It shall be the responsibility of the engineer and developer to obtain any off-site easements required to connect the project to existing public sewers. Assistance can be furnished by the authority if requested. This process must be started early enough to allow construction of the sewer before any building construction is to begin. Building permits or sewer tap applications will not be issued until off-site sewers have been constructed and accepted. This condition shall override any provision for speed-up of house starts such as furnishing a bond to guarantee completion of the streets and other appurtenances. 
2)  All easements shall allow adequate room to construct the sewer and appurtenances. Permanent easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, ten feet on each side of the line, and construction easements shall be a minimum of 60 feet wide, 30 feet on each side of the line. 
3)  The engineer shall furnish easement drawings prior to approval of the sewer plans. The drawings shall be either eight and one-half inches by 11 inches or eight and one-half inches by 14 inches. The drawings must be clear and legible for printing. The drawings shall be at a reasonable scale and shall not be a reduced copy of the plan sheet. The drawing will show property lines, the name of property owners with the length of line encroaching on each property, size of line, line designation, manhole numbers and stations, width of permanent and construction easement, scale of drawing, north arrow, land lot and district numbers, and a tie to the nearest land lot corner. Any streets or other existing easements shall also be shown. 
4)  The engineer shall furnish appropriate drawings for submittal to the owner of any state or federal highways, railroads, power lines, water lines, gas lines, petroleum lines, or any other utility lines on which the sewer construction will encroach. The drawing shall normally be eight and one-half inches by 11 inches or eight and one-half inches by 14 inches and shall show a plan view and profile view. The drawing will show the same information required for easement drawings. Also, the drawing will show the right-of-way of the existing street or utility, the owners' designation of the line, the name and number of the nearest intersection or milepost or tower number and the distance to that appurtenance. The clearance distance between the street surface, or the bottom of the rail, or the utility and the sewer will be shown. The drawing will show the type of material used for the sewer and the method of construction to be used. The drawing will also contain any other special information required by the owner of the facility on which the sewer is encroaching. Five copies of the utility encroachment drawing will be furnished with the plans when they are submitted for approval. Normally the encroachment permit will be obtained by the authority but costs incurred shall be paid by the developer. Construction permits will not be issued until the utility encroachment permit has been obtained and until any special conditions such as insurance requirements have been complied with. 
P.  Construction permits. 
1)  Construction will not be allowed until a permit has been issued by the city. 
2)  The contractor shall submit one copy of the approved construction plans which have been stamped approved. The contractor shall furnish his name and address, telephone number, certificate of liability insurance, and proof of his city business license to do this type of work. He shall also furnish the name of the person in charge of the project and any subcontractors and the name and telephone number of a responsible person who can be contacted in case of emergencies during nonworking hours. 
3)  The contractor (whose name shall appear on the approved contractor's list) shall furnish his construction schedule and shall notify the city manager and/or his designated representative a minimum of 24 hours prior to doing any work. Once the contractor begins work, he shall proceed in a workmanlike manner and shall complete the work in a reasonable time without undue off days and periods of inactivity which make it hard for the chief inspector to keep up with his activity. 
Q.  Inspection. 
1)  Inspections will be scheduled as received by the city. The development inspector must be notified 24 hours prior to any construction. 
2)  Upon request, the contractor shall furnish the development inspector with appropriate copies of the manufacturer's certification that the materials to be used meet the materials requirements of these specifications. The development inspector may reject any materials not meeting specifications or any faulty or damaged materials. Any materials so rejected must be removed from the project immediately and must be prominently marked so that they can be spotted on this or any other project. 
3)  Authorized representatives of the city, which may include appropriate county, state or federal agencies, shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
4)  The development inspector shall be notified a minimum of 24 hours before specific inspections are required so that the inspection time can be scheduled. 
5)  The development inspector may at any time direct that he be allowed to see any foundation, bedding, pipe work, manhole or other appurtenance. No connections to manholes, nor wyes, bends, service laterals or service stoppers shall be backfilled without the approval of the development inspector. 
6)  The contractor shall complete the project and shall have cleaned up the job site prior to requesting a final project inspection. The development inspector may terminate the inspection and direct further work at any time he feels that the project is not substantially complete and ready for inspection. 
7)  Manholes and lines shall be clean and free of all mud and debris at the time of inspection. The contractor shall furnish adequate personnel to open manholes and give whatever other assistance is needed by the development inspector. 
8)  The development inspector will normally visually inspect all manholes and lines for conformance to the specifications and will check the measurements shown on the "as-builts" for accuracy. The development inspector will perform low pressure air test to insure all lines are sealed. Any of the following tests may also be required at the discretion of the inspector and engineer: 
a.  Measurement of infiltration. 
b.  Smoke test. 
c.  Mandrel test. 
d.  Velocity test. 
e.  T.V. inspection. 
f.  Compaction test. 
g.  Ball test. 
9)  Any defects found by these tests must be corrected before construction of the project may proceed. 
10)  A punch list shall be issued for corrective work if needed. However, the development inspector shall not perform the contractor's work by finding all of his problems before the project is reasonably complete. 
11)  In no circumstances shall any buildings or plumbing fixtures be connected to the line until directed by the development inspector. 
R.  Tests. 
1)  All sanitary sewer lines, including both gravity sewers and force mains, shall be successfully tested before being eligible for acceptance by the city. Any of the following tests may be run at the discretion of the development inspector. All sewer mains shall also be subject to the material-specific tests listed in section 111.02.06, Materials, under each type of pipe material acceptable for sanitary sewers. 
2)  Measurement of infiltration. 
a.  The contractor shall furnish an adequate number of plugs of the proper size and acceptable weirs to measure infiltration into the system. 
b.  In no case will an infiltration rate greater than 100 gallons per inch diameter of pipe per mile of sewer per day be allowed. All visible or audible leaks must be dug up and repaired unless it is found to be in a joint and the city has authorized it to be repaired by chemical grouting. Any flow increase between two adjacent manholes must be corrected. 
c.  Measurements of flow shall be performed on any lines with a visible flow of water. 
3)  Low pressure air test. 
a.  After completing backfill of a sewer line section, conduct a low pressure air test of all pipe constructed, using methods and devices acceptable to the engineer. 
b.  Perform such tests using the following general procedures: 
i.  Temporarily plug line segment between two manholes using plugs having air tight fittings through which low pressure air can be introduced into the pipe segment being tested. 
ii.  Introduce low pressure air into the test pipe segment until the internal air pressure reaches 4.5 psig above ground water pressure, if any. 
iii.  Wait at least two minutes for air temperature in the test segment to stabilize while internal air pressure remains no less than 3.5 psig above ground water pressure. 
iv.  Bleed internal air pressure to exactly 3.5 psig above ground water pressure. 
v.  Accurately determine the elapsed time for internal pressure to drop to 2.5 psig above ground water pressure. 
vi.  The air test is acceptable if elapsed time is no less than shown by table 111-6. 
Table 111-6 Elapsed Time Requirements 

 
4)  Mandrel test. The mandrel test shall be performed in accordance with the following procedure for testing sewer pipe for maximum allowable deflection: 
a.  Completely flush the line making sure the pipe is clean of any mud or trash that would hinder the passage of the mandrel. 
b.  During the final flushing of the line, attach a floating block or ball to the end of the mandrel pull rope and float the rope through the line. (A nylon ski rope is recommended). 
c.  After the rope is threaded through the sewer line, connect the pull rope to the mandrel and place the mandrel in the entrance of the pipe. 
d.  Connect a second rope to the back of the mandrel. This will enable the mandrel to be retrieved if excessive deflection is encountered. 
e.  Remove all the slack in the pull rope by gently pulling the rope at the far manhole. After the slack has been removed, place a tape marker on the rope, close to the pipe opening where the mandrel will exit. If mandrel encounters excessive deflection, the marker will provide a means of measuring the travel distance of the mandrel so that the deflected area can be located. 
f.  Pull mandrel through the sewer line. 
g.  An increasing resistance to pull is an indication of excessive deflection. If this occurs, measure the distance from beginning marker on rope to manhole. Locate section and replace bedding or pipe if visual examination reveals damage. 
h.  Retest until acceptable. 
5)  Velocity test. 
a.  On lines installed at minimum grade and at any time the development inspector suspects that a problem with flow will occur, a velocity test of the suspected section may be required. 
b.  The contractor will add sufficient water at a point upstream of the suspect section. After flow has reached a steady state, dye or some type of floating object such as a ping pong ball or fishing float will be passed through the line. 
c.  The float will be timed as it passes through the section. Any line in which a velocity of two feet per second cannot be obtained will not be acceptable. 
6)  TV inspection. 
a.  All sewer lines shall be televised and a film of the inspection made before the final plat is signed and again before the final acceptance of the sewer lines. The films must be stored on DVD or other approved digital form. Prior to televising, the mains shall be flushed with water so that sags are apparent. 
b.  Any faulty pipe noted such as sagged pipes, broken pipes, bad joints, etc., will be dug up and will be corrected. Internal grouting to repair new lines will not be allowed. After correction of the discrepancies, the line will be re-televised. 
7)  Compaction test. 
a.  All trenches shall be subject to compaction testing after backfilling and shall meet the compaction requirements. 
b.  Any trench failing to meet compaction requirements shall be excavated and re-compacted and retested. This process shall continue until a passing test is achieved. 
c.  All costs of compaction testing shall be the responsibility of the contractor. 
8)  Ball test. The procedure for ball test is as follows: 
a.  Clean lines. 
b.  Place ball that is not more than ½ inch in diameter less than diameter of pipe to be tested in the end of section to be tested. For example: Ball not less than seven and one-half-inch in diameter for test of eight-inch diameter pipe. 
c.  Ball should travel freely through the section being tested. 
S.  Force main pressure and leakage test. 
1)  After all piping has been placed, the main shall be tested by the developer's contractor in the presence of the development inspector or his designated representative and tests shall be continued until all leaks have been made tight to the satisfaction of the city. The contractor shall furnish all necessary meters, pumps, gauges, bulkheads, and other materials and appliances necessary to conduct the test as herein required. Every precaution must be taken to valve-off or otherwise protect control equipment in or attached to the pipe line to prevent damage thereto. 
2)  Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If air release valves are not available at the high places, the contractor shall make the necessary taps at points of highest elevation before the test is made and insert plugs before the test has been completed. 
3)  Prior to the pressure test, pipe laid in trenches shall be backfilled adequately to secure the pipe during the test. Any observed leakage shall require corrective measures to pipe lines and/or joints to the satisfaction of the inspector. 
4)  The city will furnish the necessary water for the testing of the force mains; however, any water lost through breakage of lines or unnecessary or excessive flushing of lines will be charged to the contractor at the current residential rate. All lines shall be tested to a pressure of 200 PSI. Test duration shall be two hours. However, test pressure shall not exceed pipe, valve and/or thrust-restraint design pressures. Test pressure shall not vary by more than + five psi for the duration of the test which may require periodic pumping (in which case the added water will be counted as part of the leakage). The rate of leakage shall not exceed 15 gallons per 24 hours per inch diameter per mile of force main. (See table 111-7.) 
Table 111-7 Leakage Tabulation 

 
5)  Any section of the line not meeting the above test shall have the leaks found and corrected at once and re-tested until the leakage falls within the limits specified above. Leakage testing must be witnessed and approved by the city. 
T.  Acceptance. 
1)  The city may issue a letter certifying the completion of the sewer system when the contractor has completed the work items shown on the plans to the satisfaction of the City of Canton Engineering Department representative. 
2)  On projects contracted with the city, this letter shall signal the start of the 12-month warranty period which is required of the contractor. 
3)  On projects for private development, this letter will allow the developer to apply for a permit for the next phase of development. 
4)  In no case will the completion letter be considered as final acceptance of the project, nor will the contractor and developer be relieved of their responsibility to protect and maintain the system until final acceptance is given. A completion letter may be issued for sewer lines in a subdivision before offsite sewers are complete, but this will be noted in the letter and building permits will not be issued before completion of the entire sewers. 
5)  Upon completion of all work items in a private development including water and sewer lines, streets, storm drains and all other utilities, the subdivision inspection team will re-inspect all phases of the development. During this inspection, the sewers will be checked for any cut lines, shifted manholes, excessive infiltration, cleanliness of lines, adjustment of manholes, and any damage by other construction. 
6)  The curbs will be checked for markings of services and off street sewers will be checked for settling and erosion and for proper landscaping. 
7)  Upon satisfactory completion of any discrepancies noted during this inspection, the developer will begin the 12-month maintenance period required for all phases of the development. 
8)  At the end of 12-months, the subdivision inspection team will again re-inspect the entire development. When all discrepancies have been corrected, the city will begin perpetual maintenance of the sewerage system. 
U.  "As-built" drawings. At the completion of the sanitary sewer lines and when requesting the final project inspection, the contractor will furnish two sets of printed "as-built" plans and electronic data prepared in accordance with the following requirements: 
1)  The plans shall show all sewer information "as-built" in the field and any field changes made to the approved plans. In the event that the designer does not perform the field staking, the contractor must furnish certification from a licensed engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of all elevations, grades, manhole locations, and service locations. This certification and the certification of the engineer/land surveyor preparing the "as-builts" must be shown on the drawings. 
2)  "As-built" drawings shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Stationing of the sewer gravity and force main alignments, manholes and service laterals shall be required on the "as-builts." The "as-built" drawings shall meet the same requirements as the construction plans for review. 
V.  Grease traps and sand/oil traps. 
1)  The city has developed and implemented a sewage pretreatment program to limit the amount of grease, sand and oil entering the sewer system from restaurants, service stations, feed mills, car wash operations and any other establishment where such devices are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing sand, grease, oil, flammable wastes or other harmful ingredients. 
2)  The developer is required to meet with the city's pretreatment coordinator to determine the need for such a device. The city requires all such establishments to include a grease trap and/or a combination sand/oil trap as part of their sewage collection system, located between the business and the tap into the city's sewer line. 
3)  The standard details in chapter 112 include a typical design for these structures, but the size and dimensions of the trap and piping are dependent on the quantity of flow from the business. The design engineer will be responsible for sizing the structure and the piping and submitting design calculations with the plans. (Minimum size = 1,500 gallons) the city will review the design and calculations for minimum requirements prior to approving the construction plans. 
4)  The city will require that the traps be maintained and cleaned out on a regular basis at intervals determined by the city's policy. Sanitary sewage from the facility's toilets shall not route through the grease trap. 
W.  Dumpster pad requirements. 
1)  Dumpster pads shall be a minimum of five-inch thick reinforced concrete slabs on grade. The concrete for the pads shall be 4,000 psi concrete reinforced with six-inch by six-inch welded wire fabric. The dumpster pad shall be placed on a sub-base of 12 inches of graded aggregate base. The pad shall be sloped to drain to the back of the pad at a rate of one-quarter-inch per foot. Stop posts are to be placed in front of the pad drain so the dumpster or other objects will not block access to the drain. Dumpster pads shall have six-inch concrete retaining curbs on three sides. Where required or desired, a concrete block concealment wall may substitute for the retaining wall. 
2)  Dumpster pad drains for single or multiple dumpster installations shall be ZURN Model ZN 415 8" grate with solid hinged lid or alternate acceptable to the city. All drains shall have either a separate or a built in trap to prevent the escape of sewer gas. 
3)  All drain piping shall have a minimum diameter of four inches. Piping of four inches and greater under the slab or other paved areas shall be ductile iron pipe. Piping that is not under the slab or other paving and not greater than 36 inches in depth may be PVC. Clean-outs shall be installed at all changes in piping direction. Piping shall be sloped to drain by gravity. Minimum slope of four-inch pipe is 2.5 percent. 
4)  Dumpster pad drains shall be connected to and routed through the grease trap. City approval will be required for any connection varying from this requirement. 
X.  Industrial sewage pretreatment. 
1)  Wastewater connections from industrial processes shall not be made until the city's pretreatment coordinator has approved the deposit of the sewage into the system. Industrial wastewater may need to be pretreated on site before the city will accept the wastewater from certain processes. This need for pretreatment will be reviewed in the first stages of the preliminary plan review process. 
2)  Sanitary sewage from the facility's toilets shall not route through the pretreatment process. The city has developed a set of "sewer use and industrial wastewater control regulations." Developers are required to meet with the city's pretreatment coordinator to determine if the project will be required to meet the additional requirements specified in this document. 
3)  If the city determines that the sewage does need to be pretreated, the designer will be responsible for the design of the pretreatment process and related calculations. The design engineer will be responsible for designing the process and the piping and submitting the design and calculations with the plans. The city will review the design and calculations prior to approving the construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-0920-02, 9-20-2018) 
111.03.00 - Wastewater lift station specifications. 
111.03.01 - General. 
A.  The City of Canton reserves the right to make any changes in these requirements as may be deemed necessary. The design of the lift station shall be based on the future build out of the drainage basin upstream of the station. 
B.  Lift stations having a capacity less than 500 gpm (per pump) shall utilize two submersible centrifugal pumps each having a capacity of the design flow. 
C.  Lift stations having a capacity of 500 gpm or greater shall be reviewed on an individual basis and may have requirements differing from those outlined herein. 
D.  Grinder-type centrifugal pumps shall be used for pumps with a capacity of 100 gpm or less. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.02 - Submittals. 
A.  Submittal of construction plans shall include the following lift station information: 
1)  Capacity calculations. 
a.  Use one gpm capacity per house on residential developments of less than 200, except that the minimum pump capacity shall be 30 gpm. 
b.  System head calculations; tabulated and plotted on the pump curve. Include a plot of force main velocity. 
2)  Standard drawings, details and specifications sufficient to ascertain compliance with these regulations. 
3)  Wet well volume calculations and cycle time at design conditions. 
4)  Storage volume. 
a.  Calculations showing volume of storage available in the event of a power outage. 
b.  The storage zone shall be delineated on plan and profile drawings of the sewer system. (See standby power paragraph below) 
5)  Surge relief calculations showing whether surge control valves are necessary. 
6)  Buoyancy computations showing that structures are protected against flotation. 
B.  Shop drawings. After construction plan approval but before purchasing any lift station equipment, shop drawings shall be submitted including the following information: 
1)  Manufacturer's catalog sheets, performance curves, installation drawings, specifications and list of options for the specific pump that is offered for approval. 
2)  Similar catalog data for controls, valves, hatches, yard hydrants, precast wet well and other manufactured items. 
C.  Certification. 
1)  After installation and before placing the system into full operation, the work must be inspected by the developer's engineer who must then issue a certification to the city verifying that all work has been done in accordance with approved plans. 
2)  After acceptance of the work by the city engineer, a factory representative shall inspect and start up the system certifying rotation, capacity; amperage draw, lack of vibration and other standard check points. 
3)  This certification shall state the beginning date of the warranty and include a copy of the warranty. 
D.  Operations and maintenance manuals. 
1)  On or before the date of start-up, five sets of factory operations and maintenance manuals shall be delivered to the city. 
2)  These shall include the name of the contractor (or whoever's name the purchase was under), the serial numbers of pumps, telephone number and address for purchase of parts and detailed wiring schematics. 
E.  After construction is complete "as-built" drawings shall be furnished, as follows: 
1)  Provide electronic files in pdf format and in a "Cad" format that is compatible with the city's GIS system. 
2)  Provide four sets of full size prints and one set of half-size prints. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.03 - Pump restrictions. 
A.  Manufacturers meeting approved standards include Wilo, Flygt, and KSB. Others meeting these standards may be approved. The city reserves the right to review each application on an individual basis. 
B.  Lift stations with pumps up to 25 HP shall be supplied with a complete spare pump at the request of the city. A total rebuild kit, spare impeller and a complete set of manufacturer's recommended spare parts shall be required with all pump stations. 
C.  All submersible pumps shall be provided with stainless steel chains connected to each pump to facilitate the removal of the pump from the wet well for maintenance. 
D.  Pump operation shall be by pressure transducer and programmable controller with a 4-20MA output for SCADA. A spare pressure transducer and controller or a redundant level control system shall be supplied at the city's request. 
E.  A pump operation and elevation schedule shall be provided on the design drawings. This schedule shall call for pump operation elevations, ground water elevations and minimum liquid level in the wet well. The minimum levels of control are as follows: 
1)  Low level alarm. 
2)  Pumps off. 
3)  Lead pump on. 
4)  Lag pump on. 
5)  Lag-lag pump on (triplex and quadplex only). 
6)  Lag-lag-lag pump on (quadplex only). 
7)  High level alarm. 
F.  The pump horsepower, pump model and impeller size shall be clearly shown in bold print on the plans next to the drawing of the pumps and wet well. Future impeller cuts and pumping rates must be shown on the plans. 
G.  Upon installation, all pumps shall be checked by a manufacturer's representative for proper rotation, pumping capacity, amperage draw, lack of vibration, and other checks as may be deemed necessary to assure proper operation. All submersible pumps shall be pulled out of and reinstalled in the wet well in the presence of a representative of the city to assure proper clearances for easy removal of the pumps for maintenance. (Minimum two day start-up time for all lift stations.) 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.04 - Wet wells. 
A.  Wet wells shall be a minimum diameter of six feet. Rectangular wet wells shall be allowed upon approval of the city. Sizing of wet wells shall be as follows: 
1)  For lift station pumping, V min = T min × Q/4, where: 
a.  V min = The minimum effective wet well volume in gallons. This effective volume is the volume between the "pumps on" and the "pumps off" elevations. The "pumps on" elevation shall be a minimum of two feet below the invert of the inflow pipe. 
b.  T min = The minimum cycle time in minutes. All lift stations shall be sized based on six starts per hour or T min = ten minutes. Although most pumps are rated at much higher starts per hour, the size is set at six starts per hour due to the limited number of starts per hour allowed by the electrical hardware. Ideal cycle time is achieved when the pump capacity (Q) is two times the inflow. 
c.  Q = Pump capacity in GPM. 
B.  The wet well subgrade must have a minimum 95 percent Std. proctor and a 24-inch minimum thickness of #57 stone base. 
C.  All wastewater lift stations shall be designed so that the base elbow to the submersible pumps be mounted on a grout shelf approximately one foot above the base slab or to the pump manufacturer's recommendations. The base elbow shall be anchored to the base slab with four and three-quarters-inch stainless steel bolts — 5,000 pound pull-out each. Bolts shall be threaded into concrete a minimum of 8 inches. Anchor inserts shall be cast into the invert. Carbon steel bolts shall not be accepted. 
D.  All miscellaneous metals inside the wet well shall be stainless steel. Typical wet well pipe supports shall be constructed of stainless steel with stainless steel mounting hardware. Bracket shall be a minimum of three-inch by three-inch by five-sixteenths-inch. Pipe strap shall be minimum three-inch by five-sixteenths-inch with minimum ½-inch stainless steel bolts. Base of support shall be constructed of five-sixteenths-inch stainless steel plate mounted with three-quarters-inch stainless steel bolts. 
E.  A vent for the wet well shall be supplied constructed of ductile iron pipe. The vent shall be a minimum of six-inch diameter floor pipe, FL. x P.E., shall be cast in place and shall extend six inches up from the top of the wet well. A one foot long D.I.P. FL. x FL. spool shall be connected to the floor pipe and two six-inch diameter 90 degree bends shall be mounted to the spool to complete the vent pipe. A stainless steel bird screen shall be attached to the open end of the bend. 
F.  For wet wells larger in area than a ten-foot diameter well, squirrel cage type ventilator fans shall be supplied and shall have enough capacity to provide a minimum of six air changes per hour. The fan shall include mounting curb, bird screen and explosion-proof motor. Acceptable manufacturers are Penn, Acme and Twin City Blowers or alternate acceptable to the city. 
G.  A lift station wet well access ladder shall be provided. The ladder is to be constructed of materials not likely to be affected by the corrosive atmosphere of the wet well. The ladder is to be permanently mounted in the wet well to provide access for maintenance. Cast-in concrete steps will not be acceptable as an access ladder. The ladder steps shall be roughened to deter foot slippage. Minimum ladder width shall be 18 inches. Ladder shall be equipped with "safety-climb" and must be easily accessible. 
H.  Odor control equipment is required on all new sewer lift stations. Proposed odor control equipment is subject to review and approval by the city on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.05 - Valve vaults. 
A.  Lift station check valves, isolation valves, and surge control valves (if required) shall be housed in a concrete valve pit adjacent to the lift station. Check valves provided shall be slow-closing check valves. Floor drain (three-inch diameter minimum) for the valve pit shall be provided and connected to the wet well. A P-trap shall be installed in the floor drain to block sewer gases from the wet well. Valve pits must be large enough for easy maintenance operations, with two feet to three feet clearance on all sides and with bottom of piping two feet to two feet six inches off of the concrete floor. Valve pits shall be no deeper than eight feet deep. Valve pits must have easy access. A hatch opening must be placed directly over the steps so that the steps are not recessed back away from the hatch opening. 
B.  Acceptable manufacturers are as follows: 
1)  Check valves. 
a.  Golden-Anderson. 
b.  Crispin. 
c.  Alternate acceptable to the city. 
2)  Isolation valves. 
a.  Dezurik. 
b.  Val-Matic. 
c.  M&H. 
d.  Alternate acceptable to the city. 
3)  Surge relief valves. 
a.  Golden-Anderson. 
b.  Alternate acceptable to the city. 
4)  Air release valves. 
a.  Hawle. 
b.  Alternate acceptable to the city. 
C.  The discharge pipe inside the check valve vault shall be tapped for a discharge pressure gauge. The gauge shall be Ashcroft Type 1009 or alternate acceptable to the city, liquid-filled, three and one-half-inch dial, zero to 200 psi range with a diaphragm seal suitable for wastewater service. An isolation valve or corporation stop shall be installed on the tap to allow removal of the gage. 
D.  All pipes in the valve vault shall be supported by either flanged pipe supports or concrete pier pipe supports. All piping in the valve vault shall be restrained using stainless steel threaded rod. 
E.  A quarter turn plug valve shall be installed on the force main just outside the valve vault but within the chain linked fenced area of the lift station. Valve must be accessible by valve key. Valve port must be 100 percent of pipe diameter. Manufacturers shall be DeZurik 100 percent port eccentric (PEF), Val-Matic model 5600R 100 percent ported eccentric, or alternate acceptable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.06 - Pump control panel. 
A.  For lift stations less than 100 HP, controls and electrical components shall be housed incompletely weather proof stainless steel metal cabinets (NEMA 4X stainless steel). The cabinets shall be provided with condensate heaters, spare fuses and spare bulbs of each type that is used in the electrical/control system. Soft start starters shall be acceptable in NEMA 3R ventilated or air-cooled panels. 
B.  For lift stations that are 100 HP or larger, an electrical building shall be provided to house the electrical distribution equipment. NEMA 1A enclosures shall be used in buildings. The buildings must be provided with a heat pump for climate control within the building. 
C.  The pump motor starters shall be provided by the pump manufacturer. Starters for motors less than 20 horsepower shall be full voltage, non-reversing, NEMA rated. Starters for 20 horsepower and larger motors shall be Square D Altistart, Allen Bradley, Solid State Reduced Voltage or alternate acceptable to the city. 
D.  The developer shall furnish a pump controller with all necessary controls including, but not limited to, the following: 
1)  Provide starters for each pump. 
2)  HOA switches. 
3)  Pilot lights. 
4)  Power indicator lights. 
5)  Other lights as required. 
6)  Alarm silence push button. 
7)  Alarm reset button. 
8)  Elapsed time indicators. 
9)  Control transformers — 480-volt to 120-volt step downs shall not be mounted inside the control panel for heat control purposes. 
10)  Strip heater and thermostat. 
11)  Alarm horn and wiring — 120-volt. 
12)  NEMA 4x red alarm light and wiring — 120-volt. 
13)  Phase under voltage monitor with time delay. 
14)  Moisture sensing seal failure relays with indicator. 
15)  Provide alarm outputs for high water alarms and pump trouble for each pump. Coordinate with SCADA unit manufacturer for types of outputs required. Note: the pump trouble outputs are to have no time delay added. 
16)  Provide relays for phase failure and phase unbalance protection. 
17)  Provide lag pump on delay timer relay, zero to 60 seconds for each pump, such that the pumps cannot start at the same time. 
18)  Provide pump failure alarm output for each motor to include motor overload, motor thermal cutout and leak seal failure conditions. 
19)  Only the high level and low level alarms are to be wired to the alarm horn and red light. No pump failures shall be wired to the horn and light circuit. 
20)  Breakers for security lighting, generator block heater, and battery charger. Add two spare 120-volt breakers. 
21)  Provide terminal blocks for all connections into and out of the panel. 
E.  Phase converters will not be used on lift station electrical power supply. Lift station power shall be 240 VAC/3 phase or 480 VAC/3 phase and control circuits shall be 120 VAC/1 phase. 
F.  All 480 volt circuit breakers in the pump control panel shall be rated a minimum of 14 KAIC and all 240 volt and 120 volt circuit breakers shall be rated a minimum of 10 KAIC. 
G.  All wiring shall be done in rigid galvanized steel conduit. Conduit installed below grade shall be painted with two coats of asphaltum paint. Schedule 40 PVC conduit may be used for conduit runs underground. All PVC conduit shall be installed in concrete duct banks per NEC. Concrete ducts shall be poured monolithically with steel reinforcement as necessary. 
H.  A main circuit breaker shall be installed to disconnect power to the entire station. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.07 - SCADA Requirements. 
A.  The control panel manufacturer shall coordinate with the pump manufacturer and the generator manufacturer, such that the SCADA system can be installed into the control panel. The control panel shall be sized such that there is adequate space for this equipment. The control panel manufacturer shall coordinate the receipt and installation of the SCADA equipment in the control panel. Make all connections between the SCADA equipment and the pump controls as required by the SCADA manufacturer. 
B.  Each lift station shall be provided with a remote terminal unit (RTU) to communicate with the city's SCADA System as provided by Dexter Fortson Associates, Inc. Each RTU at a minimum will provide the following monitoring/control points: 
1)  Each phase voltage, current, and power factor for each pump in the station. 
2)  Station voltage phase to phase and phase to neutral and current in each phase at the line side of the main disconnect switch and at the emergency power input to the ATS. 
3)  Manual on/off control for each pump from a remote signal to the RTU. 
4)  Status of each pump - on/off. 
5)  Pump trouble alarm for each pump with 20-second time delay. 
6)  Station operation — simplex, duplex, triplex or quadplex. 
7)  Station on normal power. 
8)  Station on emergency power. 
9)  Generator running. 
10)  Generator alarm. 
11)  Maintenance shutdown. 
12)  SCADA control off. 
13)  Low wet well alarm. 
14)  High wet well alarm. 
15)  Manual off/on. 
16)  Provide alternator for the operation of pumps (triplex and quadplex only). 
17)  ATS open (normal power) and closed (emergency power) indication. 
18)  Control voltage alarm. 
19)  Status of control voltage to the RTU. 
C.  Line power shall be provided with a quick disconnect and a transient voltage surge suppressor at the main service entrance. Disconnects shall utilize a solid state circuit breaker. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.08 - Site requirements. 
A.  Flooding. 
1)  Lift stations shall remain fully operational and accessible during the 25-year flood. 
2)  All electrical controls shall be above the 100-year flood level. 
3)  All motors and mechanical equipment shall be protected against physical damage from the 100-year flood. 
B.  Access road. 
1)  Access roads to any lift station shall be paved. 
2)  Roads shall have a minimum of eight inches of graded aggregate base topped with a minimum of tow inches of asphalt Type "B" or six inches of reinforced concrete with control joints every ten feet. 
3)  Roads shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide. 
4)  A paved area inside the fencing shall be provided to facilitate service vehicle access to the pumping station wet well and other facilities. 
5)  A paved turn around area shall be provided at each pumping station. 
6)  All paved areas shall be contiguous with the paved access driveway. 
C.  Ownership. 
1)  Both the lift station site and the access road right-of-way shall have ownership dedicated to the city, and this shall be indicated on the subdivision plat. 
2)  The dedicated space for the lift station shall include sufficient space for parking of two trucks, plus turn-around, plus slope maintenance. 
3)  The dedicated width on road right-of-way shall be 30 feet minimum. 
D.  Fencing. 
1)  Lift station sites shall be fenced with a minimum of six-foot high chain link fencing topped with three strands of barbed wire. 
2)  Access gates shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width. 
E.  Water supply. 
1)  A metered water supply line (three-quarter-inch minimum size) shall be installed to the site, and a freeze-proof yard hydrant located near the wet well. 
2)  The hydrant shall be equipped with a suitable backflow preventer (Watts No. NF8 or approved equal). 
F.  Lighting. 
1)  All lift stations shall be provided with security lighting. 
2)  Security light must be mounted on a hinged pole with winch. Standard pole shall be a galvanized steel hinged square pole, General Electric No. ASHS-(XX)-2T-4.011 GV, 16 to 20 feet in height, with a General Electric No. M180 Winch/Chain and a No. RBSU2H6 GV Bracket. The security light attached to the top of the pole shall be a General Electric No. M2RR-07-S-1-H-2-LN-PEC1TL (Typ. for 2 lights) or alternate acceptable to the city. 
G.  Screening. Where natural screening is not present to screen the site from view of residences, special plantings shall be installed to screen the site. 
H.  Ground covers. All ground areas inside the fence and extending four feet beyond the fence shall be treated with a herbicide and covered with a geotextile fabric, followed with a four-inch thick layer of #57 stone. The geotextile fabric shall be a non-woven polypropylene weighing eight oz./S.Y. with a minimum burst strength of 250 psi, such as Amoco Type 4553 or equal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.09 - Force mains. 
A.  The force main shall be sized for a minimum velocity of two and one-half feet per second with one pump operating. 
B.  Force mains of four-inch diameter or larger shall be ductile iron pipe. Smaller force mains may be used only with grinder pumps and shall be PVC pipe, SDR-21 with gasket joints. PVC pipe shall not be exposed to sunlight or freezing temperatures. Buried PVC pipe shall be marked continuously with metallized locator tape. 
C.  The force main profile shall slope continuously upward where practical. If high points occur where air could be trapped in the pipe, then an air release valve (of the type made for sewage applications) will be installed (in a manhole) at the high points. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.10 - Warranty. 
A.  Regardless of the manufacturer's warranty terms, the developer will be responsible for all repairs necessary within 18 months from the date the station is completed and approved by the city. 
B.  The developer will be required to furnish such assurances to the city as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure prompt action. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.11 - Emergency power requirements. 
A.  The minimum requirement for the provision of emergency power for lift stations shall be that each station shall be provided with an emergency generator capable of starting and running the appropriate number of pumps necessary to meet and/or exceed the maximum daily demand of the pump station and other ancillary devices. The generator shall be diesel powered with an automatic transfer switch (ATS) and provisions for an automatic exercise cycle. The contractor shall set the ATS transfer delay from utility to generator at a 30 second delay. 
B.  The generator set shall be manufactured by Kohler, Cummins Onan, Katolight, Caterpillar or alternate acceptable to the city. 
C.  The generator pad thickness shall be a minimum of 12 inches installed such that the bottom of the pad is six inches below grade and the top of the pad is six inches above grade. 
D.  The person responsible for sizing the KW rating of the standby generator must supply a letter to the developer, contractor and city, stating that they guarantee the unit will operate the lift station pumps and other electrical demands with no greater than a 20 percent voltage dip. This letter must be signed and delivered before the day of scheduled start up. 
E.  This specification defines the requirements for an emergency or standby electric generator set: 
1)  The generator set shall consist of an engine directly coupled to an electric generator, together with the necessary controls and accessories to provide electric power for the duration of any failure of the normal power supply. 
2)  The generator set shall have the following characteristics: 
a.  Voltage: 480 VAC or 230 VAC. 
b.  Phase: 3. 
c.  Connection: Y. 
d.  Wire: 4. 
e.  Hertz: 60. 
f.  Power Factor: 0.8. 
F.  The generator set shall be capable of starting and running the necessary loads without exceeding the maximum voltage and frequency variations specified herein, or the maximum temperature limitations of the engine and generator. 
G.  The horsepower rating of the engine shall take into account the generator efficiency and all parasitic losses such as fan, battery charger, etc. The generator set shall be capable of producing the required KW (without overload) for the duration of the power outage (standby rating), under the following ambient conditions: 
1)  Altitude, feet 1,000. 
2)  Ambient temperature range, zero degrees to one hundred degrees Fahrenheit. 
3)  Humidity at maximum ambient temperature, 80 percent. 
H.  The following engine protective devices shall be provided, and an indicating light shall be supplied for use with each device specified: 
1)  Alarm system for high water temperature. 
2)  Alarm system for low oil pressure. 
3)  Automatic engine shutdown for high water temperature. 
4)  Automatic engine shutdown for low oil pressure. 
5)  Alarm and shutdown system for high water temperature. 
6)  Alarm and shutdown system for low oil pressure. 
7)  Engine over-speed automatic shutdown device. 
8)  Engine failed to start indicator light (over-crank). 
9)  Alarm for low coolant level. 
10)  A shunt trip and under-voltage trip shall be incorporated to cause the circuit breaker to open simultaneously with any automatic shutdown of the engine. 
I.  A dual wall sub-base fuel tank shall be supplied with the generator set, which will allow the generator to operate continuously under pump load for 72 hours, but shall not exceed 1,000 U.S. gallons. The following requirements shall be met: 
1)  The tank shall be constructed of aluminized steel with all access ports and vents located on the top horizontal surface. 
2)  The tank shall be pressure and load tested according to U.L. 142 and shall be U.L. listed. 
3)  The tank shall be capable of supporting the weight of the generator, isolator, and enclosure, and shall have four lifting eyes capable of lifting the entire generator set package. 
4)  Low level and leak detector float switches shall be provided, both wired to control panel alarm lights, and a tank mounted fuel gauge. 
5)  The generator fuel storage tank shall be completely filled with fuel by the developer before start-up of the lift station and topped off after start-up. 
J.  A generator main circuit breaker shall be provided. The interrupting capability shall be greater than the generator short circuit capability, but not less than 30,000 symmetrical amperes at 480 volts. The breaker continuous current trip rating shall be selected to provide overload protection for the generator. Main circuit breaker shall have GFCI protection per NEC. The breaker shall be provided with a shunt trip device. The generator starting circuit battery system will be used as the power source for the shunt trip circuit. The shunt trip coil voltage shall be suitable for use on the starting circuit. The breaker shall include three normally open and three normally closed auxiliary contacts. The breaker shall be a Square D Type MA, or alternate as manufactured by General Electric, Merlin Gerin, Eaton/Cutler-Hammer or alternate acceptable to the city. 
K.  Automatic starting and stopping controls shall be furnished to start the engine automatically when the normal electric power fails or falls below specific limits and to stop the engine automatically after the normal power supply resumes. The signal for starting or stopping the engine shall be from an external auxiliary contact. The controls shall be capable of operating at 50 percent of normal DC system supplied voltage. 
L.  It shall be possible to start the engine manually and run it unloaded by a manual pushbutton on the control cabinet that causes the engine to start, run and stop through the automatic start and stop controls. 
M.  The following engine and generator instruments and controls shall be furnished and installed: 
1)  AC ammeter. 
2)  AC voltmeter. 
3)  Voltage adjusting rheostat. 
4)  Battery voltage meter. 
5)  Governor speed adjusting control. 
6)  Water temperature gauge. 
7)  Oil pressure gauge. 
8)  Manual start/stop control. 
9)  Manual-off-auto mode switch. 
10)  Voltmeter/ammeter phase selector switch. 
11)  Generator "run" status dry contacts (SCADA USE). 
12)  Common alarm dry contacts (SCADA USE). 
13)  Elapsed time meter. 
14)  Panel lights. 
15)  Indicator lights for engine alarm. 
16)  All wiring and interconnections shall be in accordance with commercial electrical standards. 
N.  Weatherproof, sound attenuating, outdoor enclosure. 14-gauge steel construction. Includes two single access doors per side. Painted standard alkyd enamel finish. The city shall make the determination if the enclosure shall be sound attenuated for a commercial installation or residential installation. The city shall also make the determination as to the dBA level of attenuation required as each case may be unique. Sixty-five dBA at seven meters will be considered the standard starting point for attenuation. Exhaust roof dress cap, silencer mounting brackets, exhaust system assembly including the above mentioned silencer designed to go inside the enclosure with flex, elbow and rain cap. Painted standard alkyd enamel finish. Oil and water drains are extended to the exterior of the enclosure, each with identifying nameplate. 
1)  The enclosure shall be provided with the following electrical accessories: 
a.  Junction boxes for battery charger and jacket water heater connection. 
b.  Connection for low alarm, high alarm, leak alarm, and fuel fill pump switch. 
O.  An engine block heater shall be provided to keep the engine coolant at a temperature of 85 degrees Fahrenheit with the ambient temperature. The heater shall be suitable for operation at 120 volts ac, single phase. External only; no internal elements shall be inside the engine. 
P.  All generators sitting on fuel tanks must have a painted steel or aluminum "catwalk" all the way around the unit for service. 
Q.  The system supplier shall furnish three sets of operating, maintenance and parts manuals covering all components for the generator set. The supplier shall also instruct the city in operation and maintenance of the unit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.03.12 - Generator transfer switch. 
A.  The automatic transfer switch shall be manufactured by Kohler, ASCO, Zenith or alternate acceptable to the city. 
B.  The transfer switch shall be rated for total normal and emergency system transfer for use on a 480 or 230 VAC, 3 phase, four-wire system. 
C.  Each automatic transfer switch shall consist of a power transfer module and a control module, interconnected to provide complete automatic operation. The automatic transfer switch shall be mechanically held and electrically operated by a single-solenoid mechanism energized from the source to which the load is to be transferred. The switch shall be rated for continuous duty and be inherently double throw. The switch shall be mechanically interlocked to ensure only one of two possible positions, normal and emergency. 
D.  The automatic transfer switch shall conform to the requirements of NEMA Standard ICS-2-447 and Underwriters' Laboratories UL-1008. 
E.  The following time delays shall be provided: 
1)  A time delay to override momentary normal source outages. The time delay shall be field adjustable from one-half to six seconds and factory set at one second. 
2)  A time delay on retransfer to normal source. The time delay shall be automatically bypassed if the emergency source fails and normal source is available. The time delay shall be field adjustable from zero to 30 minutes and factory set at five minutes. 
3)  An unloaded running time delay for emergency generator cool down. The time delay shall be field adjustable from zero to five minutes and factory set at five minutes. 
4)  A time delay on transfer to emergency. The time delay shall be field adjustable from zero to five minutes for controlled timing of load transfer to emergency, and factory set at zero. 
F.  The following features and accessories shall be provided: 
1)  Independent single phase voltage and frequency sensing of emergency source. The pickup voltage shall be adjustable from 85 percent to 100 percent of nominal. Pickup frequency shall be adjustable from 90 percent to 100 percent of nominal. Transfer to emergency upon normal source failure when emergency source voltage is 90 percent or more of nominal and frequency is 95 percent or more of nominal. 
2)  A contact that closes when normal source fails and one that opens when normal source fails, rated ten amps, 120 volts AC. 
3)  A white signal light to indicate when the automatic transfer switch is connected to the normal source. A yellow signal light to indicate when the automatic transfer switch is connected to the emergency source. 
4)  Two auxiliary contacts that are closed when the automatic transfer switch is connected to normal and two auxiliary contacts that are closed when the automatic transfer switch is connected to emergency. Rated ten amps, 120 volts, 60 Hz. AC. 
5)  A test switch to momentarily simulate normal source failure. 
6)  Reset switch to manually bypass time delay on retransfer to normal. 
7)  A permissive start/stop feature to provide for start/stop of the generator from a remote site regardless of the presence of normal utility power. 
G.  The automatic transfer switch shall be mounted in a NEMA 4X for outdoor installations or a NEMA 1A for indoor non-ventilated installations. 
H.  Copies of installation drawings and complete wiring diagrams and interconnections shall be furnished to the city. 
I.  Each automatic transfer switch shall be furnished with three sets of the operator's manual providing installation and operating instructions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.04.00 - Wastewater treatment facilities. 
111.04.01 - General. 
A.  All sanitary sewer treatment facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest edition of "Rule and Regulations for Water Quality Control" from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division and the requirements of "The Ten States Standards." Where requirements conflict, the more restrictive of the requirements shall govern. 
B.  Representatives from the City of Canton Engineering Department shall have the right to review and modify the design of the treatment facility if the modifications are in the best interest of the city. Any revisions to the design made during construction must be approved by the city. 
C.  All reports, studies, plans and specifications submitted to the city must carry the seal of a professional engineer competent in the design of wastewater treatment facilities in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.04.02 - Construction. 
A.  The development inspector shall have the right to review and inspect all construction and may reject any work that does not meet the standards of the city. 
B.  After completion of construction the city will provisionally accept the project for operation subject to the requirements of these specifications. 
C.  The developer shall post a maintenance bond on the facility for an 18-month period after completion and acceptance of the facility by the city. The developer shall also post a payment bond on the facility for all subcontractors and material supplier work. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.04.03 - Operation maintenance. 
A.  The developer shall submit six copies of an EPD approved operation and maintenance manual for the facility to the city. 
B.  It shall be the developer's obligation to provide all maintenance for an 18-month period after acceptance of the project by the city. At the end of the 18-month maintenance period, the development inspector shall inspect the facility and upon correction by the developer of all deficiencies noted, the city will accept the facility for operation. 
C.  The developer shall post a maintenance bond on the facility for an 18-month period after completion and acceptance of the facility by the city. The developer shall also post a payment bond on the facility for all subcontractors and material supplier work. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
111.04.04 - Use of existing facilities. 
If the developer wishes the city to consider allowing the relocation of an existing wastewater treatment facility, the following applies: 
A.  All the rules outlined in other sections of these specifications apply. 
B.  The consultant of the city will inspect the facility that is proposed to be relocated and prepare a deficiency list which must be corrected by the developer prior to acceptance by the city. 
C.  All of the costs incurred by the city for the consultant's time will be borne by the developer as will the cost of correcting deficiencies noted in paragraph B. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 112 - STANDARD DETAILS 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 13 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 113 pulled from 2010 Canton Development Impact Fee Ordinance. 

113.01.00 - Authority, applicability and administration. 
113.01.01 - Authority. 
Chapter 113 of this UDC has been prepared in accordance with the authority provided by article 9, section 2, paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.01.02 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of Canton, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this chapter. 
B.  This chapter shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Canton, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.01.03 - Administration. 
A.  As used in this chapter, "administrator" means the City Manager of Canton, Georgia, or the city manager's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.02.00 - Findings, purpose and intent. 
113.02.01 - Findings. 
The city council finds and declares: 
A.  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Canton; 
B.  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
C.  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.02.02 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
B.  It is also the purpose of this chapter to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Canton and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.02.03 - Intent. 
Chapter 113 is intended to implement and be consistent with the Canton Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.); and the applicable minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning and the development impact fee compliance requirements, both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.03.00 - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
113.03.01 - Construction not subject to impact fees. 
The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this UDC, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
A.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this UDC that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
B.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
C.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
D.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence and operation prior to the effective date of the original Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Canton, Georgia. 
E.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
F.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
G.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.03.02 - Grandfathered projects. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the original Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Canton, Georgia shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
B.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of the original Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Canton, Georgia may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this chapter, provided that: 
1)  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Canton, Georgia shall be or have been paid in full; and 
2)  Said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within 180 days, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.03.03 - Method of calculation. 
A.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and which: 
1)  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
2)  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
C.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this chapter shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Canton, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
D.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
E.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.04.00 - Fee assessment and payment. 
113.04.01 - Fee schedule. 
A.  The current City of Canton Maximum Allowable Impact Fee Schedule ("fee schedule"), as adopted by the city council, is available in the community development department. 
B.  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule for a property located inside of Canton, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Canton, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
D.  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
1)  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
2)  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
3)  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in the adopted fee schedule, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the city's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the city council. 
4)  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.04.02 - Timing of assessment and payment. 
A.  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. 
B.  All development impact fees shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
C.  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
D.  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined in this UDC), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.04.03 - Individual assessment determinations. 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
A.  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the adopted fee schedule. 
B.  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
1)  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or 
2)  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Canton or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
3)  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
C.  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this chapter. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
D.  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Canton, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.04.04 - Fee certification. 
Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certification of the current development impact fee schedule (as adopted by city council and available in the community development department) or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.05.00 - Exemptions. 
113.05.01 - Exemption policy. 
The City of Canton recognizes that certain office, retail trade and industrial development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the city's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. To encourage such development projects, the city council may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such development projects upon either the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to City of Canton, in accordance with adopted exemption criteria. It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.05.02 - Process for exemption approval. 
An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: 
A.  Application for exemption approval must be made by the building permit applicant to the administrator. A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made, or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and payment of impact fees have been paid. 
B.  Documentation must be provided to the administrator that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted by the city. This documentation constitutes the application for exemption. 
C.  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted by the city and is complete. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
D.  The city council shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the standards and procedures contained in the exemption criteria adopted by the city council. If action by the city council is required, the application for exemption shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.06.00 - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
113.06.01 - Maintenance of funds. 
A.  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
B.  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
C.  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.06.02 - Expenditures; restrictions. 
A.  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
B.  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the following shall be considered general revenue of Canton, and may be expended accordingly: 
1)  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
2)  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Canton for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and 
3)  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of this chapter, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.06.03 - Annual report. 
A.  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the city council as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
B.  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.07.00 - Credits. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.07.01 - Credits; restrictions. 
A.  Except as provided in paragraph B below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of the original Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Canton, Georgia. 
B.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of the original Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Canton, Georgia for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this UDC, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Canton, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
C.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.07.02 - Granting of credits. 
A.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
1)  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan; 
2)  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and 
3)  The city council shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
B.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private agreement executed under the provisions of section 113.09.00 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.07.03 - Guidelines for credit valuation. 
Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
A.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
B.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
C.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Canton, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
D.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
E.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the city council in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.07.04 - Credits; application. 
A.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
B.  The administrator, in his or her reasonable discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
C.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.07.05 - Credits; abandoned building permits. 
In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the city, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.08.00 - Refunds. 
113.08.01 - Eligibility for a refund. 
A.  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
1)  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
2)  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
B.  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.08.02 - Notice of entitlement to a refund. 
When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Canton within 30 days after the expiration of the six year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.08.03 - Filing a request for a refund. 
All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.08.04 - Payment of refunds. 
A.  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
B.  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
C.  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Canton for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.09.00 - Private contractual agreements. 
113.09.01 - Private agreements; authorized. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
A.  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan; and 
B.  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.09.02 - Private agreements; provisions. 
A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
A.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the city to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this UDC. 
B.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
C.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this UDC, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.09.03 - Private agreements; procedure. 
A.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the city council. 
B.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the City Council of Canton, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.10.00 - Periodic review and amendments. 
113.10.01 - Chapter amendments. 
A.  This chapter may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. Amendments shall be made in accordance with chapter 115 of this UDC. 
B.  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under section 5.01.3.c are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the city council when this chapter is subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.10.02 - Capital improvements element periodic review. 
A.  Update. At least once each year, the city council shall review and may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the Atlanta Regional Commission for their review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
B.  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the city council may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
1)  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
2)  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
3)  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
4)  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.10.03 - Continuation of validity. 
Failure of the city council to undertake a periodic review of the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.11.00 - Administrative appeals. 
113.11.01 - Eligibility to file an appeal. 
Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the city or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.11.02 - Appeals process. 
A.  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
B.  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
1)  The name and address of the appellant; 
2)  The location of the affected property; 
3)  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken); 
C.  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
D.  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council within 30 days of receipt by the appellant of the administrator's decision. Delivery by hand or certified mail to, or posting upon the property, at the address given by the appellant in the application for relief shall constitute "receipt by the appellant" under this provision. 
E.  The city council shall thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days provided that at least two weeks written notice thereof can be given to the appellant. The city council shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing, but in no case more than 15 days following the hearing, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to present evidence to the city council and may be represented by an attorney. The city council may consider both sworn and unsworn evidence in considering the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.11.03 - Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
A.  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
B.  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be stopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.12.00 - Enforcement and penalties. 
113.12.01 - Enforcement authority. 
A.  The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
B.  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this UDC and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the administrator in his or her reasonable determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this UDC shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. 
C.  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals. If the provisions of this chapter have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.12.02 - Violations. 
A.  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter shall constitute an actionable violation. 
B.  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
C.  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. 
D.  A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the Canton Code of Ordinances. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the city council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this chapter, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this chapter and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.13.00 - Repealer and severability. 
113.13.01 - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.13.02 - Severability. 
If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the chapter as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
113.13.03 - Incorporation by reference of Georgia Law. 
It is the intent of the city council that this chapter comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). To the extent that any provision of this chapter in the Canton UDC is inconsistent with the provisions of said O.C.G.A. ch. 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this Chapter in the Canton UDC is silent as to any provision of said O.C.G.A. ch. 36-71 that is otherwise made mandatory by said O.C.G.A. ch. 36-71, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 2, 8-21-2014) 
Chapter 114 - WATER AND WASTEWATER 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This chapter regulates the use of the city water and wastewater systems. 
(b)  Compliance with state and federal water pollution control laws. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act, as amended, and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). 
(c)  The federally mandated objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the city wastewater system. 
(d)  This chapter: 
(1)  Provides for the regulation of persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the city wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement activities, 
(2)  Requires user reporting, 
(3)  Assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, 
(4)  Provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the operation and maintenance of the water and wastewater systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the residents of the city and to all users of the city water and wastewater systems including persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city water and wastewater systems. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager or his/her designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the Act means The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the Director of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
Authorized representative of the user : 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager In accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: A general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the piping of a building which collects wastewater inside the walls of the building and conveys it to outside the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection." This connection consists of: The service line which is the owners responsibility from the building or structure to the right-of-way or property line. At this point, the service line or "lateral" becomes the city's responsibility as it continues from this point to the sanitary sewer trunk line. 
City means the City of Canton, Georgia. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
County means Cherokee County. 
City manager means individual designated by the mayor and council, city manager is responsible for general supervision of all city departments including the city water and wastewater systems. Whenever "city manager" is referred to in this chapter, it shall mean the city manager or his/her designee. 
Customer means every person, firm, association, corporation, government agency, or similar organization who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using water or wastewater connections with, or sewer taps to the city wastewater system and in obtaining, having or using water or other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater through said system. The term customer shall also include illicit users of the water or wastewater systems. 
Composite means the make-up of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes. 
Department manager means the person designated by the city manager as manager of the city water and wastewater systems. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
Domestic wastewater means that wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, washing machines, dishwashers, sinks, showers and bathtubs from normal household usage. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent means the discharge flow of a treatment facility. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with 307 of the Act. 
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Federal Pretreatment Standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
Floatable oil and grease means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by flotation from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility or sand and oil/grease interceptor. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grit means matter consisting of sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that has settling velocities or specific gravities greater than those of organic putrescible solids normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Health department means the Cherokee County Board of Health. 
High strength wastewater means wastewater which contains quantities of specified constituents which exceed the quantities normally encountered in domestic wastewater (see section 114-280). 
High strength wastewater surcharge means the charge made in excess of the normal sewer service charge for all high strength wastewater. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
House connection means the water line or wastewater line extending from the house or building, to the property line or point of connection to the service lateral. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial customers means persons who, on account of their particular type of business, discharge into the city sanitary sewer or sewerage system unusual amount or unusual type of sewage which present special problems in sewage disposal and sewage treatment. 
Industrial user or contributor means an industry which discharges waste waters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the wastewater system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Inflow means water that flows into the wastewater system from the surface, streams, roof drains, down spouts or other such source. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Main means the pipe, conduit or facility which conveys utility service to individual services or to other mains. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Meter means any device used to measure service rendered to a customer by the city. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit means a permit issued pursuant to 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, lakes or other bodies of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated In accordance with that, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program; 
b.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
c.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
d.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Nondomestic user means any user of the city wastewater system who discharges wastewater into the wastewater system from a structure other than a residential unit. 
Nondomestic wastewater means the wastewater generated from nondomestic users as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Ordinance or city water and wastewater ordinance means Canton Code §§ 114-1 through 114-531. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the molar concentration of hydrogen ions in solution. 
Pit privy means shored, vertical pit in the earth used for the disposal of human or animal wastes. 
Point of delivery means where the service pipe is connected to the city's main. For water systems, the point of delivery is the outlet connection of the meter for metered service or the point at which the city's piping connects with the customer's piping. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pollution means the man-made or man-induced detrimental alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water or soil, or the products which create or cause such alteration. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Pretreatment coordinator means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the industrial pretreatment program. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on a nondomestic user. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater treatment system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 114-267 of this chapter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility, in this case, the City of Canton. 
Sanitary sewer or sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Service connection means the point of connection of the customer's piping with the meter or service pipe owned by the city. 
Service lateral means the pipe between the utility's mains and the point of delivery and shall include all of the pipe, fittings and valves necessary to make the connection excluding the meter. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Sewer development fee means a fee assessed to new users of the city wastewater system to provide the funds necessary to renew, extend and/or improve the system where said renewals, extensions and/or improvements are necessitated by the reduced available wastewater system capacity caused by the new users' demands. 
Shall and will is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or a user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(2)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (1) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this chapter. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
Standard methods means those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, a copy of which is on file in the office of the superintendent. 
Storm drain sometimes termed storm sewer, it shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Surcharge means a separate charge by the city for the handling and treatment of high strength wastewater. 
Suspended solids or total suspended solids or TSS means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as non-filterable residue. 
Toxic means constituents of wastes which adversely affect the organisms involved in wastewater treatment. 
Unpolluted water means water or quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. 
User means any person who consumes water from the city water system or who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city wastewater system. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater system or city wastewater system means the total wastewater collection and disposal facilities owned and operated by the city. Also, the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Water meter means those devices, approved by the city for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water consumed by a premise or person. 
Water system or city water system means the total water distribution facilities owned and operated by the city. Also, the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-4. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-5. - Application for service. 
(a)  A formal application for either original or additional utility service must be made and be approved by the city before connection or meter installation orders will be issued and work performed. Provided however, that under no circumstances shall any utility service be granted to any person who has any outstanding utility debt to the city. 
(b)  Each prospective customer desiring any utility service shall be required to sign a standard form of contract before service is supplied. If, for any reason, a customer, after signing a contract for utility service, does not take the service by reason of not occupying the premises or otherwise, he shall reimburse the city for the expense incurred by reason of its endeavor to furnish said service. The expense will normally be the water and/or sewer tap fee or other similar connection charge. 
(c)  The receipt of a prospective customer's application for utility service, regardless of whether or not accompanied by a deposit, shall not obligate the city to render the service applied for. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and general practice, the liability of the city to the applicant for such service shall be limited to the return of any deposit made by such applicant. 
(d)  The city shall not be obligated to render services to any person within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city if facilities, such as water or sewer lines, are not available near that person's existing or proposed location. 
(e)  The city shall not be obligated to render services to any person outside the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. The city may at its discretion, in consultation with the county government or county water and sewer authority, render services to persons outside the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-6. - Interruption of water service. 
(a)  The city will endeavor to furnish continuous water service, but does not guarantee to the customer continuous service. The city shall not be liable for any damages for any interruption of service whatsoever. 
(b)  The city will endeavor to furnish adequate water pressure, but does not guarantee to the customer adequate pressure at all times. In connection with the operation, maintenance, repair and extension of the city water system, water pressure may be affected in parts of the system without notice when necessary or desirable and each customer must be prepared for such emergencies. The city shall not be liable for any damages caused by inadequate pressure in the water supply. Customers requiring a minimum pressure for operation of fire protection systems shall be responsible for performing flow tests to ascertain available pressure in the water supply at the required flows. Where the minimum pressure is to be maintained at all times, the customer shall be responsible for providing backup or standby systems for cases when the city's water supply fails to provide adequate pressure. 
(c)  In connection with the operation, maintenance, repair and extension of the city water system, the water supply may be shut off without notice when necessary or desirable and each customer must be prepared for such emergencies. The city shall not be liable for any damages from the resumption of service or from such interruption of service without notice after any such interruption. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-7. - Damages to property due to water pressure. 
The city shall not be liable to any customer for damages caused to his plumbing or property by high pressure, low pressure, or fluctuations in pressure in the city's water mains. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-8. - Supply and resale of water. 
All water shall be supplied within the city exclusively by the city and no customer shall, directly or indirectly, sell, sublet, assign or otherwise dispose of the water or any part thereof, except with written permission from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-9. - Restricted use of water. 
In times of emergency or in times of water shortage, the city hereby reserves the right to restrict the purposes for which water may be used by a customer and the amount of water which a customer may use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-10. - Discontinuance or refusal of service. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to discontinue all utility services or to refuse to connect or commence any utility service for a violation of, or a failure to comply with, any of the following: 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter or other city rules and regulations; 
(2)  The customer's application for service; or 
(3)  The customer's contract for service. 
(b)  The right to discontinue utility service shall apply to all service received through a single connection or service, even though more than one customer or tenant is furnished service therefrom, and even though the delinquency or violation is limited to only one such customer or tenant. 
(c)  Discontinuance of service by the city for any cause stated in these rules and regulations shall not release the customer from liability for service already received or from liability for payments that thereafter become due under other provisions of the customer's contract. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-11. - Termination of service by customer. 
Customers who have fulfilled their contract terms and wish to discontinue utility service shall give at least three days written notice to that effect unless the contract specifies otherwise. Notice to discontinue service prior to the expiration of a contract term will not relieve the customer from any minimum or guaranteed payment under such contract or applicable rate schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-12. - Liability for cutoff failures. 
(a)  The city's liability shall be limited to the forfeiture of the right to charge a customer for utility service that is not used but is received from a service line under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  After receipt of at least ten days' written notice to cut off utility service, the city has failed to cut off such service. 
(2)  The city has attempted to cut off utility service but such service has not been completely cut off. 
(3)  The city has completely cut off utility service, but subsequently, the cutoff develops a leak or is turned on again so that water enters the customer's pipes from the city's main or other utility service is furnished to the customers premises. 
(b)  Except to the extent stated above, the city shall not be liable for any loss or damage resulting from cutoff failures. If a customer wishes to avoid possible damage for cutoff failures, the customer shall rely exclusively on privately owned cutoff and not on the city's cutoff. Also, the customer (and not the city) shall be responsible for seeing that his plumbing is properly drained and is kept properly drained, after his water service has been cut off. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-13. - Liability of customer. 
(a)  Each customer shall provide space for and exercise proper care to protect the property of the city on his premises. In the event of loss or damage to such property arising from the neglect of a customer to properly care for same, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the customer. 
(b)  Customer shall bear all responsibility for installation and repairs of utilities owned by the customer and be liable for damage caused by failure of utilities owned by the customer. Typically, the city owns water utilities up to and including the water meter and the customer owns all water utilities on the customer side of the meter. Sewer lines are typically owned by the customer inside the customer's property and by the city up to the customer's property line. 
(c)  Where the city furnishes utility service to a customer, such customer shall be responsible for all violations of the provisions of this chapter which occur on the premises so served. Personal participation by the customer in any such violations shall not be necessary to impose such personal responsibility on him. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-14. - Service charges for temporary service. 
Customers requiring temporary utility service shall pay all costs for connection and disconnection incidental to the supplying and removing of service in addition to the regular charge for utilities used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-15—114-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FEES AND CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-41. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to establish a fee mechanism whereby the users of various city water and wastewater system services are charged for those services in an amount established by the city as being necessary to provide adequate financial support for the water and wastewater systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-42. - Publication. 
The actual rates charged by the city for the water and wastewater system services provided shall be published in a separate rate or fee schedule. A copy of said rate or fee schedule shall be made available to the public at the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-43. - Changes in rates. 
The rates charged by the city for the water and wastewater system services shall be revised from time to time by affirmative action of the city as necessary to support the financial needs of the city water and wastewater systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-44. - Multiple units on a single meter. 
The water and wastewater system service charges to owners of buildings containing two or more family dwelling units or an integrated complex of buildings containing same who have elected to use a single water meter to service said units in accordance with section 114-205 are shown in the rate schedule available to the public at the office of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-45. - Payment. 
(a)  The payment of the sum due for water and wastewater system services shall be made monthly or at such other time as indicated by the city in accordance with a statement setting forth the amount due. Payment for services billed monthly shall be made on or before the tenth day following the date of the monthly notice, and shall be in default if not paid on or before the 25th day after the date of the monthly notice. Failure to receive notice of the amount due shall in no way relieve the customer, or owner of the property served, from making payment as provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Failure to pay the bill by the due date shall result in a ten-percent penalty added to the outstanding balance. 
(c)  No partial payments will be accepted. No second notice shall be sent. Failure to receive the bill does not relieve the obligation to pay. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-46. - Discontinuance for non-payment. 
Should any customer, including the owner of the property, receiving water or wastewater service fail to pay any sum due, the water service shall be discontinued until such sums, with penalties as provided in this division, are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-47. - Reconnection charge. 
Upon disconnection for failure to make payment under this article, a reconnection charge shall be assessed and collected with all arrears due before the water service will be restored. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-48. - Extent of discontinuance. 
The right to discontinue utility service shall apply to all service received through a single connection or service, even though more than one customer or tenant is furnished service therefrom, and even though the delinquency or violation is limited to only one such customer or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-49. - Effect of nonpayment. 
The utility charges shall be due and payable as shown on the statement of charges rendered, upon failure to pay the full amount of the bill within 15 days after the date indicated on the statement shall be cause for termination of water service to the property to which the bill applies. Termination of service may be accomplished by the city by turning off the water supply to the property involved. If service is terminated under these conditions, all expenses incurred by the city in effecting such termination shall be paid by the owner of the property involved, as well as, reconnection expenses if the service is re-established, and shall be paid in full before the utility service is reestablished. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-50. - Owners responsibility for charges. 
The owner of the property at which the water and wastewater service is located is ultimately responsible for the payment of any water and sewer service charges which are delinquent. If a renter leaves a service and does not pay for all of the services rendered to that property, the owner of the property shall be responsible for payment of the bills before a new service will be established. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-51. - Incorrect meters. 
(a)  Fast meters. Whenever a meter tested is found to register fast in excess of the tolerance permitted, the city shall refund to the customer the amount billed in error for one-half the period from the time the meter was last tested not to exceed 12 months. However, if it can be shown that the error was due to some cause, the date of which can be fixed, the overcharge shall be computed back to but not beyond such date, based upon available records. The refund shall not include any part of the minimum charge. 
(b)  Slow meters. Except as provided by this section, the city may back bill if a meter is found to be slow, non-registering or partially registering. The city may not back bill for any period greater than 12 months from the date it notifies a customer that his or her meter is slow, non-registering or partially registering. If it can be ascertained that the meter was slow, non-registering or partially registering for less than 12 months prior to notification, then the city may back bill only for the lesser period of time. In any event, the customer may extend the payments of the back bill over the same amount of time for which the utility issued the back bill. 
(c)  Billing for errors. Whenever a meter tested is found to register slow in excess of the tolerance established, the city may bill the customer. If the utility has required a deposit, the customer may be billed only for that portion of the unbilled error which is in excess of the deposit retained by the utility. For a non-registering or partially registering meter, a customer may be billed on an estimated amount based on previous bills for similar usage. It shall be understood that when a meter is found to be in error in excess of the prescribed accuracy limits, fast or slow, the figure to be used for calculating the amount of refund or charges shall be that percentage of error as determined by the test. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-52. - Water system fees. 
(a)  Water connection service charge. There is hereby levied and assessed a service charge for making connections to the city water system. All amounts charged for water connections hereunder shall be assessed to the owners of the property being connected, and said charges shall be collected prior to the making of such connection. Water connection assessments shall be as shown on the fee schedule available to the public at the city hall and may be based in part on a road frontage assessment. 
(b)  Water service charge for usage. There is hereby levied and assessed rates, fees and/or charges for the service, maintenance, operation and amortization of the city water system, based on the amount of water consumed per month by each customer receiving water from the city. The schedule for usage service charges shall be as shown in the rate schedule available to the public at the city hall. 
(c)  Fire service charge. A separate charge for fire service shall be established for varying sizes of water meters or fire line diameters. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-53. - Miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  Delinquent billed accounts. All billed accounts are due and payable on the billing date. Billed accounts not paid within 45 days from the billing date are delinquent, and service may be disconnected by the city and a service charge added to the account. This delinquent service charge is applicable to each service call to discontinue service for delinquent accounts. (The customer will be charged for the service call even if the service is not disconnected.) 
(b)  Service calls. All customer service calls shall be charged to the customer requesting the service in accordance with a fee schedule established by the city reflecting as closely as possible the actual cost to the city for rendering the service(s). The city's regular work hours are 8:00 am to 5:00 pm, weekdays. Restoration of service will only be made during normal working hours. No payments on account will be accepted in the field. 
(c)  New customer service. Service charges shall be levied for the following new customer services: 
(1)  Regular water service turn-on (next workday after application or later); 
(2)  Emergency water service turn-on. 
(d)  Meter reinstallation. A service charge to reinstall a meter shall be levied due to nonpayment for failure to apply for service. 
(e)  Meter replacement for damage. A charge will be made to replace a meter which has been damaged, or has in any way been made inoperative. This includes the service call. The damaged meter must be returned. 
(f)  Replacement of missing or stolen meter. The current cost of new meter must be paid when a meter is missing or stolen. 
(g)  Miscellaneous service calls. Service calls to uncover meters, raise meters (where yard has been backfilled or landscaped), repair meter boxes, or meter connections, will be billed at the city's cost. 
(h)  Returned checks. A processing fee as established by the city mayor and council will be charged for returned checks. If water service has been discontinued as a result of the returned check, the service charges in subsections (a) and (d) will also apply. 
(i)  Failure to apply for service. A fee will be charged to water and/or wastewater system users who have not properly applied for service in their own name. A separate fee shall be charged for each trip made by the city in an effort to have the customer properly and successfully apply for service. Payment must be made by applicant for all water and wastewater services utilized subsequent to the former customer discontinuing service. 
(j)  Water and wastewater deposits. A deposit is required on all accounts at the time water and/or wastewater service is connected. The deposit amount will be the average of two months water and wastewater billings, or a specified minimum amount for each service, whichever is greater. The deposit will not be refunded until the account is closed out and the final bill issued. Deposit amounts will be applied to monies due on the date of the final bill, and the balance will be mailed to customer as a credit refund. A new or additional deposit will be required at the time water service is restored for all customers whose service was disconnected for nonpayment, and who do not have a current deposit amount on record. 
(k)  Unauthorized connection or usage. The city shall establish fees to be charged for unauthorized water or wastewater system connections and also establish separate fees for the unauthorized use of the city water or wastewater system services. 
(l)  If it is found that there is a waste of water in or about any premises to which water is supplied from the City of Canton, either by willful waste or by means of a leak in any water pipe or fixture located in or upon the premises, the City of Canton may cause the water to be cut off from the premises upon reasonable notice to the occupant, unless special circumstances require that such waste shall be immediately stopped. Where the water supply is cut off as herein provided, the water shall not again be turned on until all water bills and the bill for the cost of cutting off and again turning on the water shall have been paid. 
(1)  The following uses are examples, but not all inclusive, of a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of water and are prohibited: 
a.  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, or a leaking valve, or a leaking outdoor faucet, or a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leaks, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, within 30 days. 
b.  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device during rain. 
c.  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler heads. 
(2)  The restrictions in this section do not apply to the following authorized uses: 
a.  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities. 
b.  Water applied as a dust control measure, as required by erosion and sedimentation rules. 
c.  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, where water is the appropriate methodology. 
d.  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available. 
e.  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative exists. 
f.  Water used for power-washing hard surfaces to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, unless prohibited by drought restrictions. 
g.  Mobile car washes when approval or a special use permit is obtained from the local authority. 
h.  Emptying of swimming pools for maintenance when proper local rules are followed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0419-01, 4-19-2018) 
Sec. 114-54. - Charges for three-inch fire hydrant meter. 
(a)  The following charges shall be levied for the use of a three-inch fire hydrant meter as provided in section 114-204: 
(1)  A deposit payable at the time meter is picked up.. 
(2)  A service charge for processing the meter rental. 
(3)  A meter rental fee based on the number of days that the customer is in possession of the meter. 
(4)  A charge for the water used. The normal water service charge established for usage section 114-52(b). 
(5)  Cost for all damages to meters due to user's negligence. 
(b)  The customer will be billed for metered water usage on a six-month basis, or when the meter is returned for refund on deposit, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-55. - Fire service charge. 
(a)  General. A fee shall be levied to all city water system customers who have fire service meters installed in accordance with section 114-138, or who have unmetered fire service lines. 
(b)  Fixed monthly service charges. A minimum monthly charge shall be levied on all fire service customers based on the size of the fire line (when no meter is provided); the size of the detector meter (when used); or the size of the full flow factory mutual meter (when used). 
(c)  Variable monthly service charges based on usage. Water used through full flow factory mutual meters shall be billed at the normal rate. The water that is measured by the detector meter will be billed at five times the normal water charge. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-56. - Optional waiver of charge by city. 
The city manager may waive the provisions of sections 114-41 through 114-55 and division 2 of this article at his discretion when it is determined to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-57. - Alteration of rates, fees and charges. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as relieving the city of the requirement, as often as it may be necessary, to revise and adjust its schedule of rates, fees and charges for either water or wastewater services and facilities, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-58. - Late fees for unpaid, past due invoiced accounts. 
All invoiced water system accounts are due and payable on the date of invoicing. All invoiced accounts not paid within 30 days from the date of invoicing are past due. A late fee of ten percent of the invoiced amount shall be assessed on all unpaid, past due invoices. The late fee provision shall not apply to billed accounts which are covered by section 114-53(a). 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-59—114-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM FEES 

Sec. 114-86. - Sewer development fee. 
There is hereby levied and assessed a sewer development fee for making connections to the city wastewater system. All amounts charged for wastewater connections shall be assessed to the owners of the property being connected, and said charges shall be collected prior to the making of such connection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-87. - Charge for usage. 
There is hereby levied and assessed rates, fees and/or charges for the service, maintenance, operation and amortization of the city wastewater system, based on the amount of water consumed per month by each customer for whom wastewater service is available from the city. The charges for having service available shall be as shown in the rate schedule at the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-88. - Effect of non-payment. 
The utility charges shall be due and payable as shown on the statement of charges rendered, upon presentation and until the date indicated on such statement. Failure to pay the full amount of the bill within 15 days after the date indicated on the service to the property to which the bill applies. Termination of service may be accomplished by the city, either by disconnecting the sewer piping or by turning off the water supply to the property involved, whichever is most practical or feasible in the discretion of the city. If service is terminated under these conditions, all expenses incurred by the city in effecting such termination shall be paid by the owner of the property involved, as well as, reconnection expenses if the service is re-established, and shall be paid in full before the utility service is re-established. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-89. - Exception to the billing presumption. 
(a)  Exceptions to rule that wastewater service charges for usage may be based on water consumed and at the discretion of the city manager are as follows. 
(b)  If a significant industrial user has a wastewater return of less than 80 percent of the water purchased then the volume of wastewater may, at the industry's option, be measured directly by a wastewater flow meter. This shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All costs of meter construction, operation and replacement shall be at the industry's expense. 
(2)  Plans for any proposed metering facility shall bear the seal of a licensed engineer and shall be subject to city approval. 
(3)  The city shall have unrestricted access to the metering facility. 
(4)  If for any reason a spot check shows the meter to be in error by more than ten percent then the city reserves the right to base billing upon metered water usage. 
(5)  For unauthorized use, the customer may be billed on a reasonable estimate of the service taken. The city may access a fee to defray the cost of restoring service provided such charge is specified in the tariff. 
(c)  Increased wastewater flows due to inflow from drainage are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-90. - Non-connected customers with sewer availability. 
(a)  All city water system customers for whom there is sewer availability as set forth in section 114-234 shall either connect to the city wastewater system as required by section 114-234 or pay the charges as indicated in the division in lieu thereof, as set forth in the rate schedule available to the public at the city hall. 
(b)  The purpose of the sewer system fees required under this section is for the city to recover an equitable and fair portion of the costs of constructing sewers and providing wastewater treatment plant capacity for potential customers in various service areas where the customers may or may not desire to connect to the wastewater system. The expense of making wastewater service available to a prospective customer should be borne by the person who benefits from the sewer availability, whether or not that person elects to avail himself or herself of the services provided by the city at the city's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-91. - Special charges for non-domestic users. 
(a)  The city may adopt charges and fees relative to the nondomestic user program as necessary, to include the following: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit applications; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the nondomestic users' program. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this paragraph and are separate from all other fees chargeable by to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-92—114-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 114-121. - Permit required. 
No person, other than authorized city employees, shall uncover, make any connections to, use, alter, or disturb any public water or wastewater line, or appurtenance thereto, without first obtaining an approved set of plans, or a written permit from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-122. - Application for connection permit. 
(a)  The owner of the land upon which a water or wastewater connection is desired, or his agent, shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by the owner's drawings, plans, specifications, or other such information which, in the judgment of the city manager, is considered to be pertinent to the desired connection. (Re: Development regulations 801.01 and 801.03 in appendix B) Water and wastewater connection service charges shall be paid as stipulated in sections 114-86—114-91 and 114-52 and in division 2 of article 2 of this chapter. 
(b)  All costs and expenses incidental to the connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city against any loss or damage to the city water or wastewater facilities that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-123. - Separate service to separate buildings. 
A separate and independent water and wastewater connection shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private water or wastewater line is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In the above instance, the front building water and/or wastewater line may be extended to the rear of the building and the whole considered as one building; however, in such case the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for maintenance of or damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-124. - Utilization of previously used pipes and materials. 
Previously used water and wastewater pipes and materials may be utilized in connection with new buildings only when found, on examination and test by the water and sewer department manager, to be in good, serviceable condition and to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-125. - Compliance with technical codes. 
(a)  The size, materials of construction, methods of construction, slope, and alignment of all water and wastewater facilities construction shall conform to the technical codes and specifications described below. To the extent that any conflicting provisions exist in the below described technical codes and specifications, the provisions of the earliest mentioned document shall prevail. 
(1)  State plumbing code in the city; 
(2)  Standard building code in the city; 
(3)  One- and two-family dwelling code in the city; 
(4)  The current standards for residential and commercial development in the city as it exists or as it may be amended; 
(5)  The city cross-connection program as provided in section 114-172 as it exists or as it may be amended; 
(6)  Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, latest edition for wastewater system construction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-126. - Elevation of wastewater connections. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of the owner of the building or buildings being connected to the city wastewater system to determine the elevations, grades and alignment of sewer lines necessary to serve the building prior to the pouring of the building foundation or footings, and to design and construct the connecting sewer in accordance with the information thus obtained. 
(b)  Whenever possible, a building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the city wastewater system, the wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means into the city wastewater system. Operation and maintenance of such a lifting system shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-127. - Conditions to determine if building may be served by system. 
The city wastewater system is designed to provide gravity service to the ground level floor of buildings, and above. Basements and below-grade living areas may or may not be served by gravity by the city wastewater system. A building is considered to be "served" by the city wastewater system for purposes set forth in this chapter whenever sewer service is provided to the ground level floor. The requirements for dry sewers are presented in section 114-139. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-128. - Connection of downspouts or drains to wastewater system. 
(a)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the city wastewater system unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage and for which a discharge permit has been issued. 
(b)  As the city identifies these corrections and notifies the property owner of the corrections, corrective measures shall be taken by the property owner at his expense within 90 days after notification or city may make corrective actions and bill customer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-129. - Water and wastewater connections. 
(a)  Construction procedures. Construction procedures for water and wastewater connections are as follows: 
(1)  All pavement cuts shall be made by sawing prior to excavation to eliminate uneven and ragged edges. 
(2)  All backfill beneath roads, sidewalks or other paved areas shall be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor using mechanical tamping equipment in six-inch lifts. It shall be the responsibility of the person making the water or sewer connection to demonstrate to the city manager or his representative that 95 percent compaction has been obtained. (see development regulation 804.02(c), (d), (e) and (f)). 
(3)  Final asphalt patches shall match the existing pavement type, quality and thickness as closely as possible. Special care shall be exercised to match existing slopes and grades for a smooth transition (see development regulation 804.02(g) in appendix B). 
(b)  Inspection of connections by city. The applicant for a building sewer connection permit shall notify the water and sewer department manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the city wastewater system. The connection and testing shall be made in the presence of the water and sewer department manager or his representative. A three-day notice is required. 
(c)  Guarding excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all OSHA and state department of transportation requirements so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to a good as new condition in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-130. - Restoration of disturbed public property. 
All water or wastewater construction work conducted on the public right-of-way or any public property shall be conducted only with proper permission from the water and sewer department manager. The developer shall be required to post a bond with the city so that proper restoration of the disturbed area is assured. All disturbed areas as a result of such construction shall be restored to a condition that is as good as new. The scheduling of such construction activities shall be as approved by the city manager if such scheduling approval is determined to be in the public's best interest. (Re: Development regulation 804.11 in appendix B.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-131. - Backflow prevention. 
(a)  Required. All wastewater treatment plants, commercial businesses, industries, or institutions shall be required to install backflow prevention mechanisms. Additionally, approved backflow preventers or vacuum breakers shall be installed with all plumbing fixtures or equipment for which the potable water supply outlet may be submerged without the protection of a minimum air gap. The particular backflow prevention devices utilized in any given situation shall be as specified in the plumbing code or as approved by the water and sewer department manager. 
(b)  Minimum required air gap. The minimum required air gap shall be measured vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or line of the fixture or receptacle into which it discharges. The minimum required air gap shall be twice the effective opening of a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than three times the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical surface in which cases the minimum required air gap shall be three times the effective opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum required air gap be less than is provided in the plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-132. - Temporary water supply standpipes. 
All standpipes installed for the purpose of providing temporary water supply at any given location shall be installed on a 90 degree elbow. Tees, crosses and wyes or other connecting device shall not be utilized. When the permanent water connection is made, the temporary elbow shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-133. - Capping and sealing of discontinued connections. 
All water and sewer service connections for which service has been discontinued as a result of the demolition of the structure being served by the connection, or for any other reasons, shall be properly and permanently capped and sealed to prevent the entrance of ground or surface water in the case of sewers and the escape of potable water in the case of water lines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-134. - Location of water meters. 
(a)  All water meters shall be installed at an easily accessible location on or near the property line of the premises being served adjacent to the public right-of-way. Water meters shall not be installed behind enclosed fences, in paved driveways, in paved parking areas or sidewalks. (See development regulations 802.03 (f) in appendix B.) 
(b)  Generally, the city shall locate meters at or near the customer's curb or property line. When it is impractical to locate meters at or near the customer's curb or property line, the city may locate a meter in any other reasonably convenient or accessible place which affords protection against damage. 
(c)  When meters are grouped, the city shall tag each meter to identify the customer whose services are measured by that meter. 
(d)  All single-family, duplex, and townhouse dwellings, per the definitions in the International Building Code, shall be served with separate metered services and shall not be served with master metered water service, except ad provided in section 114-123. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-135. - Wastewater lift stations. 
(a)  Lift stations serving two or more buildings. All wastewater lift stations installed in the city which serve two or more buildings shall be designed and constructed in strict conformity to the city standards. (See development regulations 706 in appendix B.) Engineering plans shall be prepared for all wastewater lift stations and such plans shall be approved by the city water system prior to construction. Following the construction and acceptance by the city of a wastewater lift station, title to the lift station shall be conveyed to the city. 
(b)  Lift stations serving a single building. Unless otherwise approved by the city manager, all wastewater lift stations serving a single building shall be owned, operated and maintained by the building owner. (Also see section 114-114.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-136. - City approval of construction plans. 
Construction plans for all water and wastewater facilities which are intended for public use and which are located within the city service area, or which connect to the city system shall be approved by the state environmental protection division and the city prior to beginning construction. The developer shall be responsible for obtaining approval from all agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-137. - Fire hydrant installation and repairs. 
(a)  Where possible fire hydrants shall be installed at a location that minimizes the potential for traffic damage. (Development regulations 802.02(a) and 802.03 in appendix B.) All fire hydrants shall have individual disconnect gate valves on the horizontal connecting pipe and concrete thrust blocks between the back of the hydrant and firm, undisturbed soil. 
(b)  All new fire hydrants installed must be inspected by the city before backfilling. A red disc will be placed on any fire hydrant which has been turned off for repairs or is out of service for any reason and immediate notice will be given to the chief of the fire department. Such chief shall also be notified when such hydrant is returned to active service. When repairs have been completed, the city water system personnel will place a seal on the plug showing the date that repairs were completed, and remove the warning disc. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-138. - Fire service metering requirements. 
(a)  All fire service systems on private property having fire hydrants, hand hose connections, or sprinkler heads shall utilize underwriter approved full flow factory mutual fire line meters or shall be provided with dual service consisting of a separate domestic service meter and a detector meter on the fire service line. 
(b)  When unauthorized water is used through a detector meter or a dual service connection in three or more billing periods in one calendar year, it shall be replaced with a factory mutual full flow fire line meter. Unauthorized use of water is defined as non-fire-fighting water and/or water use without prior notification and approval of the city water system. 
(c)  All water meters, detector or fire line, shall be installed on or near city right-of-way. 
(d)  Vaults shall be constructed to city specifications. 
(e)  Vault construction and meter installation shall be inspected by the city after work has been completed to insure that specifications have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-139. - Extension of mains. 
(a)  Whenever the mayor and council is of the opinion that it is to the best interest of the city to construct a water or sewer main extension without requiring strict compliance with the provisions of this article, such extension may be constructed upon such terms and conditions as shall be approved by a majority of the members of the council. 
(b)  The authority to make water or sewer main extensions under the provisions of this article is permissive only and nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring the city to make main extensions or to furnish service to any person. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-140. - Specifications. 
For installations of water mains under the provisions of this article, cement-lined cast-iron pipe, class 250, American Water Works Association Standard, not less than six inches in diameter shall be used to the dead end of any line and to form loops or continuous lines, so that fire hydrants may be placed on such lines at locations no farther than 1,000 feet from the most distant part of any dwelling structure and no farther than 600 feet from the most distant part of any commercial, industrial, or public building, such measurements to be based on road or street distances; cement-line cast-iron pipe two inches in diameter, to supply dwellings only, may be used to supplement such lines. All such lines shall be installed either by city employees or by other forces working directly under the supervision of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-141. - Main extensions to developed areas. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply only to water or sewer main extensions of 500 feet or less to areas where there is a demand for water or sewer service by the occupants of existing houses. This section shall not be applicable to land development projects and subdivision promotion, even though accompanied by the erection of occasional houses within such areas. 
(b)  Owners of property to be served by a proposed water main or sewer extension of the character to which this section applies shall pay to the city the regular charge for each connection desired immediately and shall also assume one minimum monthly bill for each 100 feet, or fraction thereof, of the proposed extension, the connection charge to be paid and the agreement to pay minimum monthly bills to be signed before the work is begun. The city shall require a cash deposit as security for such minimum bill agreement in an amount that does not exceed the estimated cost of the main extension, before making any such requested extension. Beginning with the completion of the water or sewer main extension such persons shall pay water and sewer bills at least equal to the minimum monthly charges agreed upon until the obligation for the payment of such minimum monthly bills shall have been assumed by other persons acceptable to the city at which time pro rata amounts of cash deposit shall also be returned to the depositors. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-142. - Main extensions to other areas. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all areas to which section 114-141 is not applicable. Customers desiring water or sewer main extensions pursuant to this section must pay all of the cost of making such extensions. 
(b)  Upon completion of such extensions and their approval by the mayor and council such water and sewer mains shall become the property of the city. The persons paying the cost of constructing such mains shall execute any written instruments requested by the city to provide evidence of the city's title to such mains. In consideration of such mains being transferred to it, the city shall incorporate said mains as an integral part of the city water and sewer system and shall furnish water in accordance with this chapter, subject always to such limitations as may exist because of the size and elevation of the mains. As further consideration, the city shall repay to the person or persons paying the cost of such a main extension, for a period of five years, but no longer, from the date of completion of the extension the sum of $50.00 for each connection that is made to such main extension; provided, however, that the total payments shall in no event exceed the cost of the said extension paid by such person or persons. Provided also, that before making any such payment the city shall have the right to require that the customer making the connection in question shall sign a contract for water or sewer service for a period of time to be fixed by the city, but not to exceed three years. 
(c)  No repayment shall be made for service line connection not made directly to the water or sewer main extension in question, even though such service line connections are made to a main extended from, or receiving water through, the main extension in question. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-143—114-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL USE OF PUBLIC WATER AND WASTEWATER FACILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-171. - Unauthorized connections prohibited. 
No person shall make an unauthorized water or sewer connection nor obtain unauthorized water or wastewater services. Persons so making unauthorized connections or obtaining unauthorized service shall be subject to a fee as set forth in the city water and wastewater fee schedule, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-172. - Prevention of cross-connections. 
The construction and operation of all water and wastewater system piping shall be in such a manner so as to eliminate cross-connections or the possibility thereof. It is the intent of this Code section to protect the public health by providing regulations whereby the possibilities for the contamination of the water supply due to cross-connections with the wastewater system are greatly reduced or eliminated. For that reason the provisions and requirements contained in the city cross-connection program are adopted herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-173. - Malicious damage to equipment. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the water or wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-174—114-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 114-201. - Conditions for use of private wells. 
The conditions for the use of private wells are set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-202. - Responsibility for meter and meter box. 
(a)  All meters shall be installed, tested, repaired, and removed by the city. Except in subdivisions or as elsewhere provided, all meters, service connections, and other equipment furnished by or for the city shall be and remain the property of the city. The city will, at its own expense, make routine tests of meters when it considers such tests desirable. The city will also make tests or inspections of its meters at the request of the customer. However, if a test requested by a customer shows a meter to be accurate within the normal limits, the customer shall pay a meter testing charge in an amount as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. If such test shows a meter not to be accurate within such limits, the cost of such meter test shall be borne by the city. 
(b)  When a service line is completed, the city shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such service line from the main to and including the meter and meter box, and such portion of the service line shall belong to the city. The remaining portion of the service line beyond the meter box shall belong to and be the responsibility of the customer. The cost for such connection shall be as provided in the schedule of utility fees and charges. No one shall do anything, which will in anyway interfere with or prevent the operation of a meter. No one shall tamper with or work on a water meter without the written permission of the city. No one shall install any pipe or other device, which will cause water to pass through or around a meter without the passage of such water being registered fully by the meter. 
(c)  Anyone receiving water service from the city water system shall be responsible for the meter and meter box from the time it is installed until it is removed. Any changes in grade of the premises shall be made so as not to damage the meter or meter box, or cover the meter box. Anyone damaging the meter or meter box, or covering same with earth, shall be liable for the cost of the damage. Water users shall not remove the box from the meter or leave the meter exposed to possible freezing or other damage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-203. - Backflow prevention. 
Certain city water system users shall be required to provide backflow prevention. For specific backflow prevention requirements, see section 114-131. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-204. - Use of three-inch fire hydrant meter. 
(a)  All persons who withdraw water from a fire hydrant other than for bona fide emergency purposes shall have the water metered through a three-inch fire hydrant meter and pay the proper charges in accordance with the rates set forth in section 114-54. 
(b)  The city shall have the authority to contract with commercial businesses and private citizens to supply such three-inch fire hydrant meters as are necessary for the customer's use and to inspect and repair at the customer's expense meters that are damaged through the customer's negligence. The city shall also collect and account for a deposit on each meter maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-205. - Use of single meter for multiple customers. 
(a)  The owner of buildings containing two or more family dwelling units is prohibited from using a single water meter to service said units unless same is expressly provided by ordinance; no customer may permit water or wastewater service to be taken through his installation (water meter) into any other building or dwelling unit, whether owned by himself or another, or whether on his premises or elsewhere. (However, see the exception section 114-123.) 
(b)  The owner of buildings containing two or more family dwelling units, businesses, or an integrated complex of buildings containing same may elect to use a single water meter to service said units, and if said election is made, the owner of such buildings will be responsible for payment for all water and wastewater services rendered to said buildings and units by the city as set forth in section 114-44. 
(c)  The single water meter herein provided shall be installed at or near the customer's property line as the city manager may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-206. - Multi-unit buildings; water meters. 
(a)  The city provides water and sewer service to residential multi-unit buildings. These services are billed by the city on a master meter basis and the landlord or property owner is responsible for paying for all charges contained in such bills. 
(b)  All new multi-family buildings shall be sub-billed by the owner or landlord or by a third party based on sub-unit meters which will be installed at the time of construction. 
(c)  This section shall apply only to new multi-unit residential buildings permitted on or after July 1, 2011, except that the section shall not apply to any building constructed or permitted prior to July 1, 2011, which is thereafter: 
(1)  Renovated; or 
(2)  Following a casualty or condemnation, renovated or rebuilt. 
(d)  This section shall apply only to new multi-unit retail and light industrial buildings permitted or with a pending permit application on or after July 1, 2011, except that this section shall not apply to any building constructed or permitted prior to July 1, 2011, which is thereafter: 
(1)  Renovated; or 
(2)  Following a casualty or condemnation, renovated or rebuilt. 
(e)  Originally adopted in December 2010 (Ord. No. 20121216-A) in accordance with MNGWPD requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-207—114-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 114-231. - Toilets required 
(a)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. All toilets shall either be connected to the city wastewater system or to an approved private wastewater disposal facility that complies with the provisions of article VII of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of every house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city jurisdiction, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein. All toilet facilities shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-232. - Discharge of polluted waters to a storm sewer or natural outlet prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or into any storm sewer or any sewer which connects to the storm sewer system of the city any polluted water or wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-233. - Use of septic tanks or privies. 
The use of septic tanks, privies or any other means of wastewater disposal other than into the city wastewater system is prohibited except in Governors Walk or Great Sky subdivisions or as provided for in article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-234. - Connection to available sewer required. 
(a)  All toilets, sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the city wastewater system when there is sewer availability, defined as follows: 
(1)  Sewage shall be considered available to an existing single-family residence when the main, ground level floor of the structure can be connected by gravity flow to a sewer line in any public right-of-way or easement which passes the property within 300 feet. 
(2)  Sewage shall be considered available to an existing multifamily, commercial, institutional or industrial structure when sewage service is provided in the drainage basin within which the structure is located. 
(3)  However, septic tanks shall be allowed on lot sizes of two acres and larger provided the provisions of sections 114-136 and 114-422 are met, except in Governors Walk. 
(b)  At such time as there is sewer availability to any structure that generates or might potentially generate wastewater, notification will be given by the city to the owner or rightful possessor of said premises as to the fact that there is sewer availability. 
(c)  Following written notification of sewer availability, all recipients of said notice shall have three months from the date of receipt of notice within which to connect to the city wastewater system. All such connections must be made in full compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Any person who, following notification of sewer availability from the city, believes that there is no sewer availability to his or her property may petition the city by registered mail for a review of the matter. Following such a petition for review, the city will meet with the owner on-site at a predetermined time and date to review the petitioner's case. At such hearing the burden of proof shall be upon the petitioner to show that there is no sewer availability in accordance with the definitions provided above. Following the hearing, the city will respond in writing to the petitioner with the city's official position on the matter within 30 days of the hearing. 
(e)  Any person who has sewer availability, and who has been notified by the city of that sewer availability as provided above, has the option of not tieing onto the city wastewater system provided that the person shall pay the non-connected customer service charge as provided in section 114-90 commencing three months following the notification stipulated above. Any person who ties onto the city wastewater system within the three month period provided above shall pay the normal service charges commencing 60 days after the required permits are issued. 
(f)  Devices used to move sewerage from the building to the city wastewater system are the responsibility of the owner and will not be repaired or maintained by the city. 
(g)  Property owners are responsible for construction and maintenance of the service line from the premises served to the point of connection with the city service lateral. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-235. - Discharge of holding tank contents. 
It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catch basin or other opening into the city wastewater system, or any system connected with and discharging into the city wastewater system, the contents of any holding tank, including septic tank wastes, sludge, sewage or other similar matter or material. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-236. - Discharge of grease trap contents prohibited. 
The discharge of the materials collected from grease traps into the city wastewater system is prohibited. (See also section 114-277.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-237. - Mitigation of infiltration and inflow. 
It shall be the obligation of all users of the city wastewater system to reduce to the extent reasonably possible all infiltration and inflow. Infiltration and inflow shall be reduced by using water-tight pipe and construction materials in all private portions of the sewer system as well as those sewer systems which are to be deeded to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-238. - Connection of private water system users prohibited. 
No premises which utilize a private water system shall be allowed to connect to the city wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-239—114-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NON-DOMESTIC USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-266. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-267. - Specific prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the sewer system or POTW resulting in interference. 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city manager in accordance with section 114-279 of this chapter. 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit. 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city manager. 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city manager in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
(18)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-268. - Discharge limitations. 
(a)  The pollutant limits in subsection (b) of this section are established to protect against process interference, stream standards violation, or sludge contamination. Discharges by users of the collection and treatment system are limited such that the concentrations of specific pollutants measured at the point of discharge into the collection system do not exceed concentrations specified below. 
(b)  No user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the following shown limits: 

 
Ammonia nitrogen (total = NH3 + NH4) ..... 50 
Antimony ..... * 
Arsenic ..... 0.38 
Barium ..... 5.0 
Beryllium ..... 13.0 
Biochemical oxygen demand, 5-day (BOD 5 ) ..... 600 
Bismuth ..... * 
Boron ..... 1.0 
Cadmium ..... 0.26 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) ..... 1,200 
Chloride ..... 250 
Chromium, total ..... 26.5 
Cobalt ..... * 
Copper ..... 12.59 
Lead ..... 1.03 
Manganese ..... 5.0 
Mercury ..... 0.062 
Molybdenum ..... 0.46 
Nickel ..... 2.21 
Phosphorus (total) ..... 20 
Rhenium ..... * 
Selenium ..... 0.46 
Silver ..... 6.88 
Strontium ..... * 
Tellurium ..... 1.0 
Tin ..... 1.0 
Uranyl ion ..... * 
Zinc ..... 2.06 
Cyanide, total ..... 0.67 
Phenol ..... 2.0 
Oil and grease (mineral) ..... 25 
Oil and grease (floatable) ..... 250 
Herbicides, fungicides and pesticides ..... * 
Total toxic organics ..... 2.13 
Surfactants (as MBAS) ..... 200 
Suspended solids ..... 600 
*Shall not exceed background levels present in domestic wastewater. 
(c)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-269. - Federal and state requirements. 
(a)  Any laws or regulations promulgated by the State of Georgia relative to the construction or use of wastewater facilities which are more strict than the regulations provided in the city Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations may be enforced by the city. 
(b)  Federal pretreatment standards are as follows: 
(1)  The federal government has adopted regulations governing wastewater discharges from industries into POTWs. These federal regulations are generally referred to as the Federal Pretreatment Standards, as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403, or the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, as set forth in 40 CFR Parts 405—471. Any portion of these federal standards which are more strict than the regulations provided in the city Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations will be enforced by the city. 
(2)  It is the affirmative obligation of all industrial users regulated by the Federal Pretreatment Standards, inclusive of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, to comply with the federal standards whether or not the industry has received notification from the city or any other jurisdiction of the existence and nature of the federal standards. 
(3)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(4)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(5)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(6)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(7)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(c)  Modifications to federal pretreatment standards are as follows: 
(1)  From time to time the federal government may alter existing federal pretreatment standards or promulgate new standards. None of the provisions contained in the city Code shall prevent the timely implementation of new or altered federal standards by the industries to whom the new or altered standards apply. Where new or altered federal standards are more strict than the standards presently being imposed by the city, the city may, without prejudice, immediately revise any industrial wastewater discharge permits to reflect the new or altered standards. If the industrial user is unable to immediately conform to the new or altered standards, a reasonable schedule for compliance shall be provided by the city manager. 
(2)  Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7 (c) (2) of 40 CFR Part 403 promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR Part 403, Section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-270. - Wastewater pretreatment permit application. 
(a)  All nondomestic users shall, upon the request of the city, complete and submit to the city a wastewater pretreatment permit application. The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall be on a form provided by the city and shall be used for the purpose of determining whether the industry is a "significant industrial user," issuing a permit and for other purposes. The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall include the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  Name, address and location, if different from the address. 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those shown in sections 114-266 through 114-268. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(9)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(10)  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(11)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(b)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(c)  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-271. - Sampling and testing procedures. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, hexavalent chromium, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-272. - Testing procedures. 
(a)  All wastewater monitoring samples required by the city shall be tested by an independent laboratory for the parameters required, with the results submitted to the city on the original laboratory report sheets. The cost of these test plus 15 percent overhead shall be paid for by the customer being tested. The requirement for utilization of an independent laboratory may be waived by the city when the required tests are performed by the city or other approved agency or when duplicate ("split") samples are provided to the city and the city's testing results of such duplicate samples show a reasonably good correlation with the user's in-house testing results. 
(b)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, or in accordance with any applicable EPA testing procedure of general acceptance in the chemical testing industry, provided, however, that all such analyses shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 136, which requirements shall prevail in the event of conflict. 
(c)  The cost(s) incurred for testing shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-273. - Significant industrial users. 
(a)  Generally. All significant industrial users (see definition of significant industrial user in section 114-3) that discharge wastewater effluent into the city wastewater system shall comply with the following. 
(b)  Sampling manhole. In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each significant industrial user shall provide and maintain, on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers, a large manhole or sampling chamber to be located outside the plant. If inside the plant fence, there shall be a gate near the sampling manhole with a key furnished to the city. There shall be ample room provided in each sampling manhole to enable convenient inspection and sampling by the city, or its agent. In certain sampling manholes where noxious fumes may accumulate, the city may require a fume exhaust system to protect the life and health of the city employees who are required to enter the sampling manhole. The fume exhaust system should extract the fumes from the bottom of the manhole and provide not less than one air change per minute. The manhole shall include a water-proof 120V, single phase electrical outlet at or near the installation. 
(c)  Discharge permit required. It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user, as determined under this chapter, to discharge wastewater into the city wastewater system without a city issued discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-274. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Sampling and testing records. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in sections 114-346—114-349 shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by section 114-314. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  The name of the person(s) who performed the analysis; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(b)  Monitoring activities and records of results. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in sections 114-346—114-349 shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this chapter) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city, state, or the Environmental Protection Agency. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the permitted user, or when requested by the city, state, or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-275. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city may enter into an interjurisdictional agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section, the city manager shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the city manager may deem necessary. 
(c)  An interjurisdictional agreement, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in sections 114-266 through 114-268. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A requirement for new significant industrial users discharging into sewers of a contributing municipality to obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the city manager. 
(4)  If the contributing municipality has in place an industrial pretreatment program approved by the Environmental Protection Division, a provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the city manager; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the city manager; 
(5)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the city manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(6)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(7)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(8)  A provision ensuring the city manager access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the city manager; and 
(9)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the interjurisdictional agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-276. - Industrial pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Required. All users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with the limitations and provisions contained in this chapter and to achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city prior to commencement of construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user of the responsibility for modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Compliance schedules. The timing of construction and operation of pretreatment facilities as required hereby shall be in accordance with the compliance schedules provided by the city as described in section 114-347; however, the city shall also have the authority to issue compliance schedules independent of the permitting process and such compliance schedules may be enforced by the city as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(c)  Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. All wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be properly and adequately maintained by the user so as to achieve the intended purpose of the facilities. 
(d)  Periodic restrictions. Whenever deemed necessary, the city manager may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Control facility. The city manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(f)  Gas detection meter. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-277. - Sand and oil or grease interceptors. 
(a)  Required. Sand and oil or grease interceptors are required as follows: 
(1)  All users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide oil/grease interceptors or traps. Additionally, any user who generates a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of oil and grease regulated under sections 114-266 through 114-268, and provided that the excess oil and grease is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease interceptor or trap, then said user will be required to install a grease/oil interceptor. 
(2)  All users whose wastewater stream is associated with unusually large quantities or grit, sand or gravel shall be required to install a sand trap. All car/truck wash systems shall be required to install trap design and installation shall be approved by the city. 
(3)  The requirements of this chapter section shall not apply to private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  Design criteria. Design criteria shall be as follows: 
(1)  All sand and oil/grease interceptors used in conjunction with restaurants or other eating establishments shall have a capacity of 15 gallons per seat, except that no grease trap shall be smaller than 750 gallons nor larger than 3,000 gallons. 
(2)  All sand and oil/grease interceptors used in conjunction with facilities other than eating establishments shall have a capacity that will provide not less than ten minutes nor more than 30 minutes retention time at the peak eight-hour flow rate. Flow-through velocities shall not exceed one foot per second at the peak eight-hour flow rate. 
(3)  All sand and oil/grease interceptors shall be sized, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the duly adopted city plumbing code where such parameters have not been otherwise set forth herein. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the user at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(2)  In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city manager. The frequency of removal shall be such as to ensure that no overflows of oil, grease or sand into the wastewater system ever results. 
(d)  Proper disposal of collected materials. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's employees must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-278. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Protection. Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Additionally, any person or industry which handles hazardous wastes, any priority pollutant as shown on the Environmental Protection Agency list, or any prohibited materials shall, upon the request of the city, provide proof of protection from accidental discharge of hazardous wastes, priority pollutants, or prohibited materials. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facilities. Construction shall be completed within 18 days of approval of plans by the city. No significant industrial user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures and facilities (if required) have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Notification required. Notification of accidental discharge shall be in accordance with section 114-351. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the city manager shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The city manager may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the city manager may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the city manager of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by division 3 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-279. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the city manager, and at such times as are established by the city manager. Such waste shall not violate any section of this chapter or any other requirements established by the city. The city manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The city manager shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The city manager may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The city manager also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the city manager. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the city manager. The city manager may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The city manager may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-280. - High strength wastewater surcharge. 
(a)  Established. All users discharging high strength wastewater into the city wastewater system shall be assessed a monetary surcharge, in addition to the normally required sewer use charges, in an amount to be calculated as shown below. A "high strength" wastewater is defined as wastewater which contains the below shown parameters in excess of the below shown concentrations: 
(1)  Five-day, 20 degrees Celsius biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l), not to exceed a maximum of 600 mg/l. 
(2)  Total ammonia nitrogen (NH3+NH4) of 30 mg/l, not to exceed a maximum of 50 mg/l. 
(3)  Total phosphorus of ten mg/l, not to exceed a maximum of 20 mg/l. 
(4)  Floatable oil and grease of 100 mg/l, not to exceed a maximum of 250 mg/l. 
(b)  The parameters shall be determined by the utilization of the sampling and testing procedures as provided in section 114-270. The amount of the surcharge, which is hereby charged and assessed against all users discharging high strength wastewater into the city wastewater system, shall reflect the cost incurred by the city in handling the excess oxygen demand, ammonia, total phosphorus, and floatable oil and grease. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of charges for maintenance and operation of the wastewater treatment facilities including depreciation and other incidental expenses. 
(c)  Formula. When the concentrations of the surcharged parameters shown above exceed the values of the constituents as set forth in subsection (a), above, the excess concentrations shall be subject to a surcharge in the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: 
Surcharge $/month = P × G × 8.34 × C 
Where: 
P Is the excess concentration in mg/l of the parameter (BOD, etc.) being evaluated; i.e. the actual concentration less the allowable concentration listed in subsection (a) would be the excess. 
G Is equal to the user's monthly wastewater flow in millions of gallons. 
8.34 is a conversion factor. 
C Is equal to the unit cost in dollars per pound ($/lb.) for the treatment of the surcharged parameters. This value shall be established by the department manager based on actual wastewater treatment costs which shall be revised from time to time as necessary. 
(d)  Quantitative measurement of surchargeable parameters. The measurement of the surcharge parameters (BOD, COD, ammonia, total phosphorus, or floatable oil and grease) shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The city shall sample and test the user as provided in section 114-270 a minimum of once per year, except that the duration of the sampling to determine surcharge shall be for a period of not less than 14 calendar days. 
(2)  The city need not provide any prior notice to the industry with regard to the sampling period. 
(3)  The city may sample the user as often as desired at the city's expense if, in the opinion of the city, representative samples have not been previously obtained. 
(4)  If in the opinion of the user, the samples taken by the city are not representative of the user's typical wastewater, then the user may request a resampling. At the user's request, the city shall grant the user not more than two resamplings per year. All user requested resampling shall be done at the user's expense. A reasonable cost shall be charged to the user by the city therefore. 
(e)  Billing procedure. Wastewater surcharges as provided for in this section shall be prepared and rendered in the following manner: 
(1)  For users who purchase water from and discharge wastewater to the city water and wastewater systems, the surcharge will be included on the user's regular water and sewer bill or on a separate wastewater surcharge bill. 
(2)  For users who purchase water from city water systems within the city, the surcharge will be on a separate wastewater surcharge bill from the city or in such other manner as is in accordance with current city agreements regarding wastewater billings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-281. - Bypass discharges. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(3)  Permitted. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(b)  Notice. Notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city manager, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the pretreatment coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The city manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(c)  Enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the city manager may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(d)  Grant of approval. The city manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city manager determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-282. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-283. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-284. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-285. - State licensing requirements. 
Operators of industrial wastewater pretreatment systems must comply with state licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-286—114-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 114-311. - Required. 
All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the city wastewater system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the city system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-312. - Application. 
(a)  When requested to do so by the city, all significant industrial users shall complete and file with the city an application for a permit accompanied by a fee as set by the city from time to time. Existing users shall apply for a discharge permit within 60 days of notification by the city that a discharge permit is required. Proposed new users shall make application not less than 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the city wastewater system. The completed wastewater pretreatment permit application described in section 114-270 will serve as application for a discharge permit. 
(b)  The city manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the city manager will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The city manager may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  The city manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city manager to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the city manager fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-313. - Modifications. 
(a)  The city manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-314. - Conditions. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits must contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 114-315 and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits may also contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(7)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city manager to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-315. - Duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period as determined by the city, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in section 114-313 are modified, conditions change, or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-316. - Transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the city manager and the city manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city manager must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-317. - Suspension, revocation or denial. 
(a)  When city manager has reason to believe that any one of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) below exists, he shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. Said notice shall set forth the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the city manager. The hearing date shall not be less than 15 days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail to the permittee at the address shown on the permit or at permittee's last known address. At the hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to refute the allegations set forth in the proposed permit revocation notice. If after the hearing the city manager finds that any one of the conditions hereinafter enumerated in subsection (b), below, exists, he shall have the right to suspend, revoke or deny the permit. 
(b)  Any of the following is reason for permit suspension, revocation or denial: 
(1)  Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to division 3 of this article; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-318—114-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 114-346. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 114-270. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 114-270. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 114-347 of this chapter. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 114-270(b). 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-347. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
(a)  The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 114-346(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the city manager no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-348. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city manager but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified. 
(b)  All other users who have been issued discharge permits are required to submit compliance reports at the intervals set forth in each user's individual permit. The compliance reports shall address the discharge parameters and all other information indicated as being necessary to report as shown in the user's permit. 
(c)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(d)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city manager, using the procedures prescribed in section 114-270, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-349. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city manager a report containing the information described in sections 114-346(b)(4)—(6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-350. - Changed conditions. 
(a)  Each user must notify the city manager of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
(b)  The city manager may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under division 2 of this article. 
(c)  The city manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under division 2 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(d)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-351. - Potential problem, including slug loading. 
(a)  For any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-352. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city manager as the city manager may require. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-353. - Notice of violation, repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-354. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the Environmental Protection Agency regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: 
(1)  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, 
(2)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and 
(3)  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
(b)  All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 114-350 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 114-346, 114-348 and 114-349. 
(c)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(d)  For any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city manager, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(e)  If any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(f)  This section does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-355. - Compliance required. 
All sampling and testing performed under this subsection for reporting requirements shall be conducted in accordance with section 114-270. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-356. - Date of submission. 
Written reports made pursuant to this division will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-357—114-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES 

Sec. 114-386. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Private well shall include any well-constructed for the purpose of obtaining groundwater for supply to a residential dwelling or appurtenant buildings for domestic use, including, but not limited to, household purposes, the watering of farm livestock or gardens, irrigation, heating/cooling, and recreational uses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 114-387. - Location and construction criteria. 
(a)  All private wells located in the city must be in compliance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Not less than 50 feet from a septic tank. 
(2)  Not less than 100 feet away from a septic tank absorption field. 
(3)  Not less than ten feet away from a sewer. 
(4)  Not less than 1,000 feet away from a solid waste disposal site and not in a direction where ground water flow from the site may be intercepted by the well. 
(5)  As far removed as possible from all open abandoned wells. 
(6)  No well shall be located in the flood plain unless adequate protection is provided to prevent submergence of the well casing, pumps and appurtenances. 
(7)  No well shall be drilled, bored or dug without a permanent sealed casing. 
(8)  Private wells shall be physically and totally disconnected from the premises when public water is connected to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-388. - Wastewater disposal. 
Residential units connected to private wells must use private wastewater disposal systems. Residential units connected to public water must use the public wastewater system, if available. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-389. - Connection to available public water system required. 
(a)  The water distribution system of any building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall be connected to a public water supply, if public water is available. A public water supply shall be deemed available if public water exists within 200 feet of such premises. 
(b)  When public water is made available, line fees and such other charges as are required by sections 114-52 and 114-122 and other applicable sections shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-390. - Materials of construction. 
All permanent casing, liners, screens and other manufactured material used in potable water supply well installation must be new and adequate to protect the well against entrance of contaminants during the expected life of the well. All casing and liner pipe joints shall be water tight. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-391. - Cross-connecting systems prohibited. 
The interconnection of any private wells with the city water system piping is prohibited. Under no circumstances shall any interconnection be allowed whether separated by valves, check valves, backflow preventers or any other such devices. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-392. - Conditions for the use of private springs. 
(a)  Location criteria. All springs located in the city which are used for potable water supplies must be in compliance with the following criteria: 
(1)  A spring must be protected by an enclosed structure. The walls of the structure must extend down to bedrock, or into the soil sufficiently to provide for a proper foundation to prevent surface water infiltration. 
(2)  All surface water run-off must be diverted from the spring. 
(3)  The spring must be protected from any entry of surface water. 
(4)  The overflow from the spring's enclosed structure must be designed to prevent entrance of contaminants or animals. 
(5)  The pumping and water treatment facilities must be enclosed in shelters that are of weather and vandal-proof construction. 
(b)  Wastewater disposal. Wastewater disposal shall be the same as for wells as provided in section 114-388. 
(c)  Connection to available public water system required. Connection to available public water systems shall be the same as for wells as provided in section 114-389. 
(d)  Cross-connecting systems prohibited. Cross-connecting systems shall be the same as for wells as provided in section 114-391. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-393. - Use of private surface water treatment systems. 
The use of private surface water treatment systems is prohibited in the city in all locations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-394. - State and county health department requirements. 
The sections of this chapter shall not preclude any regulations, requirements, or restrictions which are more stringent in nature than the requirements provided in this chapter regarding the use of private water supply facilities as set forth by the state or county health departments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-395—114-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 114-421. - General conditions for acceptable construction and use. 
(a)  No private wastewater disposal facilities which discharge to the surface shall be allowed in the city except as follows: 
(1)  Preexisting, properly operating facilities which have valid NPDES permits issued by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division or the Federal EPA. 
(2)  Those surface discharge systems which have approval of the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division and for which the following can be conclusively shown to the department manager: 
a.  That a proposed development cannot reasonably be served by the existing city wastewater facilities, and 
b.  That private wastewater disposal facilities which discharge to the surface are essential to the proposed development, and 
c.  That the proposed private wastewater disposal facilities will be designed and constructed in accordance with the city standards and that the facilities will be owned and operated by the city under a discharge permit issued in the name of the city as permittee, and 
d.  That all expenses associated with the construction and implementation of the proposed private wastewater disposal facilities including all application fees, levies and charges will be paid for by the developer as well as all operating and maintenance costs up until such time as the facilities are accepted by the city, and 
e.  That the city has reviewed and approved the engineering plans and specifications for the proposed wastewater disposal facilities. 
(b)  Private wastewater disposal facilities with subsurface discharges shall be constructed and operated in strict conformity with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-422. - Conditions for acceptable construction and use of septic tanks. 
(a)  Domestic wastewater only. The treatment of any wastewater other than domestic wastewater or other such wastewater which is not readily treatable by anaerobic decomposition in septic tanks is prohibited. 
(b)  Sewer not available. No person shall construct a septic tank where the City Wastewater Facilities are available as set forth in section 114-234. 
(c)  County health department permit required. No person shall construct, repair, alter or enlarge a septic tank unless a valid permit for such work is issued by the county health department. 
(d)  Specifications for systems. The specifications for all septic tank systems constructed in the city shall conform to the rules and regulations of the department of public health for individual sewage disposal systems chapters 270-5-25-.04 through 270-5-25-.07. 
(e)  Minimum lot size. No septic tank system shall be allowed where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. 
(f)  Discharge to surface. No septic tank shall be allowed to discharge to the surface or to any natural outlet. 
(g)  Health menace. No septic tank that creates or will be likely to create a menace to public health shall be allowed. 
(h)  Service to multiple units. Only one residential unit or commercial building per septic tank system is allowed. 
(i)  Street address required. A street address must be obtained from the city prior to the issuance of a septic tank system approval letter by the water system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-423. - Correction of unsanitary systems. 
Any premise that has a septic tank, privy or any other private sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be made to function in a sanitary manner within 30 days from the receipt of a written notification and order from the director of the city health department that said system is not functioning in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-424. - Time limit for connection failing private system to city wastewater system. 
At such time as the city wastewater system becomes available to a property which is currently served by a private wastewater disposal system that has failed, a direct connection shall be made to the city wastewater system within 30 days after notice of the availability of the city system or, where the city wastewater system is and has been available, within 30 days after notice of the failing private system. The conditions that define the availability of the city wastewater system are set forth in section 114-234. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-425. - Disposition of unused facilities. 
When removed from service, any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with a suitable material such as sand, gravel, dirt, etc. In the alternative, the out-of-service wastewater disposal facilities shall be removed from the ground. All connections to the city wastewater system which remove septic tanks from service shall be made to the plumbing system upstream of the septic tank. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-426. - Pit privies prohibited. 
No pit privies or other such similar subsurface systems shall be installed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-427. - Additional requirements established by the county. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the rules and regulations of the county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-428. - Pollution of streams or soil. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow to be caused, the deposition of pollution into or onto the streams, drainage ditches, or soil of the city. Such a deposition of pollution shall be deemed to be a public nuisance punished by fine of up to $500.00 for each offense. Each day that the offense continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. The notice of violation requirement provided in section 114-488 of this chapter shall not be required for cases involving the sudden and accidental releases of pollution. 
(b)  This section may be enforced by any remedy as set forth in article IX of this chapter. 
(c)  It is not the intent of this section to preempt any federal or state water pollution control laws but instead to compliment such laws so as to provide a local remedy for offenses which are not enforced under said federal or state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-429—114-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF CITY EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 114-456. - Right to enter premises. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city and authorized representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and identification shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow these persons ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(b)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(d)  The city manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated frequently to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be the responsibility of the user. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-457. - Right to obtain information. 
Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city are authorized to obtain information concerning character, strength and quantity of nondomestic wastewater which may have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the city wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-458. - Permitted activities on utility easements. 
All entry by duly authorized employees and representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification on utility easements through private property shall be done in full accord with the terms of the utility easement pertaining to the private property involved. Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a utility easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the water or wastewater facilities lying within said easement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-459. - Safety rules. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this article, the duly authorized employees or representatives of the city shall observe all reasonable safety rules. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-460. - Special powers of city manager during emergency conditions. 
(a)  The city manager, with the authorization of the city mayor and council on a case-by-case basis, is hereby empowered to implement special water conservation measures during emergency conditions. Emergency conditions include time of drought; low stream flows; interruptions in the raw water supply due to breaks or contamination; inability of the filter plant(s) to meet demand; excessive losses or demands in the distribution system due to breaks, fires, or other causes; contamination in the finished water; or any other purpose for which the curtailed use of water might be reasonably required in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The water conservation measures may include restrictions or prohibitions on nonessential uses such as swimming pool filling; watering of lawns and gardens; washing of motor vehicles; recreational uses; and any other uses which the city manager may deem to be nonessential. The types, nature, degree, commencement and duration of restrictions or prohibitions is to be determined by the city manager as directed by the city mayor and council. The existence of restrictions or prohibitions imposed under the dictates of this section shall be published weekly in the city organ in the nonlegal section setting forth the specific nature of the restrictions or prohibitions; the reason or reasons why the restrictions or prohibitions have been imposed; the date upon which the restrictions or prohibitions became or become effective; and, at the appropriate time, the date upon which the restrictions or prohibitions are rescinded. The publication shall continue weekly until such time as the emergency is past and the restrictions or prohibitions are rescinded. The restrictions or prohibitions shall become effective no sooner than the first day following the publication date of the first notice. 
(c)  The violation of the restrictions or prohibitions shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code or by any other legal means as set forth in article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-461—114-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 114-486. - Violations. 
The failure of any person to comply with any provision contained in this water and wastewater ordinance (sections 114-1—114-531) shall be a violation which shall be enforced in accordance with the penalties and provisions as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-487. - Significant noncompliance. 
(a)  As used in this chapter, the term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits , defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations , defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the city manager believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city manager's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the city manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-488. - Notice of violation. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without a notice of violation first being issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-489. - Consent orders. 
The city manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 114-491 and 114-492 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-490. - Show cause hearing. 
The city manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served at least ten days prior to the hearing. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-491. - Compliance orders. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-492. - Cease and desist orders. 
(a)  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(b)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-493. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may fine such user in an amount according to a fine schedule as approved by the city. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of five percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city manager may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-494. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The city manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 114-495 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 114-490 or termination under section 114-495. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-495. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  In addition to division 2 of article V of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in article V of this chapter. 
(b)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 114-490 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-496. - Injunctive relief. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may petition the county superior court, through the city's attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-497. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for civil penalties in at least the amount of $1,000.00 per day per violation or in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A), whichever results in the highest minimum penalty. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The city manager may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-498. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-499. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The city manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-500. - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this chapter or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. In the event of such termination under this section, the city shall retain all rights to collect unpaid bills or amounts owed by the terminated user according to law or other provision of this article. Such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served. Past due amounts shall bear interest at the same rate as would unpaid ad valorem taxes. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-501. - Public nuisances. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this chapter or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city manager. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the sections of this Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-502. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The city manager shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as defined in sections 114-486 and 114-487. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-503. - Notification delivery of enforcement actions. 
Written notice personally delivered or placed in the U.S. Mail by certified mail to the person's last known address shall be deemed sufficient notice for all enforcement actions in this article with the exceptions included in this section. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. With respect to ordinance violations regarding nonpayment of amounts due under this chapter, only notice mailed to the person's last known address of the amount owed and the date upon which payment is due shall be required. Additionally, there shall be no prior notice requirement for violations of water use restrictions duly published in accordance with section 114-460(b). 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Secs. 114-504—114-524. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 114-525. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The local enforcement authority shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-526. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 114-527 of this article. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process water, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26 (b)(14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, (municipal/county) streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: Paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard waste; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatbales; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-527. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the (local issuing authority) as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the (municipal/county) separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the (municipal/county) separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the (sanitary sewer department/agency). 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the local enforcement authority requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the local enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-528. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the local enforcement authority prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-529. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  The local enforcement authority shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the local enforcement authority. 
(c)  The owner or operator shall allow the local enforcement authority ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of the NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(d)  The local enforcement authority shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as necessary in the opinion of the local enforcement authority to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(e)  The local enforcement authority may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the local enforcement authority. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(f)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the local enforcement authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(g)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the local enforcement authority access to the facility is a violation of this article. 
(h)  If the local enforcement authority has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the local enforcement authority is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the local enforcement authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-530. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications by person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the local enforcement authority within three business days of the phone or in-person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
Sec. 114-531. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(1)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the local enforcement authority is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The local enforcement authority is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 114-531(e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the local enforcement authority finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the local enforcement authority may order compliance by written notice of violation. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the local enforcement authority by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(7)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the local enforcement authority. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the local enforcement authority or other appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the local enforcement authority, then representatives of the local enforcement authority may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within five days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment with _______ days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(g)  In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measure set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violation described therein within ten days or such greater period as the local permitting authority shall deem appropriate, after the local permitting authority has taken one or more of the actions described above, the local permitting authority may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(h)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the local permitting authority may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in (appropriate municipal, magistrate or recorders) court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(i)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(j)  Remedies not exclusives. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and local enforcement authority may seek cumulative remedies. 
(k)  The local enforcement authority may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0921-01, § 1, 9-21-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1985 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1985 Code that are included herein. Sections of the 1985 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 2002 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2002 Code, as supplemented through December 12, 2007, that are included herein. Sections of the 2002 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 