CODE OF ORDINANCES MONTGOMERY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

COUNTY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Frank Brantley 
Chairman 
____________ 
Clarence Thomas 
Vernon Sumner 
Tim Williamson 
Leland Adams 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Brandon L. Braddy 
County Manager 
____________ 
Donnie Daniels 
Code Enforcement Officer 
____________ 
Howard C. Kaufold, Jr. 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Renee Cason 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Montgomery County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2003 Code, as updated through ordinance adopted February 8, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2003 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Janis Adams, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Brandon Braddy, County Manager, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Montgomery County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Montgomery County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Montgomery County, Georgia. 2016. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CODE OF MONTGOMERY COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY  THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Montgomery County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 28, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 8, 2016, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the County may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the County to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 8, 2016, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective September 1, 2016. 
Passed and adopted by the Board of Commissioners this 8 th day of August, 2016. 
  

ATTEST: 

  
1 st Reading: July 11, 2016  2 nd Reading: August 8, 2016  Board Action: Adopted August 8, 2016 
  
Certificate of Adoption 
  
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners, held on the 8 th day of August, 2016. 
  

  
(SEAL) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what legislation has been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances and resolutions that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Legislation that is not of a general and permanent nature is not codified in the Code Book and is considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - LOCAL AND SPECIAL ACTS 
SUBPART A. - MONTGOMERY COUNTY COMMISSIONERS[1] 
Act No. 309 (House Bill No. 417) 
An Act to repeal an Act creating a Board of Commissioners for Montgomery County, approved December 3, 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937-38, Extra Session, p. 856), as amended by an Act approved March 6, 1939 (Ga. Laws 1939, p. 687); to create a Board of Commissioners for the County of Montgomery; to provide for the election of members thereof; to provide for the election of successors; to provide for the meeting and organization of the board of county commissioners; to provide for the election of a chairman, to set his bond and to provide for a salary for the chairman; to name a clerk for said board and to fix his bond and salary; to provide duties and powers of said board; to prohibit members of board of commissioners to buy from or sell to county anything of value and to prescribe penalty therefor; to provide how disbursements shall be made by said board; to provide duties for chairman of the board; to provide that the board shall be the agency to receive contributions for improvement of roads; to provide for severability of Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia as follows: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1953 Ga. Laws (Act No. 309), p. 2729, which created and established the Board of Commissioners of the County. Amendments to the Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to 1976 Ga. Const. art. VI, § VI, ¶ IV, the term "Ordinary" has been changed to "Judge of the Probate Court." Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the term "Commissioners of Roads and Revenues" has been changed to "Board of Commissioners" and the term "Commissioner of Roads and Revenues" has been changed to "Commissioner." 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1. 

Sec. 1. - [1937 Act Repealed.] 
The Act entitled "An Act to create a Board of Commissioners in and for the County of Montgomery; to provide for manner of electing members thereof; to provide for their qualifications for said office; to designate the districts into which the county shall be divided and to appoint commissioners for said districts; to provide for election of their successors; to provide for their qualification; to provide for the meeting and organization of the board of county commissioners; to provide members compensation and fix the amount of their bond; to provide for filling vacancies; to name county executive as clerk of said board and to fix his salary and bond; to provide duties and powers of said board; to provide for publication of quarterly report by board of commissioners and to provide for annual audit of county affairs, to give board of commissioners authority to sell county property and to provide method of sale; to prohibit member of board of commissioners, either directly or indirectly, to buy from or sell to county anything of value and to prescribe penalty therefor; to provide how disbursements shall be made by said board; to provide duties of the chairman of said board; to provide that the board may receive contributions for improvement of roads; to provide notice to be given of intention of becoming candidate for office of county commissioners; to provide that any unconstitutional part of this Act shall not affect remaining portion; and for other purposes," approved December 3, 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937-38, Extra Session, p. 856), as amended by an Act approved March 6, 1939 (Ga. Laws 1939, p. 687), is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 2. - [Board of commissioners.] 
A Board of Commissioners in and for the County of Montgomery is hereby created. When hereinafter used, the word "board" shall be deemed to mean the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County created by this Act. 
Sec. 3. - [Composition.] 
The Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County shall be composed of five members who shall be elected as hereinafter provided in this Act. 
(1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1001), § 1) 
Sec. 4. - [Description of Commissioner Districts.] 
(a)  For purposes of electing members of the board, Montgomery County is divided into four commissioner districts, and those districts shall be and correspond to those four districts described in and attached to this Act and made a part hereof and further identified as 'Plan: montgomeryccsb-2012 Plan Type: local Administrator: montgomery User:bak.' One commissioner each shall be elected from Commissioner Districts 1, 2, and 4 and two commissioners shall be elected from Commissioner District 3 by the electors of such districts. The two commissioners elected from District 3 shall be designated as holding Post 1 and Post 2, respectively. 
(b)  (1)  For the purposes of such plan: 
(A)  The term 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Any part of Montgomery County which is not included in any district described in subsection (a) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of Montgomery County which is described in subsection (b) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 359), § 1, p. 4118) 
Editor's note— The attachment describing the composition of the commission districts for Montgomery County as referred to in this Act has not been included in the text of this codification at the discretion of the editor. Instead, a copy of the attachment may be found at 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 359), § 1, pgs. 4120 through 4121. 
Sec. 5. - [Continuation in Office of Current Members; Manner of Election and Terms of Office.] 
Members of the board representing Commissioner Districts 1 and 2 and Commissioner District 3, Post 1, shall be elected at the November general election in 2012, take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and serve for initial terms of office of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Members of the board representing Commissioner District 3, Post 2, and Commissioner District 4 shall be elected at the November general election in 2012, take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and serve for initial terms of office of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. All future successors to members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the November general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and serve for terms of office of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 359), § 1, p. 4118) 
Sec. 6. - [Vacancies.] 
Should a vacancy on the board occur for any reason, the Judge of the Probate Court of Montgomery County shall appoint a commissioner to fill said vacancy until a successor be elected and qualified at the next general election for members to the board. 
(1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 95), § 1) 
Sec. 7. - [Oath; Chairman's bond.] 
Each commissioner elected or appointed must qualify within thirty days after his election or appointment by taking and filing the following oath with the Judge of the Probate Court: 
"I, ____________ , do solemnly swear that I will faithfully discharge the duties of Commissioner of the County of Montgomery and that I will so act as in my judgment will be most conducive to the welfare and prosperity of said county. So help me, God." 
The chairman of the board shall, in addition to the oath, make and file with the Judge of the Probate Court a bond in some solvent surety company doing business in the county for the faithful performance of his duties in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) payable to the Judge of the Probate Court, and said bonding fee shall be a legal charge against the county. The board may in the discretion of the members fix a salary to be paid the chairman of the board within the limits fixed by this Act. 
Sec. 8. - [Meetings.] 
The board shall meet in each month on the first Thursday thereof. Annually, upon the first Tuesday of January, the board shall at its meeting elect one of its members as chairman. The chairman may call the board together for a special meeting whenever he deems it necessary, or any member of the board may request the chairman to call a meeting. Any three commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of holding a meeting of the board, provided that it shall at all times take a majority vote of the entire board to constitute an action by the board. 
Sec. 9. - [Chairman.] 
The chairman of the board shall preside at all meetings at which he is present, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as are or may be conferred upon him by law or authorized by the board, and make to the board such recommendations as he shall deem proper. 
Sec. 10. - [Compensation of members.] 
[a]  The compensation and expenses provided for in this Section shall be paid from the funds of Montgomery County. 
[b]  [Compensation of the members of the Board of Commissioners including the Chairman will be pursuant to state law.] 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 342), § 1) 
Sec. 11. - [Boards' powers.] 
The board shall have exclusive jurisdiction and control over the following: 
1.  In governing and controlling all county property, letting, hiring and leasing county convicts. 
2.  In levying taxes for county purposes in accordance with law. 
3.  In examining and auditing the accounts of all officers or persons having the care, management, keeping, collecting or disbursing of money belonging to the county, or appropriated for its use and bring them to settlement. 
4.  In examining, auditing, allowing and settling all claims against the county. 
5.  In making such rules and regulations for the support of the paupers of the county and the promotion of the health of the county as are not inconsistent with the laws of the State. 
6.  In establishing, altering, abolishing, or opening roads, bridges, and ferries in accordance with the law. 
7.  In the appointment of a road superintendent and in the general management of the roads, bridges and revenues of the county, including the exercise of all powers over county matters and officers in said county as may be exercised in other counties of this State by the ordinaries where no county commissioners exist; to grant or refuse to grant licenses to do or perform any act for which license from the county or county authorities is required by law. 
8.  They shall generally have and perform all the duties vested by law in the county ordinaries when sitting for county purposes. 
9.  (A)  The board shall have authority to employ and retain a competent attorney at law, who shall be a resident of Montgomery County, and whose compensation shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) per annum, to be paid in equal monthly installments out of the county treasury of said county; to advise said board in all matters that may come before said board and to draw such county orders, contracts, etc., as are necessary; that should any special litigation or special matter arise which would require said county attorney to go out of said county at the instance of the board or perform extra services within said county in defense of suit against said board, for the same he shall be entitled to receive such compensation as is reasonable therefor as determined by the board. 
(B)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act to the contrary, the county attorney employed by the board of commissioners shall not be required to be a resident of Montgomery County. 
(1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 754), § 1) 
Sec. 12. - [Contributions for road and bridge improvement.] 
The board may receive contributions for the improvement of the public roads or bridges of the county from persons who own property along said roads, or from any other person or persons, or from the State Government, or from the United States Government, or from any corporation or firm who may be interested in the improvement of the roads and bridges of the county, and such contributions, when received, shall be used for the improvement of the roads or bridges designated by the benefactor. 
Sec. 13. - [Clerk.] 
The person serving as clerk of the board of commissioners of Montgomery County at the time this Act becomes effective is hereby made and constituted the clerk of the board created by this Act, and he shall have such authority as may be delegated to him by the board. The clerk of the board shall serve for a like term as the members of the board, so long as his services are satisfactory to the board, and his successor shall be appointed by the board at the expiration of his term or at any time before such date of expiration, if for any reason the said office shall become vacant. The salary of the clerk of the Board shall not be more than $350.00 per month, paid from county funds, to be determined by the Board. 
(1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 805), § 1) 
Sec. 14. - [Clerk's bond.] 
The clerk of the board shall give bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), payable to the board, in some solvent surety company doing business in the county and authorized by law to do business in this State, the same to be approved by the chairman of the board and conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties as such clerk, and said bonding fee shall be a legal charge against the county. 
Sec. 15. - [Clerk's duties.] 
The clerk of the board shall keep an accurate record of the meetings of the board, shall record the vote of each member of the board on any and all questions considered by the board, and shall keep an accurate account of all funds collected by him or turned over to him by any of the members of the board, agents of the board or officers of the county. He shall also keep an accurate record of all disbursements from funds in his hands, such records to include the person to whom disbursement is made, the time when the disbursement was made, the amount disbursed, and for what purpose the disbursement was made. 
Sec. 16. - [Disbursements.] 
All disbursements of funds of the county shall be by warrant drawn against the fund from which such debt shall be paid, and no other, and said warrant shall be signed by the chairman and clerk of the board. No warrant shall be drawn until the claim or debt shall be approved by the board, and all claims shall be itemized before being paid. 
Sec. 16-A. - [Compensation for Assistant to Tax Commissioner.] 
The board of commissioners is hereby authorized to pay to the assistant to the tax commissioner of Montgomery County an annual salary of up to $1,200.00, payable in equal monthly installments from funds of Montgomery County, to be determined by the board. 
(1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 805), § 2) 
Sec. 17. - [Sales and purchases.] 
The board shall have authority, whenever they deem it advisable or necessary, to sell any property belonging to the county at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash before the courthouse door, or at private sale to the highest bidder for cash, as in their discretion they deem to be to the best interest of the county. Personal property belonging to the county may be sold after publishing notice of the sale in the official gazette of the county for one week prior to such sale; provided, that in no event shall a commissioner buy from, or sell to the county, either directly or indirectly, anything or article of value whatsoever. Should any member of the board violate the foregoing provision, he shall forthwith forfeit his right to serve as a member of the board and shall be liable for punishment as for a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 18. - [Reports; Audits.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said board shall be required to publish detailed quarterly reports of all receipts or money or other things coming into their hands for the use and benefit of said county, as well as all expenditures and disbursements made by them, and such reports shall not be mere ledger balances, but shall be detailed statements of what money or other things of value have been received and from what sources received, and how expended or disbursed, and shall be so expressed that any person of average experience and intelligence can understand what is meant thereby and what has been done with the county's money or other thing of value; and at the same time said board shall publish a full and complete statement of how much money the county owes, if any, and to whom the same is due. Said board are hereby directed and commanded to publish said statements in the county paper in which sheriff's advertisements for said county are published, and they are authorized and empowered to pay therefor out of any fund in the county treasury a reasonable compensation for such publication, which, in no event, shall exceed the sum allowed for legal advertisements. It is further provided that as of the close of business on June thirtieth of each year, the board shall have a detailed audit made of the fiscal affairs of the county. Such audit shall be made by an individual, or firm, who is registered with the State Board of Accountancy of Georgia and shall include all offices and officers of the county receiving or disbursing county funds. 
Sec. 19. - [Severability.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any portion of this Act shall for any reason be held illegal, that portion alone shall be affected, but the remaining portions of said Act shall not be affected thereby, and shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 20. - [Repealer.] 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
Notice of Intention to Apply for the Passage of a Special Bill. 
Notice is hereby given that application will be made at the next session of the General Assembly of Georgia for the passage of the following bill: 
An Act to abolish all laws creating and regulating the Board of Commissioners in and for the County of Montgomery. 
This 10th day of December, 1952. 
SUBPART B. - MONTGOMERY COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 76), p. 899, which amended Section 1, Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution and thereby created the development authority of the County. Amendments to the Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. A. - Created. 
A.  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Montgomery County to be known as the Montgomery County Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and of Montgomery County and a public corporation, and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the 'Authority'. 
Sec. B. - Members. 
(1)  The Authority shall consist of five members who shall serve for a term of five years and until their successors are appointed and qualified and who shall be eligible for reappointment. The members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County (hereinafter referred to as 'Board') as herein provided. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the Authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Authority to act. Members of the Authority shall not be disqualified by reason of membership on the Authority to hold any other public office. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Board as herein provided. 
(2)  For the purpose of appointment of members of the Authority, Montgomery County is divided into four Authority Districts. Authority District No. 1 shall consist of the Mt. Vernon Militia District; Authority District No. 2 shall consist of the Uvalda and Alston Militia Districts; Authority District No. 3 shall consist of the Ailey and the Higgston Militia District; and the Authority District No. 4 shall consist of the Tarrytown and the Kibbee-Tiger Militia Districts. 
(3)  One member of the Authority shall be a resident of Authority District No. 1; one member of the Authority shall be a resident of Authority District No. 2; one member shall be a resident of Authority District No. 3; one member shall be a resident of Authority District No. 4; and one member of the Authority shall be a resident of and appointed from the county at large. 
(4)  The first members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Board after this amendment is ratified and prior to January 1, 1967 and their terms of office shall begin January 1, 1967. The first members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years and thereafter their successors (except in the case of appointments filling unexpired terms) shall be appointed for terms of five years. All appointments, other than the original appointments and including appointments to fill unexpired terms, shall be made as follows: The Authority shall nominate three qualified persons for the appointment and the Board shall appoint one of the three nominees. 
Sec. C. - Taxes. 
The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same immunity Taxes from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Montgomery County. The exemptions herein provided shall not include exemptions from Sales and Use Taxes on property purchased by the Authority or for use by the Authority. 
Sec. D. - Powers. 
The powers of the Authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To purchase, acquire, develop, improve, construct, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease as lessor and lessee, and mortgage real and personal property of all kinds, including, but not limited to, land, buildings, machinery, equipment, industrial plants, manufacturing plants, processing plants, commercial buildings, warehouses and other storage facilities, and plants and other facilities for storing, handling or processing agricultural and livestock products within the limits of Montgomery County. 
(2)  To accept and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts. 
(3)  To donate, grant, loan and lease without adequate consideration or without any consideration, or with or without security and on such terms as the Authority shall see fit, any of its funds or property to private persons and corporations operating or proposing to operate within Montgomery County, any industrial, commercial, agricultural, or recreational plant, facility, or enterprise. The provisions of this clause shall not be construed to limit any other power of the Authority. 
(4)  To borrow money and to issue-notes, bonds and certificates of indebtedness therefor and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property, revenues, and income as security therefor. 
(5)  To contract with Montgomery County, State of Georgia, and with other public authorities, political subdivisions, and public agencies of the State of Georgia and also with the United States, and with any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States. 
(6)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the Authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the Authority. 
(7)  To aid, foster and encourage, and to promote the expansion of industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation in Montgomery County, and to make long-range plans therefor. 
(8)  To exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it by the Board. 
(9)  To accumulate (if the Authority shall see fit) its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(10)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the Authority as herein stated. 
(11)  To contract with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name. 
Sec. E. - Tort liability. 
The Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents and employees of the Authority, when in performance of the work of the Authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia, when in performance of their public duties or work of the State. The Authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligations of the Authority. 
Sec. F. - Compensation. 
The members of the Authority shall receive only such compensation for their services and expenses to the Authority as shall be authorized by the Board, but such compensation shall be paid from funds of the Authority. 
Sec. G. - Funds. 
Montgomery County, acting by the Board, is authorized to levy an annual tax, not to exceed one mill, on all taxable property within Montgomery County for the support of the Authority and for its use and purposes, and all funds raised by such tax shall be paid and appropriated by the Board to the Authority and when paid to the Authority, shall become a part of its funds and may be used by it for any of its purposes and powers as herein stated or as may be hereafter provided by law, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by law. 
Sec. H. - Property. 
The property of the Authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process, except such property, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the Authority, and any such property, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the Authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
Sec. I. - Intent. 
The Authority is created and this amendment is adopted for the purpose of aiding, promoting, developing, and expanding for the public good and welfare of Montgomery County and its citizens, industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation in Montgomery County, and to authorize the use of public funds of Montgomery County for such purposes so as to provide employment and to improve the economy and living conditions in Montgomery County, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose. 
Sec. J. - Effective date. 
This amendment shall be self-executing and shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor. 
Sec. K. - General Assembly. 
The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the Authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the Authority. The scope and jurisdiction of the Authority shall be limited to Montgomery County. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the Authority nor the scope of its operations beyond the limits of Montgomery County. 
Sec. L. - Property. 
Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Montgomery County, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
Sec. M. - Debt. 
There shall be no limitation upon the payment of debt which the Authority may incur, but no debt created by the Authority shall be a debt of Montgomery County or of the State of Georgia and the Authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability; or obligation against the State of Georgia or Montgomery County. 
Sec. N. - Bonds. 
(1)  The Authority shall be authorized to issue revenue bonds for the purpose of financing or refinancing any project or undertaking within the scope of the Authority's powers, and may pledge any of its assets, income, or revenues as security for such bonds. 
(2)  Revenue bonds issued or proposed for issue by the Authority may be validated as provided in the Act of the Legislature now known as the 'Revenue Bond Law' (Ga. L. 1937, pp. 761, et seq.), as amended, and the term 'municipality' wherever used in said Act, as amended, shall include the Authority, and the Authority shall have all of the rights and powers conferred upon municipalities by said Act, as amended. 
(3)  Any private person or corporation and also any political subdivision, public authority or agency contracting with the Authority with respect to revenue bonds of the Authority proposed for validation under said Act, as amended, or with respect to any project or undertaking of the Authority to be financed or refinanced by such bonds may be made a party to the proceedings to validate such bonds under said Act, as amended, for the purpose of validating any such contract. 
(4)  This part of this amendment ([Section] N) shall not limit the other powers given the Authority in this amendment to borrow money and to give security therefor or to require the validation of the obligations of the Authority by any court. 
Sec. O. - Board defined. 
The term 'Board' where used herein shall include the present Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County and also any other board, group, or individual which may hereafter constitute the governing body or authority of Montgomery County. 
Sec. P. - Funds. 
The Board shall be authorized to appropriate to the Authority any surplus funds at the time held by Montgomery County, which appropriation shall be in addition to the tax provided in [Section] G. 
Sec. Q. - Debt. 
The Authority, with the agreement of the Board, may pledge the Authority's revenues from the annual tax provided in [Section] G as security for any obligation or undertaking of the Authority. If said revenues are pledged as security for revenue bonds issued by the Authority, the agreement between Montgomery County (acting by the Board) and the Authority shall be subject to validation as provided in Paragraph (3) of [Section] N of this amendment. 
Sec. R. - Severability. 
If any provision of this amendment should be judicially determined to be invalid for any reason, such determination shall not affect any other part of the amendment nor the validity of the provision so determined to be invalid with respect to any person other than the person in whose favor such determination is made. 
LOCAL AND SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Local and Special Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Montgomery County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Montgomery County Code" or the "County Code." 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and all ordinances found herein, the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the County Commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the County Commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the Code or other law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Board of Commissioners, Commissioners, and County Commissioners. The terms "Board of Commissioners." "Commissioners" and "County Commissioners" mean the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Montgomery County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. Whenever the terms "County," "the County" or "this County" are used, they shall refer to Montgomery County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the County to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well. 
Governing body or local governing authority. The term "governing body" or "local governing authority" means the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County, Georgia. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All terms giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the Board of Commissioners. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Names of officers, and departments. The name or title of any officer or department is to be read as though the words "of Montgomery County" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases are to be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, commissions. Whenever reference is made to officers, boards or commissions by title only, such as "County Commission" or "Planning Commission", such references shall be read as though followed by the words "of Montgomery County, Georgia." 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number; year, act number and page; year and page; or short title is a reference to such act, as amended. 
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is to be applied to a number of persons and to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "State" or "the State" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the unincorporated area of the County. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of this Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the County Commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Sec. 1-4. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the County Commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-8. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the County repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the County under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the County Commissioners, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the County pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the County Commissioners, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the County Commissioners, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the County Commissioners by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the County Commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Montgomery County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the County Commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the County to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the County to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the County Commissioners. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a County Officer or County Employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4)  The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of Code on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-91; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-15. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of the Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the County or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the County or any evidence of the County's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the County. 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or fixing the salaries, retirement and pension plans, benefits, personnel policy, civil service rules and regulations, and/or administrative procedures for County Officers or employees not otherwise enumerated in this Code. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the County. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the County. 
(7)  Any appropriation or budget ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations. 
(11)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the County. 
(12)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(13)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the County. 
(15)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision. 
(17)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or imposing any municipal rates, charges or fees for the County, that are not otherwise enumerated in this Code. 
(18)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(19)  Any ordinance or resolution that is temporary, although general in effect. 
(20)  Any ordinance or resolution that is special, although permanent in effect. 
(21)  Any ordinance or resolution the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(22)  Any ordinance or resolution that solely deals with administrative matters. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-16. - Enforcement and issuing citations. 
The Code Enforcement Officer and law enforcement officials of the various jurisdictions, of or within the County, shall be the enforcement officials for all ordinances. These officials shall have an authority to act on behalf of the County and participating municipalities in investigating complaints, executing warrants, issuing citations, making arrests and other lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of all ordinances. It shall be a violation of the ordinances to interfere with any Code Enforcement Officer or other law enforcement official in performance of his duties under this section. 
(Res. No. 17-08-01, (Att.), 8-14-2017) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The County Board of Health shall be established and composed according to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq. Planning duties and functions for the County will be performed according to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 (O.C.G.A. § 45-12-200 et seq.). The Montgomery County Board of Commissioners, Mount Vernon, Georgia, hereby entered into a cooperative planning agreement with the cities of Ailey, Alston, Higgston, Mount Vernon, Tarrytown and Uvalda, Georgia to prepare a joint comprehensive plan. Each of these municipalities jointly participated with each other in the development of the "Montgomery County-City Comprehensive Plan, 2015." Planning duties and functions for the County will be performed according to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 (O.C.G.A. § 45-12-200 et seq.). 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Commissioners' meeting day. 
The Commissioners' regular monthly meeting day is to be held on the first Tuesday of each month. 
(Code 2003, ch. 1, art. I; Mot. of 6-3-1991) 
Sec. 2-2. - Non-smoking areas. 
The Courthouse has been designated a non-smoking area and this policy will be enforced. 
(Code 2003, ch. 1, art. I; Mot. of 8-4-1992) 
Sec. 2-3. - Qualifying fees for County offices. 
Qualifying fees for all County offices are set at three percent of the total gross salary of that office as authorized under state law, including Commissioners. 
(Code 2003, ch. 1, art. I; Mot. of 1-20-1992) 
Sec. 2-4. - Rental fee for Senior Center. 
The rent for the Senior Center and the security deposit, which will be returned if no damage or excessive cleaning expenses are reported, shall be in amounts as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 1, art. I; Mot. of 8-5-1997) 
Secs. 2-5—2-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF COUNTY PROPERTY AND PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-33. - Use of County property; personnel. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use County buildings, office space, property, equipment, supplies, County Employees or any asset of the County for a private profit or benefit. 
(b)  Any County official, elected or appointed, that uses County property for private profit or that uses County employees to perform private work while on County time, shall be in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any County employee guilty of performing private work for profit while on County time shall be in violation of this article. 
(d)  Any County official, elected or appointed, found in violation of this article shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 and 60 days in jail for each count and may be subject to restitution to the County in an amount deemed appropriate by the court having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(e)  Any County employee found in violation of this article, shall pay proper restitution and be subject to immediate termination. 
(f)  The purpose of this article is to ensure that County officials, whether elected or appointed, and County employees carry out their duties with the sole intent and purpose of benefiting the citizens of the County. 
(g)  The governing authority shall be authorized to prosecute violators of this article to the maximum extent of the law in the County Magistrate Court in accordance with Article 4 of Chapter 10 of Title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or in any proper local, State or Federal Court. Prosecution of violations of this article may be upon citation as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 or upon accusation by the County Attorney or such other attorney as the County governing authority may designate. 
(Code 2003, ch. 1, art. III; Ord. of 8-6-1996) 
Secs. 2-34—2-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING CARD AND CREDIT CARD 

Sec. 2-55. - Intent and scope. 
This division is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of County-issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § I) 
Sec. 2-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the Board of Commissioners to receive a County-issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card Administrator means the purchasing card and Credit Card Administrator designated by the Montgomery Board of Commissioners. 
County means Montgomery County and/or the Board of Commissioners. 
County purchase card, County p-card or County credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a County official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the County. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the Board of Commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a County purchasing card or credit card. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § II) 
Sec. 2-57. - Designated elected officials. 
(a)  The Montgomery County Board of Commissioners ("County"), in its discretion, may authorize specific County-elected officials to use a County purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
(b)  No authorized elected official may use a County purchasing card or credit card until and unless he has executed the County's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(c)  The County will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this division or for any purchases that are not authorized by this division. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § III) 
Sec. 2-58. - Card Administrator. 
The Board of Commissioners shall designate a County Purchasing Card and Credit Card Administrator. The responsibilities of the Card Administrator include: 
(1)  Manage County-issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all County purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this division, County procurement ordinances and policies, County purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and State law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least five years or as otherwise provided by the County's record retention policy. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § IV) 
Sec. 2-59. - Use of cards. 
(a)  Authorized purchases. County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this division, the County purchasing card and credit card user agreement, County procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
(1)  Authorized elected officials may use a County purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments as authorized by a purchase order. The cards shall be signed-out from the Card Administrator or the Card Administrator's designee. Elected officials shall return and sign-in the cards immediately after the purchase is made. Elected officials are not assigned cards on a long-term basis. However, elected officials are authorized to check cards in and out from the Card Administrator or the Card Administrator's designee as needed to make purchases after a purchase order has been obtained. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
(2)  Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the County purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
a.  Per transaction: $500.00. 
b.  Per month: $1,500.00. 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the County's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the County's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the County purchasing card and credit card user agreement. Using purchasing cards and credit cards does not void the County's requirement to obtain a purchase order prior to making a purchase. 
(c)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a County purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized County elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the County's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official County duties. 
(d)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § V) 
Sec. 2-60. - Review of purchases and audit. 
(a)  Documentation. Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of County issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the County. 
(b)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: An approved purchase order must accompany each receipt or invoice. The receipt or invoice must be signed by the elected official acknowledging receipt of the good or service. The receipt, invoice or documentation of the transaction must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official County duties. The documentation from each transaction will be used to reconcile the monthly statement. 
(c)  Audits. The Card Administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § VI) 
Sec. 2-61. - Violations. 
(a)  An elected official shall reimburse the County for any purchases made with a County-issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this division or the user agreement. 
(b)  In the discretion of the County governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this division may result in: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a County purchase card or credit card; or 
(3)  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a County purchase card or credit card. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall preclude the County governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § VII) 
Sec. 2-62. - Officials granted use. 
The Board of Commissioners, by public vote, designates the following Montgomery County Elected Officials to use a County-issued purchasing and/or credit card and approves the attached user agreement for the following elected officials: 
(1)  Commissioners. 
(2)  Coroner. 
(3)  Magistrate Judge. 
(4)  Probate Judge. 
(5)  Sheriff. 
(6)  Superior Court Clerk. 
(7)  Tax Commissioner. 
Secs. 2-63—2-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-83. - Office created. 
The office of County Manager of Montgomery County, Georgia, is hereby created. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 2-84. - Appointment: restrictions. 
The County Manager shall be appointed by vote of a majority of the entire Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County ("the Board") to serve at the pleasure of the Board for an indefinite term. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 2-85. - Qualifications. 
The County Manager shall be chosen by the Board upon the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with specific reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices with respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 2-86. - Removal. 
The County Manager is the employee at will of the Board, and is not covered by or governed by any personnel policy which has been or may be adopted by the Board. The County Manager may be removed by the vote of a majority of the entire Board without cause. However, the reason(s) for removal shall be set forth in writing and provided to the County Manager within 48 hours after the vote. The County Manager shall be entitled to such severance pay as may be provided by any employment agreement executed by the County Manager and the Board, or, if no such agreement exists, the County Manager shall receive severance pay in an amount equal to 90 days of base salary. No severance pay shall be provided if the termination is for reason of the conviction of a felony. Nothing in this section shall alter or annul the right of the Board to terminate the services of the County Manager without cause at any time, subject only to the above provisions. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 4) 
Sec. 2-87. - Compensation. 
The County Manager shall be paid an annual salary, on a weekly or monthly basis; the amount shall be fixed by the Board. The Board may review and adjust the compensation annually based on performance. For that purpose, the Board may make an annual performance evaluation. The County Manager shall receive all across-the-board cost of living allowances and across-the-board wage and salary increases awarded to County employees, and shall receive all employee benefits provided to County employees generally. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 5) 
Sec. 2-88. - Reimbursable expenses. 
The County Manager shall be reimbursed for all official travel, training, and/or lodging. A County vehicle may be assigned to the County Manager in lieu of paying travel. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 2-89. - Acting County Manager. 
In the event the position of County Manager becomes vacant, the Board may appoint an Acting County Manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties of County Manager temporarily pending appointment of a new County Manager. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 2-90. - Official bonds. 
The County Manager and, before performing any duties, any Acting County Manager, shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the Board in the amount as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time, the premiums for which shall be paid by Montgomery County. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 8) 
Sec. 2-91. - Duties. 
The County Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the County of Montgomery. He shall be responsible to the Board for the proper administration of the affairs of the County as herein provided. It shall be his duty: 
(1)  To see that all ordinances, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Board and all laws of the State of Georgia subject to enforcement by County officers or department heads, other than by elected constitutional officers, are faithfully executed; 
(2)  To attend all meetings of the Board and/or it its committees, with the right to take part in discussions in accordance with any rules adopted by the Board, but having no vote. The County Manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings of the Board and non-scheduled committee meetings; 
(3)  To serve, if so directed by the Board, ex officio as County Clerk, to perform all the duties and have all the responsibilities of that office; 
(4)  To prepare and submit to the Board a proposed annual budget and a proposed capital program, and to execute the budget and capital program adopted by the Board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or authorized by the Board; 
(5)  To examine regularly at periods fixed by the Board the accounts, records and operations of every County board, commission, department, office and agency which receives appropriations from said Board; to make monthly reports to the Board on County fiscal and other affairs; to keep the Board fully advised on the financial conditions and future needs of the County, and to make such recommendations on County affairs as he deems necessary for the efficient operation of the County; 
(6)  To submit to the Board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the County for the preceding year; 
(7)  To confer with and advise all other elected or appointed officials of the County who are not under the immediate control of the Board, but who receive financial support from the Board; 
(8)  To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the County, and supervise and regulate all purchases of materials and supplies for the County within such limitations and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Board; 
(9)  To exercise control over all departments or divisions of the County for which the Board has responsibility, and all employees of the County, and to direct and supervise the administration of all County offices and the construction, maintenance and operation of all County roads, bridges, drains, buildings and other public works, and to have the care and responsibility for the maintenance of all real and personal property owned by the County; 
(10)  To appoint, and when in his discretion the welfare of the County requires it, and subject to any personnel policy which may be in effect or which may hereafter be adopted, to suspend, discharge, transfer or remove all employees for whom the Board is responsible, except the County Attorney, who shall be appointed directly by the Board. The County Manager may delegate to any department head such powers with respect to subordinates within that department; 
(11)  To recommend the salaries of all officers and employees of the County, subject, however, to pay grades and scales adopted by the Board, and budget appropriations, and subject to supervision and control by the Board; 
(12)  To supervise the programs of financial management, personnel administration, procurement, and risk management; and 
(13)  To perform such other duties as may be required of him by the Board. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 9) 
Sec. 2-92. - Performance of duties. 
The County Manager shall perform his duties under the direction of the Board, and shall be responsible to the Board as a body, but not to individual Board members. No member of the Board shall individually direct the County Manager or interfere or attempt to interfere in the performance of his duties, and the Board shall, except for the purpose of formal inquiries and investigations, deal with County employees subject to the County Manager's direction or supervision solely through the County Manager. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 10) 
Sec. 2-93. - Budget development. 
(a)  The County Manager shall, no later than the last day of the tenth month of each fiscal year, submit a proposed budget to the Board for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. 
(b)  The message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the County for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such changes, summarizes the County's debt position, and include such other material as the County Manager deems desirable. 
(c)  The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan for all County funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year, and, except as otherwise required by law, shall be in such form as the County Manager deems desirable or the Board may require. The proposed budget shall, at a minimum, include a clear general summary of its contents, and show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate sections: 
(1)  Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by organization unit when practicable, and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and 
(2)  The anticipated income and expense and surplus or deficit for the ensuing year for each utility or other enterprise fund operated by the County. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 11) 
Sec. 2-94. - Capital program development. 
(a)  The County Manager shall consult with the Board of Commissioners, heads of County departments, and constitutional officers to develop a proposed five-year capital program each year. It shall be submitted to the Board simultaneously with the submission of the proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(b)  The capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each; 
(3)  Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditure; 
(4)  The method of financing upon which each capital expenditure is to be reliant; and 
(5)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 12) 
Sec. 2-95. - Community planning and development. 
The County Manager shall, subject to supervision by the Board: 
(1)  Develop plans and programs to advance the health, safety, general welfare, and physical and economic development of the County, and shall pursue grant-in-aids that may be available from time to time to help finance implementation of such programs; 
(2)  Monitor the County's planning activities, including those undertaken in response to the Georgia Planning Act and the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act; and 
(3)  Cooperate with and coordinate the community improvement activities of independent authorities and agencies, County constitutional offices, the County Planning Commission, and County departments and other organizational components of the County government as necessary. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010, § 13) 
Secs. 2-96—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAW ENFORCEMENT FINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Additional penalties, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93. 

Sec. 2-150. - Additional penalty. 
(a)  The General Assembly of the State of Georgia has enacted legislation under O.C.G.A. § 15-21-90 et seq., effective February 5, 1990, known as the "Jail Construction and Staffing Act," and said Act authorizing additional penalty assessment in criminal and traffic cases and cases involving violations of County ordinances and further provides that the proceeds derived therefrom may be used for constructing, operating, and staffing of jails, correctional institutions, and detention facilities by counties. 
(b)  The "Jail Construction and Staffing Act" provides that the additional penalties provided for in the Act shall not be imposed or collected in any court in any county until the governing authority of the County adopts a resolution placing the Act in effect. 
(c)  It is the intent and desire of the County Commissioner of Montgomery County, as the governing authority of Montgomery County, to have imposed and collected by the courts in this County the additional penalties provided for in the "Jail Construction and Staffing Act" and to expend the funds collected for the purposes set out in the Act. 
(d)  That in every case in which any Superior Court, Probate Court or Magistrate Court in this County shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this State or any offense against a County ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(e)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this State or a violation of a County ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which any Superior Court, Probate Court or Magistrate Court in this County shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum of ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(f)  The additional penalties set forth above shall be in additional to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officer's Annuity and Benefit Fund or by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the Judges of Probate Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia, or by any other provision of law. 
(g)  The additional penalty as herein provided for shall be assessed and collected by the Clerk or Court Officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the County Commissioner by the tenth day of the month following the month in which these sums are collected. 
(h)  All sums collected and paid over to the County Commissioner of Montgomery County shall be deposited into a special account which shall be known as the "County Jail Fund" and shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing the Montgomery County jail, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(i)  The additional penalties provided for by this article shall not be imposed or collected in any court operated by any municipality located in Montgomery County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 14; Res. of 2-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-151. - Imposition of penalty. 
(a)  There shall be imposed for every fine levied by the superior, probate, magistrate or juvenile court, for violation of a criminal or traffic law of this State or ordinance of the County, a penalty equal to ten percent of the fine levied including costs. 
(b)  At the time of the posting of any bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this State or ordinance of the County, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted, and if the bail or bond is forfeited, the ten percent shall be paid over as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected by the Clerk or Court Officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds and paid over to the Board of Commissioners by the tenth of each month following the month in which the fines are collected. All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special fund designated as the "County Jail Fund." 
(d)  All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be expended as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2013) 
State Law reference— Jail Construction and Staffing Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-90 et seq.; imposition, collection, payment and expenditure of additional penalties, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; county governing authority given power to regulate alcoholic beverages permitting and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-40 et seq., 3-4-80; local government may authorize issuance license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF THE SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 4-19. - Type of sale. 
Malt beverages sold in the County will be for consumption on and off the premises at the option of the owner. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § I; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-20. - Retail licensee qualifications. 
The retail licensee must be a person of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
(1)  The licensee shall not have been convicted within five years of the date of his application of any felony, or within the last three years of any violation of the laws of this State, or any other state, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
(3)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to the above and shall place same on file with the Clerk of the County Commissioners before any license is issued. 
(4)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. 
(5)  No person shall be granted a license to engage in the sale of malt beverages at retail unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the County Commissioners that such person shall be of good moral character. 
(6)  Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § II; Ord. of 4-22-1997; Ord. of 10-5-2004, art. I, § II) 
Sec. 4-21. - Wholesale permits. 
Wholesale licenses shall be issued only to those parties who are licensed by the State of Georgia to sell and distribute malt beverages at wholesale. Application shall be made with the Clerk of the County Commissioners. Cost of wholesale license shall be as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § III; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-22. - Regulations. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of malt beverages at retail in the County nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly sell beer to a minor; 
(2)  Knowingly sell beer to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  Sell beer upon the licensed premises or permit beer to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. In addition: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale, any malt beverages where such person does not have a license from the County of Montgomery to sell or possess for sale such beverages. 
(2)  Malt beverages shall be received at or delivered to the premise of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the County of Montgomery to make deliveries in said County. 
(3)  Transportation of malt beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of wholesale permit. 
(4)  Dealers in malt beverages shall not engage in the sale of such beverages on Sunday or any other days prohibited by State law. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the County Commissioners. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § IV; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-23. - Joint responsibility; sales to minors and possession by minors. 
(a)  The term "minor" as used in this chapter shall mean any person under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase alcoholic beverage for a minor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit faked, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages to which he is not legally entitled. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to have open alcoholic beverages in his possession. 
(e)  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sales to minors. 
(f)  Any violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender upon being found guilty shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § V; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-24. - Licenses. 
(a)  Each wholesaler licensed with the State Revenue Department to serve this County shall, upon written application, be issued a permit on an annual basis for operation as a wholesale dealer. 
(b)  Unless changed by the County Commissioners, a retail license for the sale of malt beverages for each year shall be in an amount as established by the County Commissioners from time to time. Said fee shall accompany the application and shall be either cash or bank certified check. Such licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another and shall not be transferable from one location to another except with the express approval of the licensing body of the County of Montgomery. 
(c)  In addition to the above retail license fee, there is hereby assessed a local excise tax, based on sales, in the following amounts: 

 
(d)  The excise tax on tap or draft shall be in the sum of $6.00 for each container sold as hereinafter specified, containing not more than 15½ gallons and at a like rate for fractional parts, where the beverage is sold or is from a barrel or bulk container, such beverage commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
(e)  The assessment shall be paid and collected in the following manner: 
(1)  The local excise tax hereinbefore imposed shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the County Commissioners by the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the particular municipality by said wholesale dealer. Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of nine percent per annum. 
(2)  The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments, and shall render a sworn statement of the same accompanying the monthly report to the County Commissioners. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § VI; Mot. of 1-1-1981; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-25. - Hours of operation. 
The hours of operation of retail licensees for the sale of malt beverages shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the following day, Monday through Friday, and from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight on Saturday. The hours of operation of wholesale licensees for the distribution of malt beverage within the County shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturday. There shall be no malt beverages sold or distributed within this County on Sundays, or any other days prohibited by State law. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § VII; Mot. of 1-3-1978; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-26. - Authority to issue licensees. 
All applications for such licenses shall be presented to the County Commissioners for approval, and if approved, the licenses shall be issued by the County upon the payment of the required fee. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § VIII; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-27. - Rules and regulations. 
All the provisions of this article are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by ordinance of this body as the same may be from time to time amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual license fees; the qualifications of licensees; the restrictions on the business locations of licensees; the hours of operation of such licensees; the control of customers doing business with licensees; and any and all other matters which this body may deem it advisable to set forth for the proper regulation of the sale and consumption of malt beverages in this County; and all such licenses as may be hereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such amendment or amendments as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be nontransferable, except with express approval of the County Commissioners. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. I, § IX; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Secs. 4-28—4-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATING THE SALE OF WINE 

Sec. 4-58. - Type of sale. 
Wine shall be sold in the County for consumption on and off the premises. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § I; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-59. - Retail licensee qualifications. 
The retail licensee must be a person of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
(1)  The licensee shall not have been convicted within five years of the date of his application of a felony, or within three years of the date of his application for violation of the laws of this State, or any other state, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
(3)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to the above and shall place same on file with the Clerk of the County Commissioners for Montgomery County, Georgia before any license is issued. 
(4)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. 
(5)  No person shall be granted a license to engage in the sale of wine at retail unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the County Commissioners that such person shall be of good moral character. 
(6)  Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § II; Ord. of 4-22-1977; Ord. of 10-5-2004, art. II, § II) 
Sec. 4-60. - Wholesale permits. 
Wholesale licenses shall be issued only to those parties who are licensed by the State to sell and distribute wine at wholesale. Application shall be made with the County Commissioners. Cost of wholesale license shall be in an amount as established by the County Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § III; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-61. - Regulations. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of wine at retail in the County nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly sell wine to a minor. 
(2)  Knowingly sell wine to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale, any wine where such person does not have a license from the County of Montgomery to sell or possess for sale such beverage. 
(4)  Wine shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned or leased and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the State to sell wine at wholesale. 
(5)  Dealers in wine shall not engage in the sale of wine on Sunday or any other days prohibited by State law. 
(6)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § IV; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-62. - Joint responsibility; sales to minors and possession by minors. 
(a)  The term "minor" as used in the section shall mean any person under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase wine for a minor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit faked, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain wine to which he is not legally entitled. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to have open wine in his possession. 
(e)  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sales to minors. 
(f)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender upon being found guilty shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § V; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-63. - License fees. 
(a)  A retail wine license shall be in an amount as established by the County Commissioners from time to time. Said fee shall accompany the application and shall be either cash or bank certified check. Such licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another and shall not be transferable from one location to another except with the express approval of the licensing body of the County. 
(b)  In addition to the above retail license fee, there is hereby assessed an excise fee, based on sales, in the following amounts: The sum of $0.22 per liter, which sum shall be paid and collected in the following manner: Tax on each wine gallon shall be collected by the wholesaler at the time of delivery to the retailer and the same shall be remitted on or before the 20th day of the month following the date of such sales. Each wholesaler doing business in the County shall maintain a copy of each invoice showing the date, place, and license number of the retailer. Such records are to be maintained for a period of at least one year and the same to be open for inspection at any time by any authorized representative of the Department of Revenue. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § VI; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-64. - Hours of operation. 
The hours of operation of retail licensees for the sale of wine shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the following day, Monday through Friday, and from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight on Saturday. The hours of operation of wholesale licensees for the distribution of wine within the County shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturday. There shall be no wine sold or distributed within this County on Sundays, or any other days prohibited by State law. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § VII; Mot. of 1-3-1978; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-65. - Authority to issue licensees. 
All applications for licenses shall be presented to the County Commissioners for approval, and if approved, the licenses shall be issued by the County upon the payment of the required fee. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § VIII; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Sec. 4-66. - Rules and regulations. 
All license fees shall at all times comply with the laws of the State and the rules and regulations promulgated from time to time regulating the sale of wine by the Commissioner of Revenue of the State, and any violations of these regulations shall subject the licensee to revocation of his license. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. II, § IX; Ord. of 4-22-1997) 
Secs. 4-67—4-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REAPPLYING FOR REFUSED WINE AND MALT BEVERAGES APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 4-91. - Reapplication for permit. 
No person making application for a retail or wholesale license for the sale of malt beverages or for the retail or wholesale sale of wine within Montgomery County shall reapply within six months of any previous application made by said person at the same location after any previous application has been refused by said County Officials. 
(Code 2003, ch. 2, art. III; Ord. of 10-1-1985) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDING PERMITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical Codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction Codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction Codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 6-1. - Building permit required. 
No construction of a building or other structure shall be commenced without first obtaining a county building permit. Application for said permits shall be obtained from the Tax Assessor's Office in Mount Vernon, Georgia. There will be a charge for all agriculture shelters, $0.10 per square foot for all new and additions to residential structures, and $0.15 per square foot for all new and additions to commercial structures. 
(Code 2003, ch. 4, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Owner responsibility. 
The owner of the property where the construction commences shall be responsible for obtaining the building permit referred to above. 
(Code 2003, ch. 4, § 2; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalty. 
A fine in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be imposed on the owner of any property where construction is started without first obtaining a building permit. In addition to the fine, the owner will be responsible for all court costs and the costs of collection. 
(Code 2003, ch. 4, § 3; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Collections. 
The governing authority shall be authorized to fine as above provided for by entering executions against the defaulting party's property as provided for in the collection of delinquent taxes and/or by suit, garnishment or any other means for collecting debts authorized by the general laws of this State in any of the courts of the State. 
(Code 2003, ch. 4, § 4; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to help provide the County with a means of obtaining information to accurately assess and tax fairly all improvements to property within the County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 4, § 5; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 5) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TIMBER OPERATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local governing authority may require notice of timber harvesting and bond or letter of credit from harvesting entity, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 

Sec. 8-19. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Montgomery County Timber Operations Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 3-1-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 8-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Timber means pine, cypress and hardwood trees and trees of every size, species and description. Also, for purposes of this article, the term "timber" includes such trees after harvesting and while being transported as logs or in shorter lengths. 
Timber operations means cutting and harvesting timber in Montgomery County; or transporting such timber from the site at which it was cut; or the moving of equipment to and from the site of such cutting. 
Timber operator means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in commercial timber operations, whether engaged in one or all of said activities described in the definition of the term "timber operations" in this section. It shall not include persons cutting or transporting timber solely for non-commercial personal use or for firewood. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 8-21. - Notice and bond requirement. 
(a)  Requirement of notice. No timber operator shall engage in timber operations in the County without first giving notice of such operations, as provided herein; provided, however, employees of a timber operator shall not be required to give separate notice for activities within the scope of such employment if their employer has given valid notice of such activities; and provided further that an independent contractor transporting timber for another timber operation shall not be required to give separate notice if the timber operator for whom he is transporting has given valid notice for such timber operations at the same location. 
(b)  Place of filing. Notice of timber operations shall be filed with the Office of the Tax Appraiser and forms shall be available in such office. The Tax Appraiser shall approve the application and issue permission if all required information is provided. 
(c)  Application for timber operations. The application for timber operations shall be in the form prescribed by the Commissioners and shall agree with the form prescribed by the Director (Georgia Forestry Commission Form 12-6-24) and contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the timber operator. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the owner of the property on which the timber operator will engage in timber operations. 
(3)  The location of the property on which the timber operator will engage in timber operations with an attached map showing the main point of ingress from a public road and the main point of egress to a public road if different. All points of ingress and egress are subject to the approval of the County Roads Superintendent or County Code Enforcement Official. 
(4)  The roads in the County upon which motor vehicles will travel in transacting such timber and in transporting the equipment to be used in the timber operations. 
(5)  The date cutting operations are expected to commence and end. 
(6)  If the timber operator is engaged only in transporting timber, the name, address, and phone number of the timber operator for whom he will be transporting timber. 
(d)  Surety bond or letter of credit required. Notice shall not be valid for timber harvesting operations unless the person or firm giving notice delivers to the office of the County Commissioners or their designee a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business within the State of Georgia or an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association in the amount of $5,000.00. 
(1)  Such bond shall protect the County against any damage caused by such person or firm, tendering the surety bond or letter of credit, or any agent, employee or contractor of said person or firm and will be used to reimburse the County for any cost incurred to repair the County right-of-way, to re-ditch or repair existing ditch structure or for the removal of any harvesting residue to include, but not limited to, tree tops, debris, logs, pulpwood and other materials placed in or around said right-of-way. Said bond shall also be used to offset any cost to maintain or repair county roads damaged by ingress or egress of trucks engaged in harvesting operations. The Road Superintendent or County Code Enforcement Official and County Manager shall be responsible for determining all damages. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, any surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid for all harvesting operations being conducted by said person or firm within the unincorporated areas of Montgomery County unless held, forfeited or reduced by claim and shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it was delivered. 
(3)  The surety bond or letter of credit shall be released by the County upon notice of completed timber harvesting operations and inspection by the Road Superintendent or Code Enforcement Official of the harvesting site, points of ingress and egress, and any other County rights-of-way or roads affected by the harvesting operations. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 8-22. - Protection of County roads and rights-of-way. 
(a)  Driveways. When a timber harvesting operation needs to cross ditches or shoulders of roads to have ingress or egress to a harvesting site and where in the judgment of the County Roads Superintendent a temporary driveway is required to protect County-owned rights-of-way, ditches, drainage pipes or other fixtures, such driveway shall be installed before harvesting operations can commence. It shall be the option of the harvester to either install the driveway and any drainage pipes of appropriate specifications as determined by the Roads Superintendent or request the County to install said driveway at the expense of the harvester. 
(b)  Authority to regulate County roads. The County shall reserve the right granted it under O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42 to regulate the access of vehicles engaged in timber harvesting operations and other commercial vehicles and to limit such access at times when damages to County roads or rights-of-way may occur. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2010, § 4) 
Sec. 8-23. - Violations; penalties. 
Any timber operator who shall willfully fail to comply with this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2010, § 5) 
Chapter 10 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State courts of counties, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq.; probate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Bailiff pay. 
The compensation for bailiffs will be in amounts as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 5, art. I; Mot. of 11-10-1992) 
Sec. 10-2. - Criminal warrant fees. 
The criminal warrant fee shall be in an amount as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 5, art. I; Mot. of 8-6-1991) 
Sec. 10-3. - Good behavior warrant fees. 
The good behavior warrant fee shall be in an amount as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 5, art. I; Mot. of 1-6-1998) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the County and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by Federal, State and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the Chair of the Board of Commissioners may declare a local emergency for Montgomery County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Request for State assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the Chair may request the Governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the County to meet adequately and State assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the Chair finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the Chair shall execute and file with the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the Chair. The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the Governor or a declaration of local emergency by the Chair shall automatically activate the County Emergency Operations Plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The County Emergency Management Agency (EMA) Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the Emergency Management Agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with State and Federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the Director or his designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The Director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the County; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the Board of Commissioners. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the County who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the Chair is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the Chair may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 12-5 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the Governor declares a state of emergency; and section 12-6 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the County Board of Commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 12-4 as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the County Board of Commissioners. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The Chair of the County Board of Commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the County and subordinate agencies over which the County has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, Code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of County business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any County agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching State or Federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the County Clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. The following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 12-2(a)(4)c. or d. or such other measures as appropriate.] 
Time: ____________ Date: ____________ . 
Chairperson, Montgomery County Board of Commissioners" 
Signature of Chairperson ____________ 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the County's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the Board of Commissioners may contract with any municipality for the administration of an emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012, § 2) 
Sec. 12-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the County Sheriff's Office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the Chair or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any Code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the Chair or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA Director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, Code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the County Sheriff's Office, the County EMA Director and the Chairperson of the County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012, § 3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the Board of Commissioners, the affairs and business of the County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the County, all actions taken by the Board of Commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the County. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the County Board of Commissioners, the Board of Commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the County as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the County Board of Commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or the Chair of the County Board of Commissioners, the Board of Commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of the County, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or the Chair of the County Board of Commissioners, the Board of Commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the County for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the County on behalf of the State or Federal Government or fees charged by the County pursuant to a State or Federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the County Board of Commissioners, the Board of Commissioners or its designees may issue temporary permits for mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by the Development Code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the County Health Department and Development Services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the Board of Commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 12-5. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the County designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the County Development Services Department and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the County without complying with this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at a per annum charge. The administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. 
(1)  Applicant's Social Security number or Federal employer identification number; 
(2)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(3)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(4)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(5)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(6)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(7)  Copy of license from the Secretary of State, if required. 
(c)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the Governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the Board of Commissioners, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 12-6. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the Chair until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the Chair shall have discretion to impose re-entry restrictions on certain areas. The Chair shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the County emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the County; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the County Emergency Management Agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, the Director of Public Safety and/or the Sheriff of the County. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under State law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012, § 6) 
Sec. 12-7. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this chapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the County Clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012, § 7) 
Secs. 12-8—12-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - E-911 SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-33—12-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOSING A MONTHLY E-911 CHARGE 

Sec. 12-53. - Monthly E-911 charge. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County finds: 
(1)  E-911 telephone service serves as a life saving link between people and emergency services; 
(2)  E-911 telephone service is available to Montgomery County, Georgia; 
(3)  The provision of said services to the citizens of Montgomery County, Georgia does foster the safety, health and well-being of the resident of Montgomery County; and 
(4)  It is in the best interest of the citizens of Montgomery Count to maintain E-911 service which will be available to all citizens in the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the County. 
(b)  Establishment of payment. The Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County does hereby desire to establish a means and method of paying for the aforesaid service. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(b)(1)(B), a public hearing was held with not less than ten days notice; and the monies collected from the monthly "E-911" service charge shall be deposited in a separate restricted revenue fund known as the "Emergency Telephone System Fund" as required by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and said monies shall be used for the purposes stated in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 
(c)  Charge. The governing authority of Montgomery County, Georgia, does hereby impose a monthly "E-911" charge upon each exchange facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange lines are in areas served by the Montgomery County E-911 service. 
(d)  Amount. The amount of such charge shall be $1.50 per month per exchange access facility provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(Code 2003, ch. 9, art. II; Res. of 6-1-1993) 
Secs. 12-54—12-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOSING A CHARGE FOR E-911 SERVICE ON WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION DEVICES 

Sec. 12-80. - Wireless E-911 month charge. 
(a)  On September 1, 1998 the Commissioners of Montgomery County, Georgia adopted a resolution imposing a wireless 9-1-1 charge of $1.00 on wireless telecommunications with billing addresses within Montgomery County, Georgia. 
(b)  Since the adoption of such resolution Montgomery County has enhanced and improved its 9-1-1 system so that it is now capable of providing and does provide automatic number identification and automatic location of identification of a wireless telecommunications connection known as Phase II Wireless 9-1-1. 
(c)  Part 4 of Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated authorizes local governments to impose a wireless enhanced 9-1-1 charge for Phase II Service upon each wireless telecommunications connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of the local government. 
(d)  Under the provisions of such law, a charge for Phase II Service may be imposed at a rate of up to $1.50 per month per wireless connection. 
(e)  The September 1, 1998 Resolution is amended and the wireless enhanced 9-1-1 charge imposed upon each wireless telecommunications connection subscribed to by subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of Montgomery County, Georgia is increased to $1.50 per month per wireless connection provided to each telephone subscriber. 
(Code 2003, ch. 9, art. III; Res. of 2-6-2007) 
Secs. 12-81—12-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENHANCED 911 ADDRESSING 

Sec. 12-104. - Enactment and short title. 
The Board of County Commissioners hereby enacts and adopts the following division, which shall be known and cited to as the "Montgomery County Enhanced 911 Addressing Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 12-105. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means a person whom the Commissioners have appointed to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. Such official may also be referred to as "Code Enforcement Official". 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 12-106. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to improve the County E-911/Emergency Communication System and to provide for a uniform County wide addressing system with respect to street or house numbers assigned to all residences and principal buildings and businesses within the County. This will assist fire and rescue companies, law enforcement agencies, the United States Postal Service, parcel delivery companies, utility companies, tax appraisal, public works, planning and the general public in the timely and efficient provision of services to residents and businesses in the County. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 3) 
Sec. 12-107. - Display required. 
Every location furnished with a 911 address outside of any incorporated area must display that address so that it is visible from the public roadway. Mobile home parks and apartment complexes, including duplex dwelling structures, shall also be required to have each individual pad, lot number or apartment number displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this division. Such lot, pad or apartment numbers shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for numbers not in sequence. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 4) 
Sec. 12-108. - Method of display. 
(a)  Assigned E-911 address numbers may be fixed to the house, apartment, business or other location itself, provided that such house, apartment, business or other location is not more than 60 feet from the centerline of the roadway or the road or street in front of such location, and the number must be readily visible from the street or road by persons traveling along the street or road in each direction. E-911 address numbers may also be placed on mailboxes or signs located on the premises in front of the location, as long as the mailboxes or signs are on the same side of the road as the house, apartment, business or other building or location. If the addresses or numbers are displayed on signs, such signs must be of a durable type, and must be located not more than 60 feet from the centerline of the street or road in front of the property. The numbers on such signs shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. If not on signs or mailboxes, the address must be located within ten feet of the access from the public road. If the road in front of the location is unpaved, said sign should be located not more than 45 feet from the edge of the road nearest the location. 
(b)  If the house, apartment, business or other building or location to be numbered is more than 60 feet from the centerline of the street or roadway in front of the property, or if for any reason a street address number affixed to the location would not be readily visible from the street or roadway by persons traveling along the street or roadway in each direction, then the 911 address numbers shall be displayed on a sign or mailbox in the premises next to the public roadway in front of the structure, and complying with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 5) 
Sec. 12-109. - Size, condition of addresses. 
Assigned 911 addressed numbers and/or characters shall be a minimum of three inches in height and 1½ inches in width. Address numbers and characters for businesses shall be a minimum of four inches in height and two inches in width. All numbers or characters shall be reflective on a contrasting background so as to be clearly visible. It is recommended to use white reflective numbers and/or characters on a green background. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 6) 
Sec. 12-110. - Proper maintenance. 
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to properly maintain his E-911 address sign. Tall grass or bushes are to be kept cut or trimmed so as to not obstruct said signs. Also, any faded or missing numbers or characters shall be replaced so that the location may be located easily and at all times by emergency personnel. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 7) 
Sec. 12-111. - Duty of owner; notification and enforcement. 
(a)  The obligation of complying with the provisions of this division shall be upon the owner of the property. Failure to comply shall constitute a violations article of this article. Upon such violation, notice shall be given the owner of the property, or his agent, specifying the nature of such violation, and requiring that such violation be remedied and brought into compliance within ten days after receipt of such notice. Notification shall be made by the designated County Building Official. 
(b)  Any property owner who does not comply with this article shall be in violation of this article, and said violation shall result in a penalty of not more than $100.00 plus the cost of enforcement and prosecution. Said prosecution will be pursued through the Magistrate Court. The designated County Building Official shall be responsible for enforcement of this provision. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, damage, alter or deface any posted E-911 address sign in the County. Violators shall be subject to prosecution. Upon conviction, the violator will be liable of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 plus the cost of enforcement and prosecution. Said prosecution shall be pursued through the Magistrate Court. 
(Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 8) 
Secs. 12-112—12-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ESTABLISH E-911 SERVICE 

Sec. 12-136. - E-911 Service established. 
The County Board of Commissioners establishes an E-911 service to be operated in the County. The Board of Commissioners authorizes the Sheriff of the County to hire an E-911 director and qualified staff to manage and operate the E-911 service. This includes establishing procedures and policies to operate the E-911 service. The County Board of Commissioners will act as the fiscal agent for the E-911 service. The E-911 service shall have its own budget separate from the Sheriff's Office. Management of the E-911 service will be responsible for submitting an annual operations and maintenance budget for the Board of Commissioners to consider and adopt. The Board of Commissioners recommends the E-911 Director to establish an advisory team for the purpose of hearing complaints and making suggestions on improving service. Team members shall be at the E-911 Director's discretion. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2014) 
Chapter 14 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County, Georgia, does ordain as set out herein. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 14-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the County are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 14-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 14-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 14-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the County Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 14-71. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before August 19, 2010. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 6, 1994. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. The term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after August 19, 2010, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 6, 1994, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after September 6, 1994. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. The term "permanent construction" does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision is the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(2)  For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 6) 
Sec. 14-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 14-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the County are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (None as of August 19, 2010.) 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Office of the Tax Assessor of Montgomery County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 14-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 14-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 14-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing chapter, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 14-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 14-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Board of Commissioners or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 14-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Board of Commissioners from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 14-14—14-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-45. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The County Floodplain Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 14-46. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 14-69(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The County Floodplain Administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 14-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator. 
Duties of the County Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits are provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-46, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 14-46(b)(1). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-46(b). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 14-46(b)(1)c and (2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the Office of the County Floodplain Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 3, § A) 
Secs. 14-48—14-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-68. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 14-69. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-68(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 14-68. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; 
where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, the home must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 14-68(6).) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 14-68. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 14-70. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard defined in section 14-5, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-5, then the County Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 14-68(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
b  The County Floodplain Administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 14-71. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-46. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 14-72. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in section 14-7 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-68(4). The County Floodplain Administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 14-46(b)(1)c and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 14-73. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 14-74. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 14-75—14-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-92. - Variances. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the County Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of the Oconee Judicial Circuit, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the Board of Commissioners of Montgomery County shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The County Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, ch. 11; Ord. of 8-19-2010, art. 5) 
Chapter 16 - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES AND SITES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT FOR INSTALLATION OF ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 16-20. - Permit required. 
Prior to the construction of any house or building, alteration, or addition, from which sewage must be disposed of by means of a septic tank or alternative system in the County, and/or prior to the location or relocation of any mobile home in the County, an on-site sewage management permit must be obtained from the County Health Department. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 1; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 16-21. - Application. 
The application for the permit shall be filed with the Health Department and shall disclose the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The address of the location of the building that is to be constructed or the address of the building being repaired or the location and address of the mobile home being located or relocated upon the land in the County. 
(3)  The number of bedrooms in residential structures or the anticipated water usage for commercial structures. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 2; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 16-22. - Evaluation; permit issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the County Health Department Environmental Health Officer to evaluate and issue an on-site sewage management permit for those sites that comply with the County Board of Health's rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems. The cost of said permit shall be set up by the County Board of Health. It shall be the duty of the sewage disposal system contractor, or property owner if no contractor is used, to prior to the commencement of construction request evaluation by the Environmental Health Officer to determine if the septic tank system complies with the rules and regulations for on-site sewage management system as promulgated by the County Health Department. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 3; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 3) 
Sec. 16-23. - Affixing decal. 
All decals issued pursuant to this article relative to mobile homes shall be affixed to the mobile home in such manner as to be clearly visible from the front and from the street or roadway. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 5; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 5) 
Sec. 16-24. - Permit required for moving. 
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home dealer or mover to locate or relocate a mobile home on any land in the unincorporated areas of the County, until the owner of said home has received a permit for an on-site sewage management system and obtained a decal from the Tax Commissioner and have the same affixed thereto. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 6; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 6) 
Sec. 16-25. - Violation. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this article by erecting, constructing, or repairing a building, or by moving, locating, or relocating a mobile home in the County, without first having applied and been granted a permit for an on-site sewage management permit for the proposed location by the Environmental Health Officer of the County; and in the case of locating or relocating a mobile home without obtaining a mobile home decal; shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment 60 days or both. Violation of this subsection shall commence when the sewage disposal system is covered or when the house or building is occupied. 
(b)  Violators of this article shall be prosecuted by the Montgomery County Attorney in the Magistrate Court, without a jury. The Magistrate Court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement by the person signing affidavit that satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section have been met. Review of convictions shall be by certiorari to the Superior Court. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 7; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 7) 
Sec. 16-26. - Violation by sale. 
Any person or firm that desires to sell property that is less than three acres, and is advertised or stated in any manner to a potential buyer to be a lot suitable for construction of a residential unit; must obtain an on-site sewage management permit or subdivision approval from the Montgomery County Health Department prior to the sale. Violators of this section shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the County upon the sworn affidavit of buyer of such property or upon the affidavit of an official of the County or the County Health Department in the Magistrate Court without a jury. The Magistrate Court may suspend any fine or sentence upon satisfactory evidence that proper restitution has been made to the named buyer caused by failure of seller to comply with this section. Review of convictions shall be by certiorari to the Superior Court. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 8; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 8) 
Sec. 16-27. - Failure to correct violation. 
Any person or firm who shall violate any provision of the County Department of Health's rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems and has not fully corrected such violation after 60 days' notice by the Environmental Health Officer shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days' or both, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. Violators of this section shall be prosecuted by the Board of Health upon the sworn affidavit of an official of the County or the Health Department in the Magistrate Court of the County, without a jury. The Magistrate Court may suspend any fine or sentence upon statement from person signing affidavit or from the County Board of Health that satisfactory compliance with this section has been obtained. Review of convictions shall be by certiorari to the Superior Court. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 9; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 9) 
Sec. 16-28. - Agent responsible for the environmental health duties. 
The County Environmental Health Officer as used in this article shall be the person appointed by the County Board of Health as the Board's employee or agent responsible for the environmental health duties of the County Board of Health. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. II, § 11; Res. of 9-3-1996, art. II, § 11) 
Secs. 16-29—16-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME SITE PERMIT 

Sec. 16-47. - Permit. 
No mobile home shall be located and set up for occupancy, or relocated and set up for occupancy in the County without first obtaining and displaying thereon a mobile home site permit. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 16-48. - Application. 
Prior to the issuance of a mobile home site permit, the owner thereof, or an agent of the owner, shall apply to the Tax Assessors of the County, or their delegate, for a mobile home site permit. The permit shall be in the form as prescribed by the Board of Tax Assessors of the County. Said application shall, without limitation, include the following: 
(1)  Name of owner. 
(2)  The location, by address and/or the tax map parcel number identification, of where the mobile home is to be set up for occupancy. 
(3)  The previous location of the mobile home (address, map and parcel number, if in the County; County and State, if outside of the County; and name of seller if this is first occupancy of owner.) 
(4)  Name of owner of real estate on which mobile home is to be situated. 
(5)  The mailing address of owners. 
(6)  The name and address of applicant, if different from owner. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 2; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 2) 
Sec. 16-49. - Permit fee. 
An applicant for a mobile home site permit shall pay a fee for said permit which fee must be paid prior to the issuance of said permit. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 3; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 3) 
Sec. 16-50. - Issuer of permit. 
Upon the completion of the application for a mobile home site permit as set forth herein, and the payment of the permit fee, the Tax Assessors or their delegate shall issue a "Mobile Home Site Permit." The permit shall be in the design and color as deemed appropriate by the Board of Tax Assessors of the County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 4; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 4) 
Sec. 16-51. - Display of permit. 
No mobile home shall be moved into or within the County for which a mobile home site permit is required by the provisions of this article, unless the mobile home site permit is affixed to the middle area of the left rear of the mobile home as it appears while being transported. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 5; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 5) 
Sec. 16-52. - Utility services prohibited. 
No public utility shall provide service to any mobile home which is hereafter located or relocated in the County without first determining that a mobile home site permit was issued for said mobile home as required by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 6; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 6) 
Sec. 16-53. - Enforcement. 
The Tax Assessors of the County or their agents, the Sheriff of the County, the Deputies thereof, Constables, and all other law enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the Court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the officer who completes and serves it. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 7; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 7) 
Sec. 16-54. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: by a fine of not less than $25.00 but not more than $500.00. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 8; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 8) 
Sec. 16-55. - Court proceedings 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citation as described in section 16-25 and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The County Attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the Magistrate Court and shall be tried in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia and/or applicable County ordinance. 
(c)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2003, ch. 15, art. III, § 9; Ord. of 1-6-1998, art. III, § 9) 
Secs. 16-56—16-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 16-86. - Enactment and short title. 
The Board of County Commissioners of the County hereby enacts and adopts the following article, which shall be known and cited as the "Montgomery County Manufactured Home Ordinance." Those incorporated areas within Montgomery County are encouraged to adopt this or similar articles regarding manufactured homes for use within their jurisdictions. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 1) 
Sec. 16-87. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of Commissioners means the Board of County Commissioners of the County. 
Building official means the person, whom the Commissioners have appointed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. This person may also be referred to as "Code Enforcement." 
DCA means Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
HUD means U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Installation means the construction of a foundation system and the placement or erection of a manufactured home on the foundation system. Such term includes without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such home. Includes the connection to permanent utilities and placement of skirting and landing decks required by this article. The term "set-up" may be used interchangeably with the term "installation." 
Installer means a person, agency, or entity responsible for performing an installation and who is required to be licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-164 and 43-14-13(k). 
(1)  Registered installer means an installer who has qualified, by completion of minimum educational requirements, to perform all aspects of installation, except the connection of the electrical service, sewer outlets and water system from the home to existing service supply. 
(2)  Licensed installer means an installer who has qualified, by completion of educational requirements above and beyond those of a registered installer to perform all aspects of an installation, including the connection of the electrical service, sewer outlets and water systems. 
Location permit means the term used by the Montgomery County Tax Commissioners Office and State of Georgia that means the "tax decal" or "tax sticker" issued upon payment of required taxes. 
Manufactured home means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. (The HUD Code: Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards; Title 24 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 3280 which became effective on June 15, 1976). 
Manufactured home community means a lot or series of lots used as a residential area occupied by manufactured homes; conforming to herein, with appropriate and adequate-community services (for example: adequate garbage disposal; recreation facilities; utilities; streets and sidewalks provided by the developer) where the resident owns or rents the manufactured home and rents or owns the manufactured home's space. 
Manufactured home mover registration form is the form devised and used by the building official, completed by the applicant, and that contains detailed information required to formally register for records purposes a person authorized to move a manufactured home into or out of Montgomery County. 
Manufactured home park. See Manufactured home community. 
National manufactured housing construction and safety standards means the national building code for all manufactured homes built since June 15, 1976, written and administered by the LJS Department of Housing and Urban Development; also known as the "HUD Code." 
Public sewer means the sanitary sewer service provided by the County or a municipality within the County. 
Public water system (PWS) means a publicly owned water system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption that meets the bacteriological and chemical requirements of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency's "Safe Drinking Water Act" and is permitted to operate under the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
Recreational vehicle means a self-propelled or towed vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational uses. 
Site permit means the form or permit issued by the County Tax Assessor's Office that authorizes the moving of the mobile home into or out of the County. 
Travel trailer. See also Recreational vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 2; Ord. of 9-13-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 16-88. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth requirements from the date of its approval for placement of manufactured homes or recreational vehicles in the County. These requirements include, among other things, the acquisition of a building permit, tie-downs, connection to electrical, water, and waste water systems, and annual manufactured home tax decal. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 3) 
Sec. 16-89. - Registration. 
Every person, firm, corporation, or other entity holding title to or possessing a manufactured home which is placed or located within limits of the County, shall report the location of the manufactured home to and obtain a tax decal for the manufactured home from the Tax Commissioner, annually, no later than May 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 4) 
Sec. 16-90. - Authority. 
(a)  The Tax Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered subject to the specific provisions of this article, to prescribe application, and site decal forms. The Tax Commissioner is empowered to require that applicant furnish such information in writing as may be reasonable required to effectuate the purpose hereof. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or other appropriate authority of the County as designated by the County Board of Commissioners to enforce the provisions of this article, in conjunction with the Environmental Conservation, On-Site Sewage Management, and Permit article, as adopted by the County Board of Commissioners on August 7, 2001. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 5) 
Sec. 16-91. - Building permit required. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article for any mover, hauler, person, or other entity to move, or to have moved, a manufactured home into the County whose designation is within Montgomery County or to move a manufactured home out of the County whose location has been Montgomery County without first obtaining a site permit from the Tax Commissioner of the County authorizing such relocation. 
(b)  The site permit authorizing the relocation of manufactured homes, shall be affixed to the manufactured home at all times such manufactured home is being transported within the confines of this County. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the Tax Commissioner to obtain proof that all State and County taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to such manufactured home have in fact been paid. 
(d)  No site permit will be issued until an on-site sewage permit for a new installation or an "Existing On-Site Sewage Management System Performance Evaluation Report Form" for connection to an existing system is obtained from the Health Department. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 6) 
Sec. 16-92. - Tax decal required. 
Any owner of a manufactured home who has made application for the location of a manufactured home and whose application meets the requirements of this article, shall have or shall obtain a tax decal, upon payment of required charge for the same. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 7) 
Sec. 16-93. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  HUD Code or DCA approved manufactured homes, as defined in section 16-87, will be permitted for location in Montgomery County. Pre-HUD manufactured homes located within the County prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be relocated inside the County, subject, however, to other requirements for moving manufactured homes as provided herein, including site permit, on-site sewage permit, and all installation and final inspections as required herein. Mobile homes which met the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards; Title 24 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 3280 at the time of manufacture and have been subsequently remodeled, altered or refurbished must still meet all of the requirements of the HUD Regulations prior to entry into Montgomery County. 
(b)  All manufactured homes must be located on an approved site which conforms to the standards outlined in this article and be no less than usable acreage that is acceptable by the Montgomery County Health Department for proper sewage. 
(c)  Installation must comply with section 16-94 in order to obtain Building Official approval for occupancy. Such approval is necessary to obtain permanent electrical service. Manufactured homes will not be authorized to receive permanent electrical service until the provider of electrical service has been notified for approval for occupancy by the Building Official. 
(d)  The above requirements do not apply to recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall not be approved for permanent installation or permanent occupancy and may only be used for a maximum of an 18-month period as a temporary residence. All recreation vehicles must display a current State license and registration. Building permits will not be issued for recreational vehicles. 
(e)  All manufactured homes entering the County must be in a condition which renders them immediately habitable upon proper installation in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 8; Ord. of 9-13-2010, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 16-94. - Manufactured home installation requirements. 
(a)  Utility connections. All manufactured homes must be permanently connected to water, sewage, and electrical service. 
(1)  Water. Water service may be public or private. All water service must be freeze proof at elevations above and below the ground. 
(2)  Sewer. Installation of and/or connection to a new or existing on-site sewage systems must be permitted and/or final inspection completed by the Montgomery County Health Department. 
(3)  Electrical. Electrical service must meet minimum requirements for safety. 
(b)  Foundation. Unless placed on a permanent foundation, all manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with the Installation of Manufactured and Mobile Homes Rules and regulations established and published by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-16 et seq.), installed with permanent skirting, secured with tie-down devices and provided with steps and landings. The installation of all required foundation requirements must be inspected and approved by the Building Official. 
(c)  Skirting. Installation of skirting shall be required. Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Acceptable materials include masonry, stone, fiberglass, simulated brick or stone, vinyl or other materials manufactured solely for the purpose of skirting. 
(d)  Tie-downs. Each manufactured home shall have tie-downs or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured home as per installation of Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes Rules and Regulations established and published by Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.). 
(e)  Steps and landings. Steps and landings are required for all homes at all exterior entrances/exits. A minimum landing size of four feet by six feet of pressure treated lumber or elevated concrete is required. Wood landings are to be built on site, with posts placed 24 inches into soil for stability. Landings should be installed at the same elevation, but shall be no less than six inches below the elevation of the entrance/exit. Loose, stacked steps are strictly prohibited. If the landing is over 30 inches from the ground, sturdy handrails and guardrails are required. 
(f)  Recreational vehicles. Permanent connection of recreational vehicles to water, sewer, or electrical service is prohibited. Installation of recreational vehicles on piers and jacks permanently is also prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 9) 
Sec. 16-95. - Location. 
(a)  Permitted locations. Manufactured homes shall be allowed in all unincorporated areas within the County and shall be regulated uniformly for compatibility with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this article. 
(b)  Towing devices. All towing devices, wheels, axles and bolt-on hitches must be removed. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 10) 
Sec. 16-96. - Local registration requirement for installers. 
(a)  Anyone who moves, performs the set-up, or installs manufactured homes within Montgomery County is required to be registered, for records purposes, with the Building Official. 
(b)  Installers will re-register annually at the beginning of each new year. Individuals will be required, when registering, to present their State installer license, which is issued by the State of Georgia. Suspension or revocation of the license by the State Of Georgia will automatically void the installer registration with Montgomery County. 
(c)  The Building Official will maintain the list of registered installers and keep them informed of any changes or interpretations that may affect their proper installation of a home. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 11) 
Sec. 16-97. - Final Inspection forms required. 
(a)  The building official will develop and make available all those minimally required forms, applications, checklist, and procedure guides necessary to assist the consumer and installer(s) in complying with and maintaining the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A final inspection compliance document will be issued by the Building Official (and maintained on file therein), only upon satisfactory completion of the requirements of this article. 
(c)  All manufactured housing installations must meet the manufacturer's specifications and/or the specifications of this article before permanent utilities (water, sewage and electrical) may be activate or utilized. 
(d)  Permanent electrical service for the manufactured housing will not be activated, and may be disconnected by order of the Building Official until such time as the manufactured housing installation meets all of the safety requirements of this article and the final inspection form from the Building Official is completed, and is provided by the citizen to the area electrical service provided. 
(e)  In the case of hardship, temporary utility connections shall be approved, for a period not to exceed 60 days, in writing by the Board of County Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 12) 
Sec. 16-98. - Variances. 
Upon application for a variance and consideration of the same, and a determination that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with the provisions of this article due to unusual topographic, health, public safety, or other conditions beyond the control of the applicant, the Board of County Commissioners meeting in session may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided, however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of this article. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in the minutes and the reason that justified the departure is to be set forth. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 13) 
Sec. 16-99. - Fees. 
(a)  The following fees shall apply to manufactured homes: 
(1)  Location (site) permit fee: Assessed by the County Tax Commissioner in conjunction with "tax decal" or "tax sticker." 
(2)  On-site sewage system fee: Assessed by Montgomery County Health Department upon application for sewage system inspection. 
(3)  Safety inspection fee: Paid by the owner, to include one final inspection. 
(4)  Final inspection fee: Paid by the owner. 
(5)  Any re-inspection required due to non-compliance will be at the above rates, paid by the owner. 
(6)  Inspection fees: Paid in advance. 
(b)  The fees in this section shall be in amounts as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 16) 
Sec. 16-100. - Violations. 
Any violation of this article will result in a penalty of $500.00, and will be pursued through the Magistrate Court. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1), § 17) 
Sec. 16-101. - Manufactured housing required inspections. 
(a)  Safety inspection. All of the following must be completed before calling for the inspection: 
(1)  The home must be completely set up and tied down. We will inspect the piers, anchors, and straps. 
(2)  The home must be completely installed under the home IAW Manual for on-site sewage management. Four-inch schedule 40 pipe must be used from the edge of the building to the on-site sewage system. 
(3)  The electrical service must be connected. We will inspect the service pole, the outside and inside electrical panel. 
(4)  The water service must be connected. 
(5)  The inspector will need access to the inside of the home. Please make arrangements for access with the inspector. 
(6)  Do not underpin (skirt) the home until the safety inspection has been approved. 
(b)  Final inspection. The following items must be completed before calling for this inspection: 
(1)  The mobile home must be underpinned. 
(2)  The landings and steps (porches or decks) must be completed and properly placed. 
(3)  The owner's copy of the on-site sewage final inspection form must be presented to the Building Official. 
(c)  Permit and inspection information. The permit is valid for six months. Each time an inspection is made, it renews the permit for an additional six months. If the permit goes over six months without an inspection, it will expire unless you call for an extension before it expires. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(1)) 
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; power of municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise without limitation or impairment by provisions of state law, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

Sec. 18-1. - Purpose. 
It is important for a county to appear clean, well kept, and generally clear of public nuisances, eyesores, and unhealthy conditions. The appearance of a county weighs heavily in the decisions of prospective residents and businesses in locating to a particular area. A clean, safe, and well-kept county can stabilize or increase property values, provide a healthy environment, and make citizens proud of the area in which they live. Accordingly, a county needs a set of regulations to keep the area clean, remove unsightly conditions, and prevent unhealthy and unsafe situations from occurring. It is therefore the purpose and intent of this chapter to encourage a clean, healthy, and satisfying environment; one free of nuisances, eyesores, and unhealthy, unsafe, or devaluating conditions. To this end, this chapter seeks to regulate and protect the health, safety, welfare, values, and aesthetics of properties. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful, shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 18-3. - Illustrative examples of nuisances. 
The following conditions, whether on occupied or unoccupied lands, public or private property, are hereby declared to be and constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated; although this section shall not be construed to be limiting with regard to its enumeration of public nuisances. 
(1)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, construction debris, and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber, or other such items. 
(2)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(3)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a fire hazard. 
(4)  All noises which may annoy or inhibit others in their enjoyment of the use of their property. 
(5)  The pollution of any public well, stream, lake, canal, or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes, agricultural wastes, industrial wastes, or other substances. 
(6)  Any building, structure, or other place or location where any activity is conducted, performed or maintained in violation of local, State, or Federal law. 
(7)  Any method of human excretion disposal which does not conform to the provisions of local ordinances, or State or Federal law. 
(8)  The abandonment of living animals on any property in the County. 
(9)  Allowing any dog not on a leash, not under restraint, to run loose on the property or premises of another without permission of the owner of the property or the owner of the animal being in possession thereof. 
(10)  Riding off-road vehicles on public roads or upon property of another without permission of the property owner. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 18-4. - Nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to cause, permit, maintain, or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance, as defined or more specifically described in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 18-5. - Notice to abate. 
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the jurisdiction of the County, the Magistrate Court shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such a nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance, to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 18-6. - Contents of notice. 
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain the following: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances; 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the nuisance is stationary; 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; and 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed, the County will file an action in Magistrate Court to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 18-7. - Provisions for specific nuisances. 
(a)  Animals. No domestic animals shall be permitted to run at large within the County limits. It shall be unlawful for any domestic animal to be running at large on the streets or sidewalks of the County, unless said domestic pet is under the control of a leash, collar, or chain. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any domestic animal to provide a proper enclosure or structure secured from the ground to a sufficient height so that the animal cannot escape enclosure. All animal enclosures or yards shall at all times be kept in a clean condition to prevent any condition detrimental to the public health of the County. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, the carcass of any dead animal in the streets, roads, alleys, woods, or waters within the County limits. 
(b)  Noise. For the purposes of this section, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
(1)  Restrictions of 200 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
b.  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(2)  Restrictions for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
b.  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or in the case of private real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(3)  Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units. 
Except for persons within commercial enterprises that have an adjoining property line or boundary with a residential dwelling unit, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five feet beyond the adjoining property line wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically-produced sounds made by radio-receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "property line or boundary" shall mean an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of (1) adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or (2) adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. 
Exceptions. Loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises do not include noise or sound generated by the following: 
a.  Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls. 
b.  Radios, sirens, horns and bells on any emergency response vehicle. 
c.  Activities on or in school athletic facilities and on or in publicly owned property and facilities, provided that such activities have been authorized by the owner of such property or facilities or its agent. 
d.  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm. 
e.  Religious worship activities, including but not limited to bells and organs, as long as such noise, because of its volume level, duration and character does not annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities. 
f.  The operation of lawn mowers, edgers, trimmers, blowers, power-driven hedge shears, and other domestic power operated equipment when operated with a properly functioning muffler meeting manufacturer's standards, and when such operation is between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
g.  Operation of water craft upon any watercourse, lake, river, or swamp when operated in accordance with state laws. 
h.  Noise created during the ordinary course of operating lawfully permitted industrial businesses in industrial zoning classifications, or during the ordinary course of operating industrial businesses that have a vested right to continue operating in any other zoning classification. Noise that is not directly related to the industrial component of the business's operation and that otherwise violates this article shall be considered a violation of this article. 
i.  Noise created during the ordinary course of operating agricultural operations or facilities that are lawfully permitted in agricultural zoning classifications, or during the ordinary course of operating agricultural operations or facilities that have a vested right to continue operating in any other zoning classification. Noise that is not directly related to the agricultural component of the agricultural operation or facility and that otherwise violates this article shall be considered a violation of this article. 
j.  The Board of Commissioners may grant authorization for special events that would otherwise be prohibited by this article. 
(c)  Litter and/or illegal dumping. See: chapter 24, section 24-57 to section 24-61. 
Any one of these enumerated nuisances, if violated, would be a misdemeanor and could be prosecuted in the local court just as the violation of any other ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007; Res. No. 17-11-01, (Att.), 11-13-2017) 
Sec. 18-8. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates an order of the Magistrate Court to abate a nuisance, after the initial hearing provided for above, shall be punished according to the general penalties provided under section 1-14. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2007) 
Chapter 20 - ROADS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of county to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Pipe for businesses. 
The Board approved furnishing up to 80 feet of pipe free for businesses if the Board thinks it warrants that length. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. I; Mot. of 10-1-1985) 
Sec. 20-2. - Pipe for County roads. 
The Board approved purchasing pipe for County roads only. Private pipes will have to be paid for and the County will put pipe in at no charge. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. I; Mot. of 6-2-1987) 
Sec. 20-3. - Speed limits for County roads. 
The Board set the speed limit to 35 mph on all dirt roads and to erect speed limit signs. 
(1)  Charlotteville Road. The Board approved posting at speed limit of 45 miles per hour on the Charlotteville Road in front of Rabun Clark's residence. 
(2)  Cooper's Lane. The Board approved posting a speed limit of 20 miles per hour on Cooper's Lane. 
(3)  Dead River Road. The Board approved posting a speed limit of 15 miles per hour on Dead River Road. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. I; Mot. of 9-3-1996; Mot. of 5-4-1999; Mot. of 6-1-1999; Mot. of 6-6-2000) 
Secs. 20-4—20-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED LIMITS ON STATE ROUTES 

Sec. 20-25. - Speed limits established for on-system highways. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning local authorities' power to alter lawful speed limits, the following ordinance regulating speed limits within the County are adopted. 
(b)  The following speed zones are here established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 

 
**** This segment is not approved for speed detection device usage for local governments due to the length of segment. 
(c)  Signs are to be erected by the Department of Transportation for all State routes. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. II; Ord. No. 122099, 11-7-2000; Res. No. 16-12-02, 12-12-2016) 
Sec. 20-26. - Speed limits established for off-system highways. 
(a)  The following speed limits are established for off-system highways: 

 
(b)  Signs are to be erected by Montgomery County for all County routes. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. II; Ord. No. 122099, 11-7-2000; Res. No. 16-12-02, 12-12-2016) 
Sec. 20-27. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. II; Ord. No. 122099, 11-7-2000) 
Secs. 20-28—20-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMES/HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 20-90. - Street names. 
(a)  All new public streets within the unincorporated boundaries of the County shall be approved by the County Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  All requests for street names shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners at least three weeks prior to approval. 
(c)  The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street within the County. All new street names must conform to standards which allow for prompt and accurate emergency response. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. IV, § 1; Res. of 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 20-91. - Designation of street numbers. 
(a)  Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets and roads shall be assigned by the County Tax Assessor's Office. 
(b)  The County Tax Assessor's Office shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this article. 
(c)  No building or structure for which a house number is required shall be occupied prior to the assignment of said number. 
(d)  No building or structure for which a house number is required shall obtain permanent utility connections prior to the assignment of such number. 
(e)  All persons requiring a house number assignment prior to occupancy or connection of permanent utilities must apply for such number from the E-911 director or their designee at least five days in advance. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. IV, § 2; Res. of 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 20-92. - Posting of designated street address. 
(a)  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building to which a number has been assigned shall be notified by the County Tax Assessor's Office. 
(b)  Within ten days after the receipt of such notification, the owner or occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous place. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing the new number to remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to said structure by the County Tax Assessor's Office. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of each owner or occupant or person in charge of every structure to which a number has been assigned to display such number in figures at least three inches high not more than 25 feet from the street line and clearly visible from the street. If the number is not clearly visible from the street or road, the number must be displayed where the driveway intersects the road or street. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. IV, § 3; Res. of 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 20-93. - Penalties. 
In the event that the owner or occupant or person in charge of any structure to which a number has been assigned refuses to comply with the terms of this article, he may be subject to a fine of $25.00. 
(Code 2003, ch. 21, art. IV, § 4; Res. of 8-2-1994) 
Secs. 20-94—20-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITIZEN PETITION FOR ROAD ABANDONMENT 

Sec. 20-115. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Citizen Petition for Road Abandonment Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § I) 
Sec. 20-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means the procedure for abandonment of a section of the County road system as described in O.C.G.A. § 32-7-2. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § II) 
Sec. 20-117. - Petition. 
(a)  Petition prerequisite to County action. Unless the Board of Commissioners, of its own accord, determines that it is in the public's interest to abandon a section of the County road system, the Board of Commissioners shall not commence the procedure for abandonment of a road unless a citizen of the County submits a petition as specified herein. 
(b)  Contents of petition. The petition must be signed by a citizen of the County and contain the following: 
(1)  Specific identification of the section of the County road system sought to be abandoned and specific identification of property owners of said section of road. A plat or accurate sketch of said section must be attached to the petition. 
(2)  A detailed statement, explaining that the section of the County road system has ceased to be used by the public to the extent that no substantial public purpose is served by it or that its removal from the County road system is otherwise in the best public interest. The petition will not be accepted if the explanation does not on its face satisfy the required determination of O.C.G.A. § 32-7-2(b)(1). 
(3)  A certification by the petitioner that if the petition is accepted, he will pay to the Board of Commissioners a sum necessary to give notice to property owners located on the section of the County road in question; to publish notice of a determination that a road should be abandoned in the newspaper in which the Sheriff's advertisements for the County are published once a week for a period of two weeks; and to retain the County Attorney for the purpose of giving advice to the County concerning the lawfulness of abandonment and to hold the public hearing necessary for abandonment. At the time of filing the petition, the petitioner shall make a deposit of $1,000.00, payable to the Board, which shall be credited against any sums actually expended by the Board to abandon the road. If the petition is accepted, as defined in subsection (d) of this section, the deposit becomes nonrefundable. If the petition is denied without expenditure, the deposit shall be refunded. If the cost of abandoning the road exceeds the amount of the deposit, the Board will send a bill to the petitioner for the difference between the actual cost to abandon the road and the amount of the deposit; said bill must be paid within ten days of the bill's date. Failure to pay the bill within ten days will result in a civil penalty equal to the amount of the bill plus 15 percent thereof. 
(c)  Place of filing petition. The petition shall be filed with the Office of the Board of Commissioners. 
(d)  Acceptance of petition. After the filing of the petition, discussion of the petition shall be scheduled for the first general meeting of the Board of Commissioners at least one day after the date of filing. At said meeting, the Board shall determine whether it will accept the petition. Acceptance occurs if a majority of the Board votes to move forward with the procedure for abandonment of the road in question. If accepted, and upon payment of the deposit, the Board shall commence the procedure for abandonment of a County road in accordance with applicable law. Acceptance of the petition and/or payment of the deposit shall not constitute a guarantee that the section of road in question will ultimately be abandoned. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § III) 
Sec. 20-118. - Limitations. 
Nothing herein shall limit the Board's authority to abandon roads of its own accord without the petition of a citizen. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2013, § IV) 
Chapter 22 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity articles, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; local land disturbing articles, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; local erosion programs, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 

Sec. 22-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Montgomery County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § I; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall evens up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as "excavation." 
Department means the Department of Natural Resources. 
Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
District means the Ohoopee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources as an Issuing Authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the Division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the Division. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into State waters or onto lands within the State, including, but not limited to, clearing dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 22-3(a)(5). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) is the State law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) is the numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure is a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means the solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation is the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan is the erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Ohoopee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization is the process of establishing and enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are those practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams are all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means the measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § II; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities, which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 22-4. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where the vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 22-4 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; production or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, apiarian products; farm building and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 22-4(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving 1 1/10 acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any State waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "State waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one and one-tenth acres or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 22-4(b) and (c); provided further that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or State Tollway Authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; and 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, provided that any such land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 22-4(b) and (c). 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 22-4(b) and (c), issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § III; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities, which are not excluded by this chapter, shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the Division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units of waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units of waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the Division or any general permit for construction activities issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), "Georgia Water Quality Control Act: for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, articles, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection (c), a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  a.    Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all State waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this subsection (c)(15) of this section. 
b.  The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that nay person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any State waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent rout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements apply to such buffer: No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, articles, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § IV; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  In general. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the County without first obtaining a permit from the Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Chairperson and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the date specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 22-4(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $10.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by section 22-4(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. 
(5)  a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.  The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 22-4(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. The flowing data is required for a site plan: 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement. "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to State waters and the specified width of MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the District and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 22-4(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b. of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all of any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the County Tax Commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § V; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The County Commissioners will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The Commissioner's Office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who request entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The Districts or the Commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The Districts or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The Districts or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the District and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any County or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the Division, the Division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § VI; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the Director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the State or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 22-5(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, any person who violates and provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of County ordinances, any Magistrate Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter or other County ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)  The following penalties shall apply to land-disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this chapter, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter: 
a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy; and 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land-disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § VII; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-8. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approve erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any chapter; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the County Board of Commissioners within seven days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Issuing Authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § VIII; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-9. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the August 7, 2001. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Code 2003, ch. 22, § IX; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 22-10. - Application for land-disturbing activity permit. 
(a)  A complete application for a permit must include original and four copies of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan must be factual and complete. Upon completion, the application/plan must be submitted for permit processing. 
(b)  Pursuant to the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. and Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-7, Erosion and Sedimentation Control, both amended, the undersigned property owner/applicant hereby applies for permit for the land disturbing activity as indicated hereon and represented by the attached plans. 

 
  

 

Owner Address: 

 
  

 

Project Location: 

 
  

 

Applicant Address: 

 
  

 
(Code 2003, ch. 22; Ord. of 8-7-2001) 
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Private dumpsters. 
Owners of private dumpsters pay their own trash pickup. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. I; Res. of 6-1-1993) 
Secs. 24-2—24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION, ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT, AND PERMIT 

Sec. 24-21. - Short title. 
This article shall be known, referred to, and may be cited as "The Environmental Conservation, On-Site Sewage Management, and Permit Article of Montgomery County." 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 1; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-22. - Purpose. 
It is the intent and policy of the County Board of Commissioners: 
(1)  To promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the County and its residents; 
(2)  To protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of Montgomery County; 
(3)  To facilitate the adequate provision of on-site sewage management for all development in the local jurisdiction; 
(4)  To protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other development; 
(5)  To promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; 
(6)  To establish measures to preserve an adequate supply of safe drinking water and a quality for State waters which is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public as well as to provide for future growth; to protect the environment, including the soils, air quality, and water resources, from pollution and inappropriate development; 
(7)  To assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the County; and to require permits for new development or location within the County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 2; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the Federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261, and as amended. 
Lot means the contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of size or use. 
Perennial river/stream means a river/stream or section of a river/stream that normally flows continuously throughout the whole year. 
Protected river corridor means all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. 
River/stream bank means the rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, whether immediate or future. This shall include all divisions or re-subdivisions of land involving a new road or change in existing roads. Excluded from this definition is the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 3; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-24. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permit required. No building, mobile home, structure, or land within the jurisdiction of Montgomery County shall hereafter be erected, constructed, located, moved, used, subdivided, altered or disturbed except in conformity with the regulations herein and without first obtaining a permit from the Montgomery County Board of Commissioners or their designee. This provision does and shall apply to the location of all manufactured housing and industrialized buildings in the County. 
(b)  Minimum lot size. All lots intended for residential or other use within the County shall be of such size as necessary to meet all requirements, rules, and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources according to the "Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources Public Health for On-Site Sewage Management Systems" Manual for On-Site Sewage Management; and as necessary to comply with the minimums set forth in the tables MT-1 and MT-2 in section 24-34, if on-site sewage management is utilized; and/or this article, whichever is stricter. 
(c)  On-site sewage management permit required. No person or business shall construct an on-site sewage management system on any lot within the County until site approval and an on-site sewage management construction permit has been obtained from and issued by the Montgomery County Health Department. 
(d)  Permit coordination. The required permit under subsection (a) of this section shall not be issued until the Montgomery County Health Department issues an on-site sewage management construction permit or a site approval letter, whichever is appropriate, so that all lots proposed to be used or subdivided would satisfy the requirements of this article, including the "Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management Systems." If the County Health Department is delegated the responsibility for administering this article, the permit or letter under this section shall suffice as the permit required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Requirements are minimum. The regulations and requirements set by this article shall be the minimum requirements. 
(f)  Compliance with State and Federal regulations. All developments, structures, and uses within the County shall also meet the requirements of all other local, Federal and State regulations in effect, including but not limited to, Department of Transportation regulations, State Fire Marshal regulations, Georgia's Uniform Construction Codes, and Georgia Department of Natural Resources and Georgia Environmental Protection Division environmental rules and regulations. Issuance of a permit under this article does not constitute certification of compliance with such Codes or regulations, and does not abrogate responsibility of the owner to so comply. 
(g)  Map interpretation. If there is any uncertainty as to whether a lot, portion of lot, or a proposed construction or location impacts an environmental resource regulated by this article because of interpretation of the applicable map, the decision of the County Board of Commissioners, or the County Health Department, if it is delegated the responsibility for administering this article, shall take precedent and be considered correct and final, but may be appealed as set forth in subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)  Map appeal. Any person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the Montgomery County Board of Commissioners or the Montgomery County Health Department, as appropriate, regarding map interpretation may at their own expense request reconsideration. Such reconsideration shall include submission of scientific evidence for reversal of the alleged error in map interpretation, and such evidence must be documented by a State registered engineer, geologist, or soils scientist. To obtain a reversal of the decision of map interpretation, the evidence must be acceptable to Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division, and the Montgomery County Board of Commissioners, and/or the Montgomery County Health Department if the Montgomery County Health Department is delegated responsibility for administering this article. Any costs for submission of evidence to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division shall be borne by the person requesting reconsideration. 
(i)  Coordination with zoning and other regulation. This article shall be coordinated with any zoning or other regulations adopted by the Montgomery County Board of Commissioners, and if there is any conflict with those zoning or other regulations, the stricter provisions shall apply. If zoning is or has been adopted, the provisions of this article shall be considered an overlay, or additional requirement(s) to the requirements of underlying zoning regulations and district. 
(j)  Fees. Any fees for applications, inspections, and the issuance of permits or certificates required or issued under the provisions of this article shall be paid by the person seeking such permit at the time of application in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amount of such fees, if any, shall be those established by the County Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 4; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-25. - Delegation of article administration. 
The County Board of Commissioners, because of the need for coordination, hereby charges the County Health Department and the County Manager or their designee with responsibility for administering this article and ensuring compliance with its provisions. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 5; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-26. - Wetlands protection regulations. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the County are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. 
(b)  Reference map. The official maps to be used as the determinant for location of wetlands in Montgomery County and to be regulated areas under this article will be the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's National Wetlands Inventory Maps for the County. These maps portray generalized wetlands inventory areas, and these wetlands inventory areas do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands under the authority of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a wetland delineation by that agency. 
(c)  Wetlands development permit requirements. No activity or use except those identified in subsection (d) of this section shall be allowed within wetlands without a permit under this article. Activities or uses permitted under Section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act may receive a local permit once any required federal permit, or if appropriate, letter of permission/determination, is obtained as described below, and any other applicable provisions of this article have been satisfied. 
(1)  If there is a determination in the administration of this article that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein would not be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and would not disturb an identified wetlands inventory area, no further action concerning this particular section is necessary. 
(2)  If there is a determination in the administration of this section that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein may be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and might disturb wetlands which appear to be under the jurisdiction of Section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a permit under this article. 
(3)  If a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination is required, no local permit under this article will be issued until the person requesting the permit, at their own expense, obtains either a Section 404 permit, if so required, or a letter of permission/determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that no Federal permit is required. 
(4)  No action in the administration of this section, or no local permit issued pursuant to this section relieves the landowner from any Federal or State permitting requirements, including those relating to wetlands or land disturbance. 
(d)  Permitted uses not requiring a permit. The following uses are permitted without permit within the wetlands of the County to the extent they are not prohibited by any other article or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, Section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption. 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require a Section 404 permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(4)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(5)  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. In compliance with the Georgia "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 6; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-27. - Groundwater recharge areas protection regulations. 
(a)  Findings of fact. Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animal waste, like septic tank effluents, contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(b)  Reference map. The official map for delineation of significant groundwater recharge areas in Montgomery County to be regulated areas under this article is the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 edition)." 
(c)  Groundwater recharge areas development permit requirements. All uses except those identified in subsection (d) of this section and those subject to further restriction by any underlying zoning district are allowed. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
(1)  All new aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks, and shall otherwise meet the requirements of U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all Federal requirements. 
(2)  All single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, mobile home parks, or other uses located within a groundwater recharge area and not served by both public water and sewer systems shall be required to have 150 percent of the minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DHR Manual) Tables MT-1 and MT-2 (included as part of this article in section 24-34). The minimums set forth in Tables MT-1 and MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. Said minimum lot size shall not be in any case less than the minimum lot size specified by any underlying zoning district. The regulations specifying the largest minimum lot size shall apply. 
(3)  All lots shall have a minimum width of 150 feet, or as specified in any underlying zoning district if stricter (larger), in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system is to be located. 
(4)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank or other on-site sewage management system unless the County Health Department first approves the proposed on-site sewage management system installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and the provisions of this article. 
(5)  All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner except for the construction of mining settling basins. 
(6)  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compact clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five by 107 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  All new hazardous waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities. 
(2)  New facilities handling 10,000 pounds or more of hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, excluding underground storage tanks, on any one day. 
(3)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 7; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-28. - Major river corridor protection district regulations. 
(a)  Findings of fact. Perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second are of vital importance to the State in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable for habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. These river corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the State, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
(b)  District delineation. The term "protected rivers" as defined under the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, adopted by Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Section 12-2-8 of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, includes any perennial river or watercourses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second. The Altamaha River and the Oconee River through the County meet this criteria. A protected river corridor and a protective 100-foot vegetation buffer is hereby established along the entire length of these rivers within the jurisdiction of the County. The buffer area is measured horizontally from each river bank within the County jurisdiction. Under the method prescribed by the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, no development or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the protected river corridor and within a 100-foot buffer of the river bank except for the following permitted uses. 
(c)  Permitted uses. No development, or construction, or other land-disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the 100-foot buffer from the protected river except for the following uses, and the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity or construction permitted within the river corridor for these acceptable uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, if any underlying zoning district so permits, provided each dwelling is located on a lot with a minimum size as specified by the County Health Department or the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be the greater of these requirements; however, in any case the lot for each dwelling shall not be less than two acres, not including any area between the river banks; and provided the septic tank drainfield is located outside of the 100-foot buffer area. 
(2)  Any residential uses existing or under construction prior to the adoption of these local protection articles, provided the use has an on-site sewage management construction permit issued by the County Health Department prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(3)  Any industrial or commercial uses existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, providing they do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and meet all other Federal and State environmental regulations. 
(4)  Road and utility crossings, providing the construction of these crossings meets the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or any local requirements, if stricter. 
(5)  Timber production and harvesting, providing it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission, and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(6)  Agricultural production and management, provided it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and all other State and Federal laws and regulations, including those promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division; and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(7)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of Section 12-2-8 (as amended) of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 
(8)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(9)  Wastewater treatment. 
(10)  Recreational usage consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. In compliance with the State "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  Facilities or areas used for the handling, receiving, storing, or disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(2)  Hazardous or solid waste landfills. 
(3)  Septic tank drainfields within the 100-foot buffer area under any circumstance. 
(4)  Septic tanks within the 100-foot buffer area, except as expressly provided for single-family dwellings which are permitted under and comply with subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 8; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-29. - Variances. 
When, due to a particular hardship or extraordinary circumstance of the property involved which is not easily corrected, it is impractical for an owner or developer to comply with all of the requirements of this article, the County Board of Commissioners shall be authorized to vary such requirements (under its jurisdiction) only to such extent as to provide fairness to the owner or developer and as to not violate the intent and purposes of this article. Such variances shall only be granted in an official public meeting, and the reasons for granting them shall be entered into the minutes of the public meeting. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 9; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-30. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of these provisions, prohibitions, and installation restrictions by any private individual, land owner, builder, remodeler, contractor, licensed electrician, licensed plumber, septic tank dealer or installer, mobile or manufactured home dealer or mover, or developer; or installation and delivery of any utility services by a public or private utility to any property which holds a septic tank system installed against these prohibitions and restrictions, shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. The County Board of Commissioners may take other actions or remedies as available at law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of provisions of this article. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 10; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-31. - Court of jurisdiction. 
The County Board of Commissioners or the County Board of Health, as appropriate, may bring complaints of violation of any provision of this section before the Magistrate Court, as so desired. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 11; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-32. - Conflicting articles. 
Whenever the provision of this article and those of some other article or statute apply to the same subject matter, that article requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. All other articles and parts of articles in conflict with this article, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, § 13; Res. of 8-7-2001) 
Sec. 24-33. - Minimum lot sizing for on-site sewage management. 
(a)  Minimum lot size requirements for these lots utilizing on-site management systems are as follows for single-family dwellings including but not limited to: manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by local zoning, must be provided in multiples of the following minimum lot sizes for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. See Table MT-1 as follows. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in Sections A—F of the DHR Manual. 
Table MT-1 
Minimum (Min.) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max.) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System. 
Type of Water Supply System 

 
* In this context "Non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** gpad= gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
(b)  Minimum lot sizing requirements for those lots utilizing on-site sewage management systems are as follows in Table MT-2 for multifamily residential dwellings, all other non-single-family dwellings and commercial structures, and this also includes mobile home parks. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in Sections A—F of the DHR Manual. 
Table MT-2 
Minimum (Min.) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max.) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System. 
Type of Water Supply System 

 
* In this context "Non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** gpad= gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. II, app. 1) 
Secs. 24-34—24-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL LAW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 24-57. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Montgomery County Litter Control Law." 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. III) 
Sec. 24-58. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to create an article and law for the County, excluding all incorporated cities and townships therein, to control the disbursement of litter on public and private property throughout the County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. III) 
Sec. 24-59. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brick bats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuge, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, old furniture, building supplies or discarded materials of every kind and description, discarded or abandoned: 
(1)  Refuse, rubbish, junk, or other waste material; or 
(2)  Dead animals that are not subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-4. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse or the shore of beaches thereof, any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forest or any commercial or industrial property. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. III) 
Sec. 24-60. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this County, or any waters in this County, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the County for the disposal of litter, and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a nondisposable litter receptacle or container designed for the temporary storage of litter and located in an area designated by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. III) 
Sec. 24-61. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment in the County jail or both. 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the court in which the convict is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of the sentence, or in the sound discretion of the judge of court in which the conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of the sentence. 
(c)  The court may publish the names of persons convict of violating this article. 
(d)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited or dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(e)  The County presently has and maintains receptacles for the deposit of litter in appropriate locations throughout the County, henceforth said containers shall be suitable for dumping therein of household garbage only and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuge or other material into the container other than household garbage. As used in this article the term "household garbage" means animal, vegetable and fruit refuge matter and other refuge matter ordinarily generated as by products of a household or restaurant such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastic and wrapping or packaging materials. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disburse the contents of or otherwise vandalize any containers provided by Montgomery County for the dumping of trash or garbage. 
(g)  Dumping trash on private or public lands, except in designated trash containers, is against both state law and local ordinance. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. III) 
Secs. 24-62—24-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF DISPOSAL OF YARD TRIMMINGS 

Sec. 24-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. IV, § 1; Ord. of 9-1-1996) 
Sec. 24-82. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the County. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. IV, § 2; Ord. of 9-1-1996) 
Sec. 24-83. - Penalties. 
Any person violating section 24-82 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $25.00, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed five days, or a combination of such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. IV, § 3; Ord. of 9-1-1996) 
Secs. 24-84—24-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE AND SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 24-110. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to define litter, public or private property, scrap tires, scrap tire generators and carriers: tire retailers, municipal, commercial and industrial solid waste, and recovered materials. It also provides regulations for disposal and transportation of all solid waste, litter and scrap tires and the use of sanitary landfills, inert landfills, and construction and demolition landfills; penalties for the violation of said article; and other purposes related thereto. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Sec. 24-111. - Enactment clause. 
(a)  It is declared to be the policy of the County, in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment, to institute and maintain a comprehensive County-wide program for all solid waste management which will ensure that solid waste facilities, whether publicly or privately operated, do not adversely affect the health, safety, and well being of the public and do not degrade the quality of the environment by their reason of location, design, method of operation or other means and which, to the extent feasible and practical, makes maximum utilization of the resources contained in solid waste referred to in this article as "recovered material." 
(b)  It is further declared to be the policy of the County to educate and encourage generators and handlers of all solid waste to reduce and minimize to the greatest extent possible the amount of solid waste which requires collection, treatment, or disposal through source reduction, reuse, composting, recycling, and other methods to promote markets for and engage in the purpose of goods made from recovered materials and goods which are recyclable. The Board of Commissioners of the County does hereby ordain and enact into law the following. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Sec. 24-112. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(4.1). 
Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing for industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but not limited to, fertilizer agricultural chemicals, food and food related products and by products as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(12.1). 
Litter means discarded materials of every kind as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from household, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(18). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests or any commercial or industrial property as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(2). 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(25). 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(26). 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-19(2.i). 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(31). 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(39). 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI, § I; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Sec. 24-113. - Waste disposal in general. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and depositing of all litter, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump, or permit the dumping of litter, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in this County including, and without limitations, any public or private property in the County or any waters in this County unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the Board of Commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires or recovered materials and the person is authorized to use such property. 
(2)  The litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables or scrap tires is placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property. 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and not otherwise in violation of law. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, tire retailers shall be subject to rules as defined in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-4-19 of the Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4 applicable to solid waste. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI, § II; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Sec. 24-114. - Transporting litter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the County hauling wet or moist municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste that leaks, flows freely or spills from said vehicle. 
(b)  Any litter or municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste hauled on a moving vehicle shall be covered or secured in such a manner that litter will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public or private property in the County. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI, § III; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Sec. 24-115. - Regulation of all solid waste or litter containers and receptacles. 
(a)  All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonable possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(b)  Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)  No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the County Commissioners or their designee. 
(d)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any such container or receptacle. 
(e)  No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(f)  No person shall deposit large non-compatible articles in containers or receptacles such as but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bed springs, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(g)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(h)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle. 
(i)  No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the Board of Commissioners. 
(j)  No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the Board of Commissioners. 
(k)  No person shall deposit any solid waste at a County solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in a manner that it can be handled by the attendant and shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation. 
(l)  No person shall deposit waste or litter of any kind at a County solid waste collection and recycling center into County owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for said material. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI, § IV; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Sec. 24-116. - Regulation of sanitary landfills, inert landfills, construction and demolition landfills, and solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)  No landfill shall be operated in the County other than a landfill designated by the Board of Commissioners as the County landfill, and no private sanitary landfill shall be operated in the County without the review and written approval of the Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  No person shall deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)  No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(d)  No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste collection recycling center. 
(e)  Price on solid waste brought to said center will be set to defray total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)  Hours of operation of said centers will be set to maximize convenience of residents of that area. 
(g)  All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge provided, it is separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)  The attendant on duty will have full authority of said center consistent with this article. 
(i)  All rules listed in this section shall apply to all public and/or private property in said County, all waters and/or waterways of said County, and all the County solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI, § V; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Sec. 24-117. - Violations. 
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and/or other punishment within the sound discretion of the Magistrate Court. The offender(s) may also be directed to pick up and remove litter from public streets or other public or private areas as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b). 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VI, § VI; Ord. of 4-4-1997) 
Secs. 24-118—24-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOUTHEAST GEORGIA SOLID WASTE RECYCLING AND REDUCTION 

Sec. 24-150. - Established. 
The Southeast Georgia Waste Reduction and Recycling Commission (Commission) is hereby created for the purpose of assisting the Counties of Bulloch, Candler, Emanuel, Evans, Jenkins, Montgomery, Screven, Tattnall, Toombs, Treutlen and Wheeler, Georgia, establish and implement a regional policy for waste reduction, all to the betterment and enhancement of the environment. Montgomery County is hereby made a member of the Commission. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VIII, § I; Res. of 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 24-151. - Composition. 
(a)  The Commission provided for herein shall be comprised of member County and City Governments. 
(b)  Each member shall name and appoint representatives to the Commission as set forth in the organization's constitution and bylaws. 
(c)  The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedures and keep all minutes and records of its proceedings. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VIII, § II; Res. of 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 24-152. - Responsibilities. 
In order to promote and provide for uniformity and concert of action among its members, the Commission shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Develop, recommend and encourage the adoption of a regional plan for recycling and reduction of solid wastes; 
(2)  Assist members in implementing any plan adopted by the Commission; 
(3)  Recommend management priorities to include enforcement mechanisms that will best further and enhance the goals and objectives of the Commission; 
(4)  Institute educational and awareness programs to further solidify public support for the Commission and its objectives; 
(4)  Monitor regional performance from data collected and examined under Keep America Beautiful Inc.'s Regional System guidelines and make an annual report to each member government; 
(6)  Seek local, State and Federal funds through membership fees, grants and loans as necessary to properly and sufficiently fund the Commission and its programs. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VIII, § III; Res. of 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 24-153. - Incorporation by reference. 
The Constitution and by laws of the Commission are made a part of this article and are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 2003, ch. 23, art. VIII, § IV; Res. of 3-7-1995) 
Chapter 26 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Recording of maps and plats, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67 et seq.; subdivisions abutting state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; the Zoning Procedures Laws, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Montgomery County Subdivision Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), art. 1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Authority and jurisdiction. 
The 1983 Georgia Constitution grants authority to the governing authority of Montgomery County to regulate land development and land use. These regulations shall apply to all unincorporated land located within the boundaries of Montgomery County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), art. 2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Purpose. 
The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the County. In furtherance of the general intent of this chapter, the regulation of land development is authorized for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(2)  To prevent the overcrowding of land and promote desirable living conditions; 
(3)  To ensure the timely provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and serves to land developments; 
(4)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; and 
(5)  To ensure in general, the wise and timely development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan (if applicable) of Montgomery County. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), art. 3) 
Sec. 26-4. - Liability. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the County any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property caused by defect in any piping or appliance or installation of any products. Nor shall the County or any official employee be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by means of the inspection authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), art. 4) 
Sec. 26-5. - Rules. 
In the construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and the words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural, the singular. 
(2)  The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(3)  The term "may" is permissive. 
(4)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 5.1) 
Sec. 26-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a secondary building or structure subordinated to and not forming an integral part of the main or principal building on a lot or parcel, but pertaining to the use of the main building. 
Alley means a narrow thoroughfare dedicated or used for public passageway up to 20 feet in width, which usually abuts the rear of the premises, or upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and which is not generally used as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, is not used for general traffic, and is not otherwise officially designated as a street; a way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Buildable area means that portion of any lot which may be used or built upon once the required front, side and rear yard setbacks have been subtracted from the total area. 
Building means any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building line means a line extended along the foundation of a building from which is measured the distance that a building must be set back to meet the minimum distance from the building line to the front, rear or side property line or in some cases, to the centerline of an adjacent roadway. 
Building official means one or more persons, officers or officials or his authorized representative, whom the governing authority has appointed to administer and enforce, individually or collectively, this chapter and any other ordinances or regulations related to land development and land use. 
Building site means the ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
Certified document. A survey, sketch, plat, map or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional engineers, registered surveyor, architect or other legally recognized person. 
Density means the number of units or buildings per acre, or the number of people per unit, building, acre or mile, or the quantity of people, structures or units within a specified area. 
Developer means any person, firm, corporation, or agent of the foregoing who or which divides for transfer, sale, rent or lease or in any way develops any land deemed to be a subdivision or mobile home park development as herein defined. 
Easement means the right or privilege of using another's property, for purposes such as constructing and maintaining sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, gas lines, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, ingress and egress. 
Engineer means any person being licensed by the State of Georgia as an engineer capable of determining the correct manner in which to construct roads, streets, highways, water and sewage systems, drainage system, structures or other technical related areas. 
Flag lot means a lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor no greater in width than 1½ the required lot width. No more than one flag lot shall be permitted to front on the same side of the same street every 1,500 feet. All flag lots shall have a minimum street frontage of at least 60 feet. 
Floodprone areas means the land that is usually flooded whenever a rise in the water level of a creek, stream, river or other body of water is experienced; that land adjacent to a creek, stream, river channel, canal or other body of water that is designated as a floodplain or floodprone area by a governmental agency. 
Lot means the parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or any piece of land described by a legally recorded deed. 
Lot area means the total area of the lot, including easements. 
Lot, corner, means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
Lot interior means any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one street other than an alley. 
Lot line, front. In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this chapter; provided it is so designated by the Final Development Plan which meets the approval of the governing authority or its authorized representative. 
Lot line, rear. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be determined by the governing authority or its authorized representative. 
Lot line, side. A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot line. 
Lot, reverse frontage, means a lot having frontage on two or more public streets, the access of which is restricted to one street. 
Metes and bounds description means a method of property description whereby properties are described by means of their direction and distances from an easily identifiable location or point. 
Mobile home (manufactured home) means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, USC 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976); and meeting the following development standards: Structure, when in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning system contained therein. The square footage shall be calculated using the width and length dimensions noted on the manufactured home's title or bill of sale. 
Mobile home park (manufactured home park) means a parcel of land developed for subsequent rental, lease, or residential use for placement of two or more mobile/manufactured homes. All mobile/manufactured homes located within a mobile/manufactured home park must be installed in accordance with the Montgomery County Manufactured Home Ordinance, and all mobile/manufactured home parks shall be designed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. A mobile/manufactured home occupied by an immediate family member of a property owner shall not be considered for purposes of determining whether a mobile/manufactured home park exists, providing the number of mobile/manufactured home the property owner submits to the governing authority or its designee a mobile home family purpose affidavit confirming the proposed occupant's status as an immediate family member along with a plat of the lot location indicating thereon review and approval by the Montgomery County Health Department confirming the availability of land area sufficient to meet the minimum lot size requirements set forth hereunder. If the mobile/manufactured home ceases to be occupied by an immediate family member, the mobile home/manufactured home shall then be considered the same as any other mobile/manufactured home for purposes of determining whether a mobile/manufactured home park exists. For purposes of this provision, the term "immediate family member" means a child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, sibling or step-child. A mobile home family purpose affidavit may be obtained at the Board of Commissioner's Office. 
Nonconforming means a building or other structure, use or lot, which by reason of design, size or use does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section, subdivision or mobile home park indicating the location and boundaries of properties prepared and stamped by a registered surveyor. 
Principal building means the building on a lot in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. 
Public use means use of any land, water, buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or authority, County, State or Federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
Reserve strip means a strip of land adjacent to a public street or similar right-of-way which has been reserved for the purpose of controlling access to the public way. 
Right-of-way line means the boundary of a strip of land designed, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. When two adjoining lots under the same ownership are used, the exterior property lines of the lots so grouped shall be used in determining setbacks. 
Site means an area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded development plan, subdivision plat, or in a legally recorded deed. 
Street means a right-of-way affording primary access to abutting property. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "street" shall also mean avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes and other public or private ways. 
Street, arterial, means a street of exceptional continuity that is intended to carry the greater portion of through-traffic from one area of the County to another. 
Street, collector, means those streets which are neither local streets nor arterial streets. Their location and design are such that they are of exceptional continuity, serve as routes passing through residential areas, and serve as means of moving traffic from local streets and feeding it into arterial streets. 
Street, cul-de-sac , means a short local street having but one end open for vehicular traffic, the opposite end being terminated with a permanent turnaround. 
Street, dead-end , means a street not intersecting other streets at both ends, and distinguished from a cul-de-sac by not being terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Street, local , means streets which provide only access to adjacent properties and by nature of their layout serve only vehicles with either origin or destination within the area. 
Street, marginal access , means a minor service street which parallels and which is immediately adjacent to an arterial street (frontage road). 
Surveyor means a person who is licensed by the State of Georgia as a registered land surveyor. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected that requires a fixed location on the ground or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot of record (which exists at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived) into two or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites (manufactured home sites), or other divisions, for the purpose of auction, sale, devise or development, whether immediately or in the future; except that a subdivision does not include the following where the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the governing authority: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. 
(2)  A division of property previously held in joint ownership among the joint owners thereof shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  The transfer of property or any portion thereof from one contiguous owner to another contiguous owner shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of this chapter. 
(4)  A single transfer of an interest in property by a landowner shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of this chapter. However, any subsequent transfers of less than the entire remaining tract of property or subsequent transfer of a portion of the previously transferred property by the owners thereof, their heirs, assigns, or devisees or successors in interest shall be deemed to create a subdivision and the second transfer and all subsequent transfers shall be governed by the terms of this chapter. The utilization of this single transfer exception by a landowner shall not preclude the subsequent use of other allowed subdivision exceptions of subsections (1), (2), (3), (5), (6), and (7) of this definition. 
(5)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where only an existing city, County, or State maintained street is involved and no new streets. (See flag lot which sets forth the requirements for flag lots.) 
(6)  The division of land into parcels for the purposes of conveying the land directly to an immediate family member. For purposes of this provision, the term "immediate family member" means a child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, sibling or step-child. To obtain a review of a plat being submitted under this exception, a family purpose affidavit must be submitted by the grantor to the governing authority or its designee certifying the status of the grantee as an immediate family member. A family purpose affidavit may be obtained at the Board of Commissioner's Office. 
(7)  A transfer of a security interest in property by a landowner for purposes of obtaining financing from a financial institution where ownership remains the same provided the lot fronts on a city, County or State maintained street and complies with the lot size requirements set forth in section 26-26. 
Use means any purpose for which a building or tract of land may be designed, arranged, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
Waterfront. Any site shall be considered as waterfront property provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of water, including a creek, canal, river or any other body of water, natural or artificial, including marshland, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear or side. 
Yard means a required open space on a lot that is left unoccupied with structures and facilities, except as permitted in this chapter. A yard may also be known as a setback. 
Yard, front , means the open space on a lot located between the right-of-way boundary of the abutting street and the front building line as extended to the lot lines to either side. Any yard lying between an abutting street and the building line is considered a front yard. 
Yard, rear , means the open space located between the rear property line and the rear building line as extended to the side lot lines. 
Yard, side , means the open space located between the side property line and the side building line as extended to the front and rear lot lines. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 5.2) 
Secs. 26-7—26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL 

Sec. 26-23. - Development Plan approval. 
(a)  In order to create, develop, construct, alter, expand or sell lots within a subdivision or mobile home park, a developer must first secure approval of a Final Development Plan from the governing authority. The procedure for review, consideration, and approval of a Development Plan consists of two separate steps. These are: 
(1)  Review of Sketch Plan by the governing authority. 
(2)  Review of Final Development Plan by the governing authority. 
(b)  It is recommended that developers considering subdivision or mobile home park development seek a predevelopment review by the Montgomery County Health Department prior to beginning work on their development plan. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 6.1) 
Sec. 26-24. - Requirements for submission of Development Plan. 
A Final Development Plan shall not be submitted for review until the developer or his agent has obtained review and approval from the following: 
(1)  The Montgomery County Health Department shall review the water supply and sewage disposal facilities to be provided on all development plans after being provided with such percolation tests or other information as it may require. In addition, it shall make determinations in all matters concerning the public health, as specified herein. Such determinations and recommendations shall be in writing and accompany the Final Development Plan. Regardless of individual lot sizes within a development, a developer shall be required to provide the Health Department with a soil map and soil descriptions based on high intensity soil study conducted in compliance with the Department of Human Resources' current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Prior to granting approval of a Final Development Plan, the Montgomery County Health Department shall confirm the availability of land area sufficient to meet the minimum lot size requirements set forth in section 26-26. 
(2)  The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners or his authorized designee shall review the Final Development Plan for conformity of its proposed streets with adopted design standards and existing and proposed public street improvements. 
(3)  A land disturbing activity permit, pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, including all amendments in effect as of the date of the application for such permit, shall be required prior to any land disturbing activity on the project site. "Land disturbing activity" includes, but is not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. An approved sediment and erosion control plan and review by the soil conservation service is required as part of the application for the land disturbing activity permit. The permit must include a Wetlands Survey Clearance Affidavit and Floodplain Map/Affidavit, prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor. 
(4)  If the proposed subdivision or mobile home park development includes or abuts any part of the State highway system, the developer shall submit the Development Plan to the Department of Transportation for review and approval in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-151. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 6.2) 
Sec. 26-25. - Procedure for Sketch Plan review. 
(a)  Application for Sketch Plan review. The developer shall submit to the governing authority, at least 25 days prior to the next regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the governing authority, the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting Sketch Plan review and giving the name and address and phone number of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the governing authority on the Sketch Plan shall be sent/called. 
(2)  Eight copies of the Sketch Plan. Additional copies of the Sketch Plan may be requested by the governing authority. 
(3)  Sketch Plan application fee, as set forth in the Montgomery County Schedule of Fees, shall accompany the Sketch Plan. Said fee is non-returnable. 
(b)  Review of Sketch Plan. No Sketch Plan shall be acted upon by the governing authority without affording a hearing thereon. The purpose of the Sketch Plan is to assist the developer prior to extensive site planning necessary for the preparation of the preliminary plat and to enable the developer to become familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. The governing authority shall review and approve, disapprove, or approve with modification the Sketch Plan. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 6.3) 
Sec. 26-26. - Procedure for Final Development Plan review. 
(a)  Application for Final Development Plan review. The developer must submit to the governing authority, at least 25 days prior to the next regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the governing authority, the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of the Final Development Plan and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the governing authority on the Final Development Plan shall be sent. 
(2)  The original and five copies of the Final Development Plan. 
(3)  If streets are to be built, the developer will indicate such developer's proposal for a bond or bank letter of credit to assure their proper and timely construction. 
(4)  Final Development Plan application fee as set forth in the Montgomery County Schedule of Fees shall accompany the Final Development Plan. Said fee is non-returnable. 
(b)  Review of Final Development Plan. 
(1)  The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners, or other person or persons designated by the Chairperson, shall check the Final Development Plan for conformance with the rules and regulations of this chapter and report his findings to the governing authority, which shall afford a hearing on the Final Development Plan, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the governing authority by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting Final Development Plan review and approval. 
(2)  Thereafter, the governing authority shall approve or disapprove the Final Development Plan. A notation of the action shall be made on both the original and one copy of the Final Development Plan. The original shall be returned to the developer or his agent. Upon approval being stamped thereon, a developer shall proceed within 15 days from the date of approval to record the Final Development Plan in the Clerk's Office of the Montgomery County Superior Court. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 6.4) 
Sec. 26-27. - Federal Housing Administration approval. 
In the event the developer plans to secure approval of the Development Plan design by the Federal Housing Administration, it is required that such approval be secured prior to submission of the Preliminary Development Plan to the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 6.4) 
Sec. 26-28. - Approval of development in floodprone area. 
No portion of a subdivision or mobile home park development shall be approved which is subject to inundation by a flood of 100 years frequency or less, and to all State and Federal laws and regulations. All subdivision and mobile home park developments must be designed to minimize flood damage; all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, shall be located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage must be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage must be provided to eliminate exposure to flood hazards; water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters; and on-site sewage management systems must be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 6.5) 
Secs. 26-29—26-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-60. - Sketch Plan. 
The Sketch Plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch and contain the following information: 
(1)  Vicinity map. The Sketch Plan shall include a vicinity map at a scale not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the proposed development to surrounding development. 
(2)  Other requirements. The Sketch Plan shall show: 
a.  Proposed name of development; 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer or designer; 
c.  All names and addresses of all property owners of the site; 
d.  All names and addresses, as listed by the County Assessor, of all owners of the land adjacent to the site and location of those property lines; 
e.  North indicator; 
f.  Date of preparation; 
g.  Total acreage of the tract to be developed, lot layout, and estimated lot sizes; 
h.  Existing and proposed uses of land throughout the subdivision, including streets, roads, utility easements, and land reserved or dedicated for public or common use; 
i.  Existing and proposed uses of land throughout the subdivision, including streets, roads, utility easements, and land reserved or dedicated for public or common use; 
j.  In case of a resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon; 
k.  Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, and land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood frequency on the property to be subdivided; 
l.  Location of existing buildings on the property to be subdivided; 
m.  Location of city limit lines and County lines (if applicable); 
n.  Sketch Plan shall be on one sheet where practical. If the complete plan cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(3)  Subdivision of part of property. The developer shall submit a Sketch Plan of such developer's entire tract even though such developer's present plans call for the actual development of only a part of the property. 
(4)  Recorded deed and plat. Along with the Sketch Plan, the developer shall submit a copy of the recorded deed vesting title in the owner(s) and a copy of any recorded plat showing the property. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 7.1) 
Sec. 26-61. - Final Development Plan. 
The Final Development Plan shall be drawn so that the overall dimensions of the plat do not exceed 18 inches by 22 inches. If the Final Development Plan is drawn in two or more sections, each section shall be accompanied by a key map showing the location of the several sections. The Final Development Plan shall also contain the following specific information: 
(1)  Name of owner of record. 
(2)  Name of subdivision or mobile home park development, data, north arrow, and graphic scale. 
(3)  Name, registration number, and seal of registered land surveyor. 
(4)  Names of counties in which development is located and location map. 
(5)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearing, length and width of every street and alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include radius, point of tangency, and other data for curved property lines and curved streets, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice. 
(6)  Name of owners of record of all adjoining land and all property boundaries, watercourses, streets, easements, utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided. 
(7)  Exact boundaries of original property lines within the tract of land being developed shown with bearing and distances. 
(8)  Streets and alleys, right-of-way, and street names, including street profiles reflecting grades and positive drainage, and roadway typical sections. 
(9)  Rights-of-way of easements; location, widths, and purposes, including storm drainage easements. 
(10)  Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, street trees and lot and block numbers. 
(11)  Parks, or other public open spaces, if any. 
(12)  All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and angles to the nearest second. 
(13)  Accurate description of the location of all monuments and markers. 
(14)  Utility easements by width and location. 
(15)  Drainage design, including sketches of drainage areas, pipe/culvert sizes required, invert elevations, etc., prepared and stamped by a professional engineer. 
(16)  Any additional information not covered by subsections (1) through (15) of this section which is required to be included on a Sketch Plan. (See section 26-60.) 
(17)  Copy of subdivision covenants, if any. 
(18)  The following signed certificates shall appear on the Final Development Plan which is submitted to the governing authority by the developer: 
a.  Certificate of Accuracy. 
"I hereby certify that this FINAL Development Plan is a true, correct and accurate survey as required by the Montgomery County Subdivision Ordinance; and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision, that all monuments shown have been located and placed to the specifications set forth in said regulations." 
By: ____________ 

 
Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No. ____________ 
Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
b.  Certificate of Ownership and Dedication, Individuals. 
"It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and I (we) hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other sites to public or private use as noted. It is understood that this is not an assumption of maintenance by the governing authority. This dedication is for the public's right of ingress and egress only." 

 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 7.2) 
Sec. 26-62. - Permanent reference points. 
Upon obtaining approval of the Final Development Plan, all of the development's permanent reference points shall be placed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Corner tie. At least one corner of the subdivision or mobile home park development shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker. If a corner is within 2,000 feet of a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Station, U.S. Geological Survey, or Georgia Grid System coordinated monument, then this corner shall be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000. When such a monument or station is not available, the tie shall be made to some permanent and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable point, physical object or structure. In subdivision or mobile home park developments of more than ten lots, the information for this corner tie shall include elevation above sea level making it in effect a benchmark which can be used to determine if individual lots are in a floodprone area. 
(2)  Monuments. 
a.  Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision or mobile home park development; at the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with boundaries of the Final Development Plan and at the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision or mobile home park development; at all points of curvature, points in the side lines of streets and alleys; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. 
b.  It is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the subdivision or mobile home park development, if the angle points can be readily reestablished by reference to monuments along the side lines of the streets. 
c.  All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable. 
d.  If the required location of a monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the location of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof shall be clearly indicated on the plat and referenced to the true point. 
e.  All monuments used shall be made of a minimum of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long. 
(3)  Control corners. Within each block of a subdivision or mobile home park development at least two monuments designed and designated as control corners shall be installed. All control corners shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four inches in diameter or square and not less than three feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means, a metal plate of noncorrosive materials and marked plainly with the point, the surveyor's registration number, the month and year it was installed and the words "control corner." 
(4)  Property markers. A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than one-half inch in diameter and at least 24 inches in length shall set all corners, except those located by monuments. 
(5)  Accuracy. Land surveys shall be at an accuracy of at least 1:10,000. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 7.3) 
Secs. 26-63—26-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 26-82. - Required improvements. 
Subdivision developments shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Water supply. All water systems shall be installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Montgomery County Health Department, County Board of Health, and the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. The water system shall be a permitted community water system as required by the State of Georgia Safe Water Drinking Act. 
(2)  Sanitary sewage. If a sanitary sewer is installed in a subdivision or mobile home park development, sanitary sewers shall be installed to the plans and specifications approved by and in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the Montgomery County Health Department. When the sewer line is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed-out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
(3)  Sewage disposal systems. Prior to the construction of any sewage disposal system, such as private septic tanks, an oxidation pond or other facility, the location, size, plans and specifications of such a facility shall be approved by and be in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the governing authority and the Montgomery County Health Department. 
(4)  Curb and gutters. If concrete curbs or paved valley type gutters are required, they shall be installed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by an engineer, registered surveyor, or architect, and approved by the governing authority or its designee. 
(5)  Street grading and surfacing. It shall be the developer's responsibility to construct streets in developments governed by this chapter. Street grading, base preparation, and surfacing of all streets shall be carried out by the developer according to the plans and specifications approved by the Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners or his authorized designee and the Georgia Department of Transportation as required. This requirement shall not apply to existing County or State maintained streets. (See section 26-106 for street design standards.) 
(6)  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges and other necessary appurtenances, shall be designed by and installed according to the plans and specifications approved by a registered engineer. All storm drainage pipe shall be concrete or galvanized corrugated metal, with a minimum diameter of 18 inches. 
(7)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision or mobile home park development. The location and design shall be approved by the governing authority or its designee, and coordinated with local 911 authority. 
(8)  Development entrances. The governing authority may limit the number of entrances, driveways, or "curb cuts." Design standards on County or State streets and roads shall be consistent with all State, Federal, and local laws and applicable ordinances, including the Georgia Department of Transportation Rules and all amendments or revisions in effect as of the date of the Final Development Plan approval. The governing authority may consider safety as well as require available alternatives for reducing the number of entrances, driveways, or "curb cuts." 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 8.1) 
Sec. 26-83. - Final plat revisions. 
If it should become necessary to revise an approved Final Development Plan due to dimensional error, a revised Final Development Plan shall be submitted to the Clerk of Court for final recording after the governing authority has approved and signed the revised Final Development Plan. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 8.2) 
Sec. 26-84. - Performance bonds or bank letters of credit. 
To ensure installation and completion of required improvements approved by the governing authority as part of a Final Development Plan, the governing authority or its designee may require a bond or bank letter of credit, in an amount and with a surety or bank and containing conditions and terms satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the County a period specified by the governing authority or its designee and expressed in the bond or bank letter of credit; and the County is hereby granted the power to enforce such bonds or bank letters of credit by all legal and equitable remedies. The form of the performance bond or bank letter of credit is subject to approval by the governing authority or its designee. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 8.3) 
Sec. 26-85. - Acceptance of streets by the County. 
The County shall not accept title to or assume responsibility for maintaining any street until at least one year after the street has been constructed and paved in accordance with this chapter. Prior to acceptance, the governing authority will inspect the roads to ensure compliance with this chapter. Fee for inspection will be in accordance with the County Schedule of Fees. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 8.4) 
Sec. 26-86. - Access. 
The governing authority shall not approve a subdivision development in a location where the existing road sand streets providing primary access are inadequate to serve the additional traffic generated by the development. If the ditches on existing County roads or streets are to be used for drainage from the subdivision development, the developer will re-grade said ditches and provide an all-weather drainage outlet. All re-grading and drainage outlets shall be approved by the governing authority or its authorized representatives. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 8.5) 
Secs. 26-87—26-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-106. - Streets. 
(a)  Generally. Streets shall conform to the current DOT and/or County road construction and maintenance specifications in effect at the time of the development application and may differ from those requirements outlined in this chapter. If the DOT and County road construction maintenance specifications are different, the more stringent specifications shall apply. 
(1)  Subgrade shall be compacted to 100 percent of the laboratory maximum dry density. 
(2)  Graded aggregate base should meet section 310 of the Georgia DOT specifications and be no less than four inches in depth. It shall be compacted to 100 percent of the maximum dry density. 
(3)  Any pertinent laboratory testing, to verify the above items, shall be done for every 1,000 square yards of material placed. 
(4)  All slopes both cut and filled shall have a maximum 3:1 slope; all drainage ditches shall have a minimum depth of two feet. 
(b)  Conformity to existing maps or plans. The location and width of all proposed streets shall (if applicable) be in conformity with official plans and maps and with existing amended plans of the governing authority. 
(c)  Continuation of adjoining street system. The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Where possible, existing major streets shall be extended. 
(d)  Access to adjacent properties. Where it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a temporary turnaround shall be provided. Houses fronting on minor streets shall have access from minor streets only. 
(e)  Street names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets, shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use of suffix, street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat or Final Development Plan, by marking or in any deed or instrument, without first obtaining approval of the governing authority or its designee. 
(f)  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through-traffic will be discouraged. 
(g)  Trees. It is recommended that as many trees as possible remain on the site during the initial clearing and grading and that trees normally remain unless they lie within a planned public right-of-way, within a planned building site or within the necessary paved areas surrounding or adjacent to the primary structure. 
(h)  Railroads and highways (freeways, expressways). Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the development of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, in residential districts a buffer strip not less than 25 feet shall be provided adjacent to railroad rights-of-way or limited access highways. This strip shall be part of the Final Development Plan and shall be so designated on the plan: "This strip is reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs by the owner. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
(2)  All other streets which are parallel to the railroad, when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade, shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(i)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets by less than 125 feet shall be prohibited. 
(j)  Right angle intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly a right angle as practicable. 
(k)  Cul-de-sac. All dead-end streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least 60 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a 30-foot radius or as approved by the governing authority, or its authorized representatives. 
(l)  Alleys. Service alleys or drives may be required in multiple dwelling, commercial, and industrial developments and shall have a minimum width of 15 feet, but shall not be provided in one and two family residential developments unless the developer provides evidence satisfactory to the governing authority of the need for alleys. 
(m)  Street right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Curb and gutter type construction. (Speed limit shall be posted 45 miles per hour or less.) 

 
(2)  Shoulder-type lane. 

 
(3)  Inverted crown type construction. 

 
(4)  Notes. 
a.  When inverted crown is used, the minimum grade shall not be less than one-half of one percent. 
b.  Except for local street, roadway widths shown do not provide for on-street parking; service lanes are intended only for loading and unloading of passengers and goods and for disabled vehicles and not for the storage of vehicles. 
c.  Right-of-way (henceforth referred to as R/W) width listed is for only that portion of the typical section between the limits indicated in diagram. Sloping rights of additional R/W will be required for cut and fill slopes outside these limits; these future slope areas beyond indicated R/W limits should also be kept clear of development until slopes have been constructed. 
d.  R/W widths greater than "minimum" are encouraged because they make for a safer, more aesthetic and more "comfortable" facility and permit future roadway widening without disrupting abutting property. 
(n)  Sight distance for vertical curves. Where vertical curves are used, the minimum sight distance shall be as follows: 

 
(o)  Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees occurs in the alignment of a marginal access or minor street or road, a curve of reasonable radius shall be introduced. A curve shall be introduced at any change in direction of a collector, industrial or commercial service street or major thoroughfare. On major thoroughfares the centerline radius of curvature shall be determined by the State Department of Transportation or County Engineer. On collector, industrial or commercial service streets, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 150 feet unless the topography of the land to be subdivided makes this impractical. 
(p)  Street grades. Grades on major thoroughfares shall be established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. Grade on collector streets shall not exceed eight percent, unless topographic conditions make this impractical. Grades on minor residential streets shall not exceed 15 percent, unless topographic conditions make this impractical. All street side ditches shall have a minimum grade of not less than one-half of one percent. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 9.1) 
Sec. 26-107. - Easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of ten feet and locate along the front, side or rear lot lines shall be provided as required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 9.2) 
Sec. 26-108. - Pedestrianways. 
If crosswalks are required by the governing authority they shall not be less than ten feet wide where it is deemed essential in order to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 9.3) 
Sec. 26-109. - Subdivision design and specifications. 
(a)  Setback lines. No dwelling shall be located within 40 feet of its front lot line or any street right-of-way, 15 feet of any side lot line or 25 feet of any rear lot line. 
(b)  Lot size with private water and private sewer. 
(1)  Minimum area: Subdivision lots served by both an individual well and an individual septic tank shall contain a minimum lot area of at least 43,560 square feet for a single housing unit unless the Montgomery County Health Officer determines that 43,560 square feet is not sufficient. 
(2)  Minimum width: 200 feet between side lot lines measured at the front setback line. 
(3)  Minimum depth: 200 feet. 
(c)  Lot size with public water and individual septic tank. 
(1)  Minimum area: Subdivision lots served by community or public water and individual septic tanks shall contain the minimum lot area of at least 22,000 square feet for a single housing unit unless the Montgomery County Health Officer determines that 22,000 square feet is not sufficient. 
(2)  Minimum width: 100 feet between side lot lines measured at the front setback line. 
(3)  Minimum depth: 200 feet. 
(d)  Lot size with public water and public sewer. 
(1)  Minimum area: Subdivision lots served by community or public water and sewer shall contain the minimum to area of at least 22,000 square feet for a single housing unit unless the Montgomery County Health Officer determines that 22,000 square feet is not sufficient. 
(2)  Minimum width: 100 feet between side lot lines measured at the front setback line. 
(3)  Minimum depth: 150 feet. 
(e)  Orientation of lot lines. Side lot lines shall be as nearly at right angles as possible to street lines. 
(f)  Lot location. Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street on which it has access. 
(g)  Additional requirements. No mobile home shall be admitted to any subdivision unless it can be demonstrated that the mobile home meets the requirements of the Montgomery County Manufactured Home Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 9.4) 
Sec. 26-110. - Mobile home park design and specifications. 
(a)  Development size. Each mobile home park development shall have a minimum area of not less than ten acres. 
(b)  Setbacks. No mobile home or other building within a mobile home park shall be located within 25 feet of its front lot line or any street right-of-way; ten feet of any side lot line or any rear lot line. 
(c)  Lot size. Mobile home lot sites shall have a lot area as required in subsection (d), (e) or (f) of this section with a minimum lot width of 100 feet unless more stringent lot size requirements are required by the Montgomery County Health Officer to conform to State health regulations. In cul-de-sacs, the width of the mobile home space shall be at least 100 feet at the location of the center of the mobile home unit. 
(d)  Lot size with public water and individual septic tank. Mobile home lots served by community or public water and individual septic tanks shall contain the minimum lot area of 12,500 square feet unless the County Health Officer determines that 12,500 square feet is not sufficient. 
(e)  Lot size with public water and public sewer. Mobile home lots served by community or public water and sewer shall contain the minimum lot area of 12,500 square feet unless the County Health Officer determines that 12,500 square feet is not sufficient. 
(f)  Lot size with private water and private sewer. Mobile home lots served by both an individual well and an individual septic tank shall contain a minimum lot area of at least 43,560 square feet unless the County Health Officer determines that 43,560 square feet is not sufficient. 
(g)  Orientation of lot lines. Side lot lines shall be as nearly at right angles as possible to street lines. 
(h)  Lot location. All mobile home lots must abut upon an interior street (a street located completely inside the boundaries of a mobile home park), which has direct access to a street outside the park. Each mobile home sites shall be provided with a driveway connecting with this interior street and sufficient to provide two off-street parking spaces. No mobile home site within a mobile home park shall have immediate access to a street located outside the boundaries of the mobile home park. 
(i)  Buffer. A buffer strip of at least 75 feet wide shall be located adjacent to each exterior property line of the mobile home park and shall not be included within any individual mobile home lot. This buffer strip shall be increased to a width of 125 feet when located adjacent to existing residential, commercial or industrial development. An area of sufficient width to hide the view of the mobile home park development shall be densely planted along the exterior of the buffer zone with fast growing evergreen shrubs or trees. This strip shall be part of the Final Development Plan and shall be so designated on the plan: "This strip is reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs by the owner. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
(j)  Recreation. Where the average lot sizes for a mobile home park development are less than 22,000 square feet, a minimum of ten percent of the total area of any mobile home park shall be set aside and designed for recreational purposes. 
(k)  Additional requirements. No mobile home shall be admitted to any mobile home park unless it can be demonstrated that the mobile home meets the requirements of the Montgomery County Manufactured Home Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 9.5) 
Sec. 26-111. - General suitability. 
(a)  Soils. The governing authority shall not approve a development where the soil conditions have been determined not suitable for development by the County Health Department pursuant to local, State, and Federal laws, regulations and standards. 
(b)  Health, safety, and welfare. In approving a Final Development Plan, the governing authority may attach additional conditions to protect the health, safety and welfare of both the occupants of the subdivision and the occupants of the surrounding property. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 9.6) 
Secs. 26-112—26-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 26-128. - Variances. 
When, due to unnecessary or undue hardship experienced by the developer of a tract of land it is impractical for a developer to comply with the interpretations of the design requirements of this chapter, the governing authority shall be authorized to vary such requirements provided the intent and purpose of this chapter is not violated. The fact that a financial hardship will be suffered if a variance is not granted is of itself insufficient grounds for granting a variance. Such variations, and the reasons for granting them, shall be entered into the minutes of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 10.1) 
Secs. 26-129—26-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-144. - Filing and recording. 
(a)  Submission for filing. 
(1)  No plat, deed, or other document or instrument describing a subdivision or mobile home park, including those exceptions as enumerated under the definition of "subdivision" in section 26-6 shall be submitted for filing or recording in the Office of the Clerk of Court of Montgomery County unless it shall have the approval of the governing authority or its designee inscribed thereon. 
(2)  No plat of a resurvey of an existing parcel of land containing no division of said existing parcel shall be submitted for filing or recording in the Office of the Clerk of Court of Montgomery County unless it shall have the approval of the governing authority or its designee inscribed thereon. 
(b)  Requirements for section 26-26 approval. To obtain the approval required under section 26-26, the registered surveyor and/or an attorney shall provide a statement on the plat, deed, or other document or instrument certifying the applicable exception, as enumerated in the definition of "subdivision" in section 26-6, being utilized or that the plat is a resurvey of an existing parcel of land containing no division of said existing parcel. The statement shall be in substantially the following form: 
"I (name of registered surveyor/attorney), hereby certify that this (plat, deed, or other document or instrument describing property by means of a legal description) meets the following exception under the Montgomery County Subdivision Ordinance: (describe exception, as enumerated in the definition of "subdivision" in section 26-6)." 
(c)  Examples of descriptions of exceptions, as enumerated in the definition of "subdivision" in section 26-6. 
(1)  This (plat, deed or other document or instrument describing property by means of a legal description) represents a division of property previously held in joint ownership among the following joint owners: (name owners); 
(2)  This (plat, deed or other document or instrument describing property by means of a legal description) represents the transfer of property from one contiguous owner (name owner) to another contiguous owner (name owner); and 
(3)  This (plat, deed or other document or instrument describing property by means of a legal description) represents a single transfer of an interest in property by a landowner (name landowner). To the best of my knowledge and belief, the parcel to be transferred is not a portion of a lot of record created on or after the date of execution of the Montgomery County Subdivision Ordinance. 
(d)  Review fee. An applicant for review of a plat, deed, or other document or instrument as required by section 26-82(1) must pay a review fee as set forth in the County Schedule of Fees. 
(e)  Acceptance for filing. The Office of the Clerk of Court the County shall not accept, file, or record any plat, deed, or other document or instrument requiring approval under section 26-8(1) without approval being entered thereon by the governing authority or its designee. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 11.1) 
Sec. 26-145. - Unauthorized conveyances. 
No lot, street, alley, improvement, easement, right-of-way or other property or property right of any kind shall be conveyed, by deed or otherwise, to the County, the governing authority or other public authority without its express acceptance of such conveyance as indicated by the signature of its authorized agent on such deed or other document of conveyance. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 11.2) 
Sec. 26-146. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Sale, transfer, or lease. No lot or parcel of land shall be sold, transferred, or leased until the Final Development Plan, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved as provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Construction standards. A building or structure shall be considered substandard if or when it does not meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code of Georgia, or any other Code or ordinance adopted by the County or its governing authority. 
(c)  Occupancy. For any subdivision or mobile home park development subject to the provisions of this chapter, no building or structure may be occupied for dwelling or other purposes, nor shall an occupancy permit be issued, if required, for any building or structure until all streets and required utility installations, including water supply and sanitary sewer systems, have been completed. 
(d)  Erection and location of buildings. Any building or structure erected or located in violation of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the governing authority or its designated official(s) may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 11.3) 
Sec. 26-147. - Lease or transfer of lots in unapproved developments. 
The lease of, transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell or lease lots by reference to an exhibition of, or other use of a plat or plan of a subdivision or mobile home park development subject to the requirements of this chapter that has not been given approval by the governing authority is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or lease shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The County may enjoin such lease, transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 11.4) 
Sec. 26-148. - Unapproved development. 
The creation, development, construction, alteration, or expansion of a subdivision by a developer without first obtaining approval of a Final Development Plan from the governing authority is prohibited and shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 11.5) 
Sec. 26-149. - Street names. 
It shall be unlawful for a person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by any marking or in any deed or instrument without first obtaining the approval of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 11.6) 
Sec. 26-150. - Continuance of a nonconforming use. 
A lawful use of or vested right to use any building, structure or land existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or the adoption of any amendment thereto may be continued subject to the restrictions contained in this chapter even though such use does not conform with the regulations of this chapter except that: 
(1)  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the area of use or the size of the structure as it existed on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or the adoption of any amendments thereto. 
(3)  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be re-established after discontinuance for six months regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon. 
(4)  Any intended nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or the adoption of an amendment thereto shall be prohibited unless such intended nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired is actually commenced within one year of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or the adoption of an amendment thereto regardless of the intent or expectation to commence or abandon such nonconforming use. 
(5)  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be rebuilt, altered, or repaired except as provided herein: 
a.  If the structure is altered or repaired, said alterations or repairs shall be in conformity with the building codes in force at the time of said alteration or repair; provided, however, that said alteration or repair shall not extend or enlarge the structure being altered or repaired; 
b.  If the structure is totally rebuilt, the replacement structure shall conform with all the requirements of this chapter, except as to the district; provided, however, said replacement structure may not occupy an area greater than the replaced structure. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 11.7) 
Secs. 26-151—26-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 26-169. - Violations of chapter. 
A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment of not more than 12 months. After any developer, person, or entity has been notified by the governing authority or its designee that such person or entity is in violation of this chapter, each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense punishable by like fine. In addition to or in lieu of the foregoing the governing authority may, whether by legal process or otherwise, seek to enjoin, correct, and/or abate any violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 12.1) 
Sec. 26-170. - Compliance. 
If the governing authority determines that certain improvements to a subdivision do not comply with the approved Final Development Plan or any other provisions of this chapter, the developer or owner shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and upon demand by the Board of Commissioners, shall immediately correct any deficiencies as required by the governing authority 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 12.2) 
Secs. 26-171—26-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 26-194. - Interpretation. 
The regulations expressed in this chapter shall be considered as the minimum provisions for the protection of the health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 13.1) 
Sec. 26-195. - Conflict with other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Whenever the requirements made under authority of this chapter impose higher standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 13.2) 
Sec. 26-196. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a declaration shall not affect the chapter as a whole, or any other part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 13.3) 
Sec. 26-197. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with and less restrictive than any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 13.4) 
Sec. 26-198. - Savings provisions. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the County under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the County or its governing authority except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005(2), § 13.5) 
Chapter 28 - TAXES 

Sec. 28-1. - Freeport Tax. 
The Board amended the Freeport Tax from 20 percent to 100 percent as an incentive for new industry to come into the County. An application for exemption of the Freeport Tax has to be applied for in the Tax Appraiser's Office. 
(Code 2003, ch. 24, art. I; Mot. of 8-4-1992) 
Sec. 28-2. - Board of Tax Assessors. 
[(a)  Membership. ] Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290 there is an established Montgomery County Board of Tax Assessors. The Board of Tax Assessors shall consist of not less than three nor more than five members to be appointed by the Montgomery County Board of Commissioners. The appointment up to a five member board is authorized but not mandated. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-292 the Montgomery County Chief Appraiser is eligible to serve on the Board of Tax Assessors if authorized in a meeting of the Board of Commissioners. 
[(b)  Compensation. ] Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-294 each member of the Board of Tax Assessors shall be paid as compensation for his services an amount to be determined from time to time by the Board of Commissioners. The compensation to be paid to a member of the Board of Tax Assessors shall not be less than $20.00 per day for the time he is actually discharging the duties required of him. Attendance at required approved appraisal courses shall be part of the official duties of a member of the Board of Tax Assessors and he shall be paid for each day in attendance at such courses and shall be allowed reasonable expenses necessarily incurred in connection with the courses. The compensation of the members of the Board of Tax Assessors and other expenses as may necessarily be incurred in the performance of the duties of the Board shall be paid from the county treasury in the same manner as other payments by the County are made. 
[(c)  Term. ] Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-295 appointment of members to the Board of Tax Assessors will be for a term of six years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
[(d)  Certification of appointment. ] Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290(c) the order making an appointment to the Board of Tax Assessors shall be regularly entered upon the record of the Superior Court of Montgomery County. A certificate from the Clerk of the Superior Court reciting the order and stating that the person appointed has taken the oath required by law shall constitute the commission of a member. No other commission shall be required. The Clerk of the Superior Court shall transmit a copy of the certificate to the State Revenue Commissioner within five days of the date the oath is administered. 
(Res. No. 16-08-04, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 16-08-04, adopted Aug. 8, 2016, repealed the former § 28-2 and enacted a new § 28-2 as set out herein. The former § 28-2 pertained to Tax Assessor's term of office and derived from the Code of 2003, ch. 24, art. I; and a resolution adopted Aug. 5, 1996. 
Sec. 28-3. - Taxpayer's Bill of Rights. 
The Board of Commissioners adopts and incorporates by reference the procedures required by the most recently published version of the Taxpayers' Bill of Rights as promulgated by the State Department of Revenue. 
(Code 2003, ch. 24, art. I; Mot. of 7-2-1999) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2003 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2003 Code, as updated through February 8, 2016, which are included herein. Sections of the 2003 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Local and Special Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 