CODE OF ORDINANCES OF DOUGLAS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY 
____________ 
Published in 1988 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Gwynne Maurer  Chairman 
____________ 
Tom Worthan  Steve Farris  Commissioners 
____________ 
Helen Meade  Clerk of Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Raymond Worthan  County Manager 
____________ 
Joseph H. Fowler  County Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY 
____________ 
Honorable Tom Worthan  Chairman, Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Honorable Henry Mitchell, III  District 1 Commissioner 
Honorable Kelly Robinson  District 2 Commissioner 
Honorable Mike Mulcare  Vice Chairman, District 3 Commissioner 
Honorable Ann Jones Guider  District 4 Commissioner 
____________ 
Eric Linton  County Administrator 
____________ 
Lisa Watson  County Clerk 
____________ 
Ken Bernard, Esquire  County Attorney 
____________ Wes Tallon  Director Department of Communications  and Community Relations 
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Douglas County of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances of the County. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the ordinances included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their locations within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 9 is numbered 9-1 and the tenth section of Chapter 8 is 8-10. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-3 and 4-4 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-3.1, 4-3.2 and 4-3.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 2 and 3, it will be designated as Chapter 2.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by public officers and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of B. Meade White, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Joseph H. Fowler, County Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  Tallahassee, Florida 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature and ordinances that amend subject matter not found in the Code are not codified and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The following listed Acts of the General Assembly of Georgia, creating and describing the county and providing for a board of commissioners and administration of the county government, were adopted as an ordinance by the board of commissioners on March 8, 1977: Acts of 1870, p. 13; 1874, p. 371; 1874, p. 390; 1877, p. 273; 1881, p. 531; 1952, p. 2705; 1953, p. 2300; 1968, p. 2996; 1973, p. 2121; 1975, p. 2513; and 1976, p. 2707. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, Douglas County, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as "The Douglas County Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to all ordinances and resolutions of the board of commissioners unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the issue sought to be addressed, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate the remedy sought, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b). 
Board. "Board" or "the board" shall mean the county board of commissioners. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of Douglas County as designated in section 1-1 above. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other ordinances, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurement of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation of time. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3). 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Douglas County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the county to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. Any word importing one (1) gender shall extend to be applied to the other genders also, if the sense permits. 
State Law reference— Gender, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4). 
Governing authority, governing body. The words "governing authority" or "governing body" shall mean the county board of commissioners. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more county officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance giving the authority. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5). 
Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, as herein defined, whether acting by themselves or through servant, agent or employee. 
Land, real estate. The terms "land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of incorporeal nature. 
May. The word "may" is permissive rather than mandatory. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Month. The word "month" shall mean calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Number. A word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person or thing, and every word importing the plural number shall extend and apply to one (1) person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" or "sworn." 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and" and the word "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction shall be applicable. 
Owner. The word "owner," when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
State Law reference— Definition of Person, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every specie of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8), (15). 
Property. The term "property" includes both real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" shall include any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. Reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Road, street. The words "road" and "street" shall mean any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the county. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. A "signature" or "subscription" includes, in addition to its common usage, the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The words "state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future if the sense permits. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7). 
Week. The word "week" shall mean a calendar week of seven (7) days. 
Writing or written. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Ord. of 2-1-77, § 1(2-103)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or expiration. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision. 
(Ord. of 2-1-77, § 1(2-105)) 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances, etc. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as ordinances, resolutions, or regulations existing at the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amending Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Douglas County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows.…" The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Douglas County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (or subsection or chapter) reads as follows.…" The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  All sections, chapters or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter or provision number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect or ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Violations; abatement of nuisance; appeal in license suspension or revocation cases. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this Code the doing of an act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punished to the maximum extent allowed in sections 15-10-60 and 36-1-20 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or as otherwise provided by the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section or elsewhere in this Code, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the county as provided by law or ordinance. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as new and separate offenses. 
(d)  In any case in which the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this Code is sought, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of commissioners, or body designated by it, for a determination of whether or not the license shall be suspended or revoked or neither suspended nor revoked. Each such licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to present evidence, and to cross-examine witnesses presented against such licensee. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; punishment for driving under the influence, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-391. The above-cited § 15-10-60 authorizes punishment of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or sixty (60) days in jail. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 1-11. - Applicability of Code. 
The provisions of this Code, unless otherwise specified, shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Sec. 1-12. - Matters not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any legislation promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the county, or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by the county to any person; 
(4)  Any legislation dedicating, naming, defining, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the county; 
(5)  Any appropriation or legislation authorizing appropriations or gifts; 
(6)  Any legislation providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(7)  Any legislation establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county; 
(8)  Any zoning ordinance or resolution; 
(9)  Any legislation which is temporary, although general in nature; 
(10)  Any legislation which is special, although permanent in nature; 
(11)  Any legislation levying or otherwise relating to taxes, not in conflict with this Code; 
(12)  Any legislation establishing fees, not in conflict with this Code; 
(13)  Any legislation providing traffic regulations for specific areas, such as no-parking zones, stop intersections, etc., not in conflict with this Code; or 
(14)  Any legislation enacted after the date of the adoption of this Code; 
and all such legislation is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Prior illegal uses not authorized. 
The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any law in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time shall take effect immediately after their passage, or as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, clause, paragraphs, phrases and sentences of this Code are severable, and if any sentence, phrase, clause, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sentences, phrases, clauses, paragraphs and sections of this Code, inasmuch as the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional sentence, phrase, clause, paragraph or section. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-1 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by state law, the governmental powers of the county shall be exercised by the board of commissioners in the manner provided by state law and by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-15-77, §§ 3-101, 4-101) 
Sec. 2-2. - Meetings of board of commissioners—Time; calling special meetings; open to public. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesdays of each month, at 10:00 a.m., unless otherwise provided by resolution. 
(b)  Special meetings. The chairman or any two (2) members of the board of commissioners may convene the board whenever the chairman or the two (2) members deem that the public business demands it. 
(c)  Open to public. All meetings at which official actions are to be taken shall be open to the public. 
(d)  Work sessions. The board of commissioners may conduct work sessions at its pleasure for the purpose of reviewing matters brought to its attention, which shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. of 1-18-77(3), § 4-102) 
State Law reference— Meetings to the public, O.C.G.A. § 38-80-1; "Sunshine" law, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.; Ga. Laws 1952, p. 2705, requires a meeting on the first Tuesday in each month. 
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, Roberts' Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of the board meetings. 
(1)  Call to order. All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be open to the public. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence, the member designated by the chairman, or if not so designated, the member selected by the members present, or any other party designated by the board, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special or called meeting, and shall immediately call the board to order. 
(2)  Attendance record. The county clerk shall enter in the minutes the names of commissioners who are present and those who are absent. 
(3)  Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the board of commissioners shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting, and an affirmative vote of a majority of such number shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business. 
(4)  Approval of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a meeting is requested by a commissioner, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the county clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy not later than the Friday preceding the next meeting. 
(5)  Reports by committees. Any business coming before the board may be referred to a committee of one (1) or more commissioners or to a department head for further study. It shall be the duty of each such committee to make a timely report on matters referred to it. 
(6)  Citizen input. 
a.  At voting meetings of the board of commissioners, any person who desires to address the board regarding an item germane to the agenda (meaning on the meeting agenda) during citizen's input, shall first register to do so at an area designated for such purpose at the meeting location, completing and submitting a speaker form to the county clerk at least ten (10) minutes prior to the announced starting time of the meeting. Upon recognition by the presiding officer to speak at the meeting, such person shall appear at the location designated by the presiding officer and provide their name and address for the record. Thereafter, the person so recognized to address the board shall have up to three (3) minutes to provide input on a matter germane to the agenda. Citizens desiring to provide public input to the board of commissioners on issues not germane to the agenda shall be directed to the board's work session for citizen's input. If such person addressing the board has printed materials to distribute to members of the board, such materials shall be submitted to the county clerk prior to the start of said meeting in order that distribution to the board of commissioners will not unduly delay the meeting. If such person wishes to distribute printed material to the general audience in attendance at the public meeting, such person shall place the materials in the area designated by the presiding officer in order to provide public access to the materials. Without the express permission of the presiding officer during the conduct of the meeting, all presentations will be closed after three (3) minutes. The presiding officer may establish time limits on public comments regarding an issue, provided time limits for differing opinions are equivalent. In the event of multiple people wishing to speak on a topic, it is suggested that people with similar views to express select one (1) representative to speak for all of them. No campaigning of any kind shall be permitted as public input under this procedure, and no campaign materials may be distributed at meetings of the board of commissioners. 
b.  At non-voting work sessions of the board of commissioners, any person who desires to address the board regarding any item of public interest during citizen's input, shall first register to do so at an area designated for such purpose at the meeting location, completing and submitting a speaker form to the county clerk at least ten (10) minutes prior to the announced starting time of the meeting. Upon recognition by the presiding officer to speak at the meeting, such person shall appear at the location designated by the presiding officer and provide their name and address for the record. Thereafter, the person so recognized to address the board shall have up to three (3) minutes to provide input on any matter of public interest, subject to the limitations herein described. If such person addressing the board has printed materials to distribute to members of the board, such materials shall be submitted to the county clerk prior to the start of said meeting in order that distribution to the board of commissioners will not unduly delay the meeting. If such person wishes to distribute printed material to the general audience in attendance at the public work session, such person shall place the materials in the area designated by the presiding officer in order to provide public access to the materials. Without the express permission of the presiding officer during the conduct of the meeting, all presentations will be closed after three (3) minutes. The presiding officer may establish time limits on public comments regarding an issue, provided time limits for differing opinions are equivalent. In the event of multiple people wishing to speak on a topic, it is suggested that people with similar views to express select one (1) representative to speak for all of them. No campaigning of any kind shall be permitted as public input under this procedure, and no campaign materials may be distributed at work sessions of the board of commissioners. 
(7)  Recording vote. The yeas and nays of the commissioners present shall be recorded on the minutes on any vote taken. 
(Ord. of 1-18-77(3), §§ 4-103(a)—(c), 4-104(e)—(h); Ord. of 7-9-92; Ord. of 6-2-09) 
Sec. 2-4. - Same—Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements of the county shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the following manner: 
(1)  Preparation. All ordinances shall be prepared by the county attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the board of commissioners unless ordered by a majority vote of the board, or requested in writing by the chairman, or by the county attorney on such attorney's own initiative. 
(2)  Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions, contract documents and agreements, before presentation to the board, shall have been approved as to form and legality by the county attorney. 
(3)  Introduction and adoption. Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the board of commissioners must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the board, except that the county attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the board, and any commissioner may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted. 
(Ord. of 1-18-77(3), § 4-104(a)—(c)) 
Sec. 2-5. - Composition of administrative services. 
Any department or person under the control and supervision of the board of commissioners shall constitute the administrative service of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-15-77, § 3-102) 
Sec. 2-6. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of the office by state law and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the board of commissioners for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and initiate, with the approval of the board of commissioners, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the county and to the public; 
(3)  Submit reports quarterly or as otherwise required by the board of commissioners of the activities of their respective departments to the board of commissioners; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the board of commissioners; 
(5)  Prepare budgets annually, or as otherwise directed, as required by the board of commissioners; 
(6)  Have power, when authorized by the board of commissioners, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinate employees; and 
(7)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all county property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(c)  Departmental cooperation. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the board of commissioners, any other department such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of the department. 
(d)  Open records. All county records, except those which by this Code, state law or court order are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service hereinbelow prescribed. 
(e)  Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall: 
(1)  Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays, except as otherwise directed by the board of commissioners; provided that any elected county official may extend the hours of operation of offices under such official's direct supervision when such official deems it reasonably necessary for the convenience of the public. 
(2)  Make a daily deposit with the county depository designated by the board of commissioners of any monies received from the public. 
(Ord. of 3-15-77, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-7. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the board of commissioners may require any department head, county official or employee, before entering upon the discharge of official duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the board of commissioners. Said bond shall be payable to the county for the faithful performance of said duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriation or unlawful expenditures in office. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the board of commissioners. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the county. 
(Ord. of 3-15-77, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-8. - Open records policy. 
The document attached to an ordinance of March 20, 2001, marked as Exhibit A is adopted as the county open records requests policy. The policy is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-20-01) 
Secs. 2-9—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEE USE OF COUNTY-OWNED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—8 of an ordinance adopted May 16, 1989, have been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. II, §§ 2-21—2-28. 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 13. 

Sec. 2-21. - Vehicles assigned to full-time, permanent employees only. 
No vehicle may be assigned to any employee who is not a full-time, permanent employee of the county. A full-time, permanent employee of the county is one who is scheduled to work forty (40) hours per week, has been certified by the county personnel director as an employee. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 1) 
Sec. 2-22. - License requirements; driving record; assignment to employee residing outside county. 
Each employee assigned the use of a county vehicle must have a valid Georgia State drivers license without restriction and must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department head that such employee is a competent operator of the vehicle of the type and description to be used by such employee. The employee must also have a driving record which, though, perhaps, including instances of vehicular collisions in the past, nonetheless, shows the ability to responsibly and capably handle the vehicle of the type and description to be assigned to such employee. No vehicles may be assigned to an employee who resides outside of Douglas County, Georgia, unless it is shown that such employee is subject to be called to duty outside of normal operating hours. For purposes of this article, normal working hours are 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday of each week, excluding holidays. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 2) 
Sec. 2-23. - Return of vehicle; exception. 
All vehicles assigned to employees shall be returned to a designated location of county property at the conclusion of each normal working day, unless the employee is authorized to take the vehicle to such employee's private residence. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 3) 
Sec. 2-24. - Taking vehicle to employee's private residence outside of normal working hours. 
No employee shall be authorized to take any county vehicles to such employee's private residence outside of normal working hours unless such employee is subject to be called to return to perform functions in the course of such employee's employment for the county outside of regular working hours. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 4) 
Sec. 2-25. - Use of county vehicles for personal purposes. 
No county vehicles may be used by any employee for personal purposes at any time. Transportation to and from place of employment to the residence of employee shall not be considered personal use. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 5) 
Sec. 2-26. - Responsibility for vehicle. 
Any vehicle assigned to an employee shall be the responsibility of that employee, and the employee shall assure that the vehicle receives routine maintenance, is properly fueled, and is operated in a safe and responsible manner. Maintenance on such vehicle shall be performed by county personnel at the county maintenance facility. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 6) 
Sec. 2-27. - Abuse of privileges. 
The abuse of this article by any employee may result in the termination of the privileges of using such vehicle and may further subject the employee to disciplinary action pursuant to the personnel regulations and merit system of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 7) 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 13; civil service system, § 13-14 et seq. 
Sec. 2-28. - Use of vehicle constituting income for federal income tax purposes. 
To the extent that the use of county-owned vehicles by any employee constitutes income for federal income tax purposes, each employee shall solely bear full and complete responsibility for reporting such income and paying any and all taxes due in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89, § 8) 
Secs. 2-29—2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution of March 2, 1993 repealed former §§ 2-41—2-46 in their entirety and added a new §§ 2-41—2-46. Former §§ 2-41—2-46 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances of June 6, 1989; November 21, 1989; and July 21, 1992. 

Sec. 2-41. - Office created; appointed. 
There is hereby created the office of county manager of Douglas County, hereinafter referred to as "manager". 
(Res. of 3-2-93) 
Sec. 2-42. - Qualifications. 
The manager shall be appointed or may be removed by majority vote of the entire board. The manager shall receive such compensation as prescribed annually by the board. The manager shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The board may designate a person or persons to perform on a temporary basis the functions and duties of the manager during his absence, disability, or suspension. No member of the board of commissioners shall be appointed county manager during the term of office for which he or she is elected or for a period of one (1) year after leaving office as a commissioner. 
(Res. of 3-2-93) 
Sec. 2-43. - Experience. 
The manager shall be chosen by the board, upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in and knowledge of the duties of office as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-21-17, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted February 21, 2017, § 1, repealed former § 2-43, and enacted a new § 2-43. Former § 2-43 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from a resolution of March 2, 1993. 
Sec. 2-44. - Duties. 
The board of commissioners of the county shall continue to be the chief executive entity of the county, and it shall be the duty of the board to set the overall executive policies and procedures of the county. The manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the county, fully responsible to the chairman and other members of the board for the proper and efficient administration of all the affairs of the county, including all of the day to day operations of the county except as otherwise provided by law. Specifically, it shall be the duty of the manager: 
(1)  To appoint and remove all department heads in the administrative service of Douglas County government with the express advice and consent of the board, as provided for by this article and in compliance with the Douglas County merit system or personnel rules adopted by the county, except the county attorney and county clerk; who shall be appointed and removed only by the board; 
(2)  To supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the county or any that may be created except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance with the advice of the board; 
(3)  To submit to the board the annual operating budget for the county, specifically including a capital improvement budget, which has been prepared by the budget/fiance officer. Also, the manager shall obtain from all department heads and local constitutional officers their proposed annual budgets; 
(4)  To submit to the board and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the county as of the end of each fiscal year and at such other times as the board may direct; 
(5)  To prepare and make such other reports concerning the operations of departments, offices and agencies of the government as may be required by the board; 
(6)  To keep all commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the county and make such recommendations to the board concerning the affairs of the county as he deems desirable; 
(7)  To confer with and assist the directors of all departments, such as the department of health and department of family and children services, whose responsibilities and activities are not under direct control and jurisdiction of the commissioners, but who are dependent upon appropriations therefrom, and provide general liaison between the commissioners and all departments, boards, commissions and employees of the county; 
(8)  To confer with and advise all elected and appointed officials of the government who are not under the immediate control or jurisdiction of the commissioners, but who receive financial support therefrom, including but not limited to the clerk of the superior court, judge of the probate court, sheriff and tax commissioner; 
(9)  To examine regularly accounts, records and operations of every board, commission, authority, department, office and agency which receive appropriations from the Commissioners; 
(10)  To see that the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the board and the laws of the state are forth fully executed and enforced; 
(11)  The manager shall not engage in or be concerned with local partisan politics or any local political campaign. He shall not contribute to any local campaign fund or solicit funds for local political purposes from any other person. He shall not be eligible for election as a member of the board of commissioners of Douglas County for a period of one (1) year after termination of his service as county manager. 
(Res. of 3-2-93) 
Sec. 2-45. - Supervision of all departments by board of commissioners; additional duties of manager. 
The board of commissioners shall supervise and direct the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the county, solely through the chairman of the board. The chairman may delegate or designate the manager to act in his stead in such administrative matters as the chairman determines are necessary. 
The manager shall attend all meetings of the board and such other meetings as directed by the chairman. The manager shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be required by the chairman. 
The manager shall further have the responsibility of coordinating with department heads after consultation with the board rules for regulating purchases by the county and setting forth specific limitations on authority for other individuals and providing for the securing of bonds for performance of services. 
The manager shall with the concurrence of the chairman have the authority to transfer funds within any department budget among personnel operations or capital improvement categories up to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). All proposed transfers in excess of that amount shall require the consent of a majority of the board. 
(Res. of 3-2-93) 
Sec. 2-46. - Bond. 
The manager shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the county to be approved by the board and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. The amount of said bond shall be determined by the board. Said bond shall be delivered to the board within five (5) business days after the manager assumes his duties, and upon receipt, it shall be filed by the chairman of the board in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Douglas County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 3-2-93) 
Secs. 2-47—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDGE OF THE JUVENILE COURT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of a resolution, adopted Dec. 19, 1989, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. VI, §§ 2-61—2-64. 

Sec. 2-61. - Office created; appointment, term. 
There is hereby created the office of judge of the juvenile court. Such office shall be effective January 1, 1990. The office of judge of juvenile court of Douglas County shall be a full-time judicial position. The judge of said court shall be selected in the manner and for the term provided by statutory law as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Res. of 12-19-89) 
Sec. 2-62. - Duties. 
(a)  The said judge shall have such duties and authority as is set forth in the Juvenile Court Code of Georgia. 
(b)  The judge shall assist the Superior Court of the Douglas Judicial Circuit by presiding in such matters as may be assigned by the judges thereof pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 15-1-9.1 or other lawful authority. 
(c)  The judge shall be prohibited from engaging in the private practice of law except as the same shall involve carrying out the duties as judge or in defending any action brought against him/her. 
(Res. of 12-19-89) 
Sec. 2-63. - Compensation. 
(a)  The initial annual compensation of the judge shall be as provided in the budget of the county governing authority for the year 1990. 
(b)  Compensation shall be increased at such times as increases incur in the compensation of Douglas County Merit System employees and in the same percentage amount as the increases for such employees, provided that such increases are approved by written order of the judge or judges of the Superior Court as are by law responsible for setting the salary of the judge of the juvenile court at the time of such increase. 
(Res. of 12-19-89) 
Sec. 2-64. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect concurrent with an order of the judges of the Superior Court relating to the provisions hereof and evidencing the consent of the sitting judge of the juvenile court to the restrictions and duties provided in this section succeeding judges of the juvenile court of the county shall likewise consent in writing to restrictions and duties provided for in this article prior to assuming the office created herein. 
(Res. of 12-19-89) 
Secs. 2-65—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAGISTRATE COURT 

Sec. 2-81. - Constable of the magistrate court. 
The chief magistrate is empowered to appoint constables of the magistrate court for the purposes of county code enforcement, and that the following positions are hereby authorized to be appointed for this purpose: 
Tax commissioner; 
Deputy tax commissioner; 
Animal control officers; 
Planning and zoning director; 
Senior planner; 
Zoning administrator; 
Occupational tax code enforcement officers; 
Planning and zoning code enforcement officers; 
Beer and wine code enforcement officer; 
Building official; 
Building inspectors; 
Engineering department director; 
Construction monitoring engineer; 
Soil erosion control inspectors; 
Land acquisition and property management agent; 
Fire chief; 
Assistant fire chief; 
Fire marshal; 
Fire safety inspectors; and 
Fire investigators. 
(Res. of 5-16-00) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 3, 1991, amended Ch. 3 to read as herein set out in Art. I, §§ 3-1—3-3 and Art. II, §§ 3-20—3-52. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 3, Art. I, §§ 3-1—3-19 and Art. II, §§ 3-20—3-47 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 2, 1985, §§ 62-101, 62-102(a)—(c)(1)—(4), (d)—(f), 62-103—62-105, 62-106(a)—(f), 62-107, 62-108(a)(1), (b)(3), (c), (d), 62-109(a)(1)—(4), (c), 62-110—62-114; an ordinance adopted Oct. 3, 1989; a resolution adopted July 17, 1990. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages prohibited in amusement centers, § 4-12; intoxicated persons prohibited in amusement centers, § 4-13; taxes on alcoholic beverages additional to business license tax, § 12-15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages: As used in this article the term includes and is limited to wine, beer, malt beverages and liquor as follows: 
(1)  Wine: Any alcoholic beverage made from fruits, berries, or grapes whether by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added as defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(25). 
(2)  Malt beverages: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(13). 
(3)  Liquor: Any spirituous liquor or distilled spirits which includes all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
(b)  Distilled spirits: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to all fortified wines. 
(c)  Governing authority: The governing authority of the unincorporated area of the county is the board of commissioners of the county. 
(d)  Grocery store: A retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages does not exceed fifty (50) percent of its total gross sales. 
(e)  Hotel: A building(s) or other structures(s) kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential in which fifty (50) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests, which facility also serves food and has one (1) or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least eighty (80) persons, where meals are regularly served to such guests and/or to the public at large. Sleeping accommodations and dining rooms shall be accommodated in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in conjunction therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge, restaurant or nightclub in their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. 
(f)  Key employee: A full-time employee involved in the management of the store. 
(g)  Lounge: A separate room connected with, a part of an adjacent to a restaurant (as defined herein) or located in a hotel (as defined herein), provided, that in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of its connected restaurant. 
(h)  Minor: A person younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(i)  On-premises: All enclosed space within the proprietor's building and any other areas outside the proprietor's building which are under the direct control of the proprietor. 
(j)  Restaurant: Any public place, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where substantial meals are regularly and actually prepared and served, excluding periods for holidays, vacations and redecorating; having adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and personnel and a minimum seating capacity of eighty (80) persons at tables or booths (excluding bar stools or similar seating); and wherein the principal business is the serving of such meals. 
(k)  School: only such state, county, city, church, public, private, or other schools, including state licensed daycare facilities, that teach Georgia State accredited curriculum taught in the common public schools of this state. 
(l)  College: public and private colleges and universities that offer associate, baccalaureate or post - baccalaureate degrees recognized by the University System of Georgia or a commonly recognized accrediting agency. 
(m)  Underage person: A person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Res. of 11-24-98; Ord. of 11-1-05; Ord. of 10-7-14, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-16, § 1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes of promoting the health and general welfare of the community; and to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages in the county. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-3. - Applicability of provisions to territory outside municipalities only. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply only to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Secs. 3-4—3-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-20. - License required for manufacture, sale. 
No alcoholic beverage shall be manufactured or sold at wholesale or retail, in the original package or by the drink except under a license issued by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-21. - License a grant or privilege. 
All licenses herein shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by the laws of the state, applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such businesses. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-22. - License issued on approval of application. 
Retail license for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated areas of the county and permits for the wholesale distribution of the same will be granted by the governing authority upon proper application being filed and approved. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-23. - License restricted to off-premises consumption, exceptions. 
Alcoholic beverages sold in the unincorporated areas of this county shall be for off-premises consumption only subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Hotels or motels as defined in section 3-1, Article I hereof may be granted an alcoholic beverage license for on-premises consumption; and 
(2)  Any restaurant as defined in Article I, section 3-1 herein may be granted an alcoholic beverage license for on-premises consumption, provided that such on-premises consumption is incidental to the serving and consumption of meals. 
(3)  Except in those instances where an establishment obtains a pouring license pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-24. - Reference of application to business license office; issuance of license on payment of fee. 
All applications for alcoholic beverage license shall be presented to the business license office and forwarded to the governing authority for approval; and, if approved, the licenses shall be issued by the business license office upon the payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-25. - Separate license for each place of business. 
Any person doing business at more than one (1) location or premises shall apply for a license for each such location as set forth in section 3-24 above. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-26. - Violations and punishment. 
Violations of this chapter will be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment of not more than sixty (60) days or both. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-27. - Standards for licenses. 
(a)  Where the applicant is a corporation, any registration for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and may only be issued to a person employed full-time working at least forty (40) hours per week in a management capacity at the business location. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any registration for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and may only be issued to the partnership if: (1) The managing general partner thereof is working at the location in a full-time capacity at least forty (40) hours per week or (2) a person employed full-time forty (40) hours per week by the partnership in a management capacity and working at the business location. 
(c)  Where the applicant is the sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full-time in a management capacity on the premises, otherwise, to a person employed full-time by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity and working at the business location. 
(d)  Each of said persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall be a citizen of the United States or a legal alien; and must be twenty-five (25) years of age or older at the time of the application for a license. 
(e)  No person named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall have been convicted of a felony, or any laws of this state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, within five (5) years of the filing of this application. 
(f)  New licenses. Effective January 1, 2003, any applicant seeking to obtain an alcoholic beverage license in the county must provide proof of attendance at, and completion of, a responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop that has been approved by the development services director. Such workshop shall be attended by the applicant prior to the issuance of any alcohol license and shall be at the applicant's expense. If, at the time the application is considered by the board of commissioners, the applicant has not provided evidence to the board that the applicant has successfully completed an approved RASS workshop, the license shall be denied. Once the license is granted, the licensee will be required to meet the remaining requirements set forth in this section. 
(g)  Existing licenses. All licensees currently holding a valid county alcoholic beverage license at the time of this amendment, who have not attended an approved responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop, are required to attend and complete a RASS workshop that has been approved by the development services director by July 1, 2003. Such workshop shall be attended by the licensee at the licensee's expense. All licensees must provide proof of attendance and completion of such RASS workshop to the board of commissioners on or before July 1, 2003. Failure to abide by any of the provisions in this subsection may result in suspension or revocation of the licensee's alcoholic beverage license. Any change of ownership or licensee will require a new license and will require compliance with the requirements of subsection (a) prior to issuance of any new license. 
(h)  All alcoholic beverage licensees shall be required to attend and complete an approved responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop every two (2) years. Proof of attendance at, and completion of, an approved RASS workshop within the previous two (2) years must be attached to any renewal application. No alcoholic beverage license will be renewed or issued unless this requirement has been satisfied. 
(i)  Effective January 8, 2019, the issuance of any new alcohol license, or prior to any alcohol license renewal, the licensee must provide proof that all employees and managers involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages have successfully taken an examination, approved by the director of development services. Employees and managers must complete such examination commencing work or being hired, whichever is shorter. Documentation of each employee's and manager's date of hire and proof of successful completion of the examination must be maintained on the premises, and posted in a prominent location and available for public inspection at all times during which the location is open for business and engaged in alcohol sales for off-premises consumption. Employees and managers who directly serve alcoholic beverages to patrons for on-premises consumption shall be required to keep their server badge on their person while at work. 
(j)  If, at the time an alcohol beverage license application or renewal is considered by the county board of commissioners, the licensee has not provided evidence to the building permits office that the licensee has satisfied the requirements of subsections (a), (b) and (c) above, the application or renewal shall be denied. 
(k)  If, at the time an alcoholic beverage license renewal is being considered, or at any other time more than sixty (60) days after the license has been issued, the licensee is unable to provide evidence to the building permits office and the board of commissioners that the employees and management of the licensed establishment have complied with the training requirements as set forth in subsection (d), the license may be suspended or revoked. 
(l)  The occupational tax office shall not have authority to waive the workshop or training provisions set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Ord. of 9-18-01; Ords. of 11-20-01; Ord. of 12-17-02; Ord. of 12-18-12, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-8-19, § 1) 
Sec. 3-28. - Grounds for denial. 
No application for any retail license hereunder shall be granted where the application, the investigation or the evidence on a hearing before the governing body shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  If applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any county or governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked. 
(2)  That the applicant, as a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, had violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  Where there is evidence with respect to the proposed business location that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances to schools and churches, the type and number of schools and churches in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(4)  Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure could create a difficulty in police supervision. 
(5)  Where in the opinion of the business license office there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles. Sufficient parking shall mean not less than ten (10) parking spaces on the premises. A licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for such licensee's customers so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-29. - Affidavits; application to partnerships and corporations. 
(a)  The applicant shall make a signed, sworn statement of such applicant's qualifications according to the specifications set forth hereinabove and the same shall be placed on file with the governing authority before any license is issued. 
(b)  If the application is made for a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make signed, sworn statements of these qualifications, the same to be placed on file with the governing authority before any license is issued. 
(c)  If the application is made for a corporation, all persons who shall have the supervision and control of the licensed premises must make signed, sworn statements of the qualifications set forth hereinabove and the same shall be placed on file with the governing authority before any license is issued. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-30. - Plat requirement for new location applicant. 
If the license for the sale of alcoholic beverages is made for a new location, the following must be submitted at time of application: 
(1)  A current certified survey plat showing the distances to the nearest facilities as described in section 3-49; and 
(2)  A diagram showing the dimensions of the proposed structure as well as the seating and exit arrangements for on-premise consumption only. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-31. - Investigation of applicant. 
All persons submitting applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the law enforcement agencies of the county which shall submit a report and recommendation to the governing authority. A copy of such report shall be filed with the permit office. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-32. - Applicant for retail license, requirement for advertisement. 
(a)  All applicants for retail licenses hereunder shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement for at least four (4) consecutive issues in the newspaper published in the county in which legal advertisements of the county are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the licensee; if a partnership, the names of the partners; and if a corporation, the names of the licensees; and date and time the governing authority will hear the application. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point and shall be at least one-inch column advertisement, and shall be prepaid by the applicant at time of application. 
(b)  Advertisement of the application may commence after the investigating law enforcement agency has filed its report with the permit office. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed on the location of the proposed business a minimum of two (2) signs stating the type of license applied for and the date of the hearing in the following form: 
" ____________ license applied for. A hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Douglas County shall be held on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . All interested persons take notice." 
The signs shall not be less than twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, and shall be obtained from the county at a cost of ten dollars ($10.00) per sign. One sign shall be placed adjacent to the main entrance of the business or in a window adjacent to the main entrance facing forward toward the public street and the second sign shall be placed on the front property line adjacent to the public street, sidewalk, or other public property so as to be clearly legible by persons using such public street or right-of-way. Both signs shall be posted for a two-week period (fourteen (14) days) immediately preceding the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Ord. of 5-20-03) 
Sec. 3-33. - Wholesale licenses. 
Wholesale licenses shall be issued only to those persons who are licensed by the State of Georgia to sell and distribute wine or malt beverages at wholesale. Application shall be made with the governing authority, and the applicant shall present evidence to show that all laws and regulations pertaining to such activities in the county are understood by the applicant, and shall pay all fees assessed by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-34. - License period. 
(a)  License for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued for the then calendar year. In case of a revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to any refund of the license fee. 
(b)  The license hereunder granted shall be valid as to each licensee from the first day of January to the last day of December of the then calendar year. This rule applies to new licenses as well as renewals of licenses. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-35. - Fees; delinquency penalty. 
(a)  In addition to any other business license fees that may be applicable under this Code, the following annual license fees shall be paid for the type of license being acquired as follows: 
(1)  Application fee - nonrefundable ..... $250.00 
(2)  Malt beverages: 
a.  Retail package malt beverage sale ..... 500.00 
b.  Malt beverage pouring license ..... 500.00 
c.  Wholesale malt beverage distributor ..... 500.00 
d.  Malt beverage manufacturer ..... 500.00 
e.  Brewpub ..... 1,000.00 
(3)  Wine: 
a.  Retail package wine sale ..... 500.00 
b.  Wine pouring license ..... 500.00 
c.  Wholesale wine distributor ..... 500.00 
d.  Wine manufacturer ..... 500.00 
(4)  Liquor: Liquor-pouring license ..... 5,000.00 
(b)  Delinquency penalty. Each license fee is due and payable on the second day of January of each year. Failure to pay such license fee on or before the second day of January of each year shall void the license and any further sales after that date shall be unlawful. A retail licensee who has failed to pay the annual license fee by January 2 shall be assessed a five hundred dollar ($500.00) penalty in addition to the annual license fee before being permitted to sell alcoholic beverages under that license. A license in delinquent status for a period in excess of thirty (30) days shall be revoked. Further sale of alcoholic beverages under such revoked license shall subject the former licensee to the penalties of law set forth hereinbelow. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Ord. of 12-18-12, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3-36. - Transfer of license; temporary license. 
(a)  A license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be transferable from one (1) location or premises to another without the express approval of the chairman. 
(b)  The license may be transferred from one (1) person to another if the transferee-applicant is qualified as set forth in this article and the transfer is approved by the chairman. The transfer fee shall be as prescribed from time to time by the governing authority and shall be payable upon application being made for the transfer of license and shall be a nonrefundable fee. 
(c)  In the event that a registration is surrendered, or revoked, or in the event a registrar severs his association with a registered establishment, or in the event a registered establishment applies for a transfer of the registration from one (1) person to another as provided in subsection (b), the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of surrender or from the date of revocation or from the date determined to be the date of severance or from the date of application for transfer under subsection (b); provided, no sale shall be authorized until such time as an application for a temporary registration is made. The establishment may file an application for a temporary registration in the name of an employee who is a qualified registrar pursuant to section 3-27 of this article as of the date of filing the application and said application shall include a sworn statement of these qualifications. The temporary registrar shall pay an administrative fee as prescribed from time to time by the governing authority and the fee shall be payable upon application being made for a temporary registration. Upon application being made for a temporary registration, the authorization to sell under the previous registration and the temporary registration shall be revoked by operation of law. 
AFFIDAVIT FOR APPLICATION OF TEMPORARY  REGISTRATION TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
BEFORE the undersigned attesting officer comes ____________ , who being duly sworn deposes and says that (s)he is a person of good moral character, is at least twenty-five (25) years of age, is a citizen of the United States, or a legal alien, and unless an honorably discharged member of the United States armed forces, a resident of the State of Georgia for a period of one (1) year immediately preceding the date of filing the application. Affiant further states that (s)he has not been convicted within five (5) years of the date of application, of a felony, or of any violation of the laws of this state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, that (s)he is a person employed full-time working at least forty (40) hours per week in a management capacity at the business location. 
This affidavit is made for the purpose of application for temporary registration to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to the Code of Douglas County section 3-36(c). 
    (Affiant)     
Sworn to and subscribed before me  this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
Notary Public, Douglas County, Georgia   
AFFIDAVIT FOR APPLICATION OF  REGISTRATION TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  FOR PARTNERSHIP OR CORPORATION 
BEFORE the undersigned attesting officer comes ____________ , who being duly sworn deposes and says that (s)he is a person of good moral character, is at least twenty-five (25) years of age, is a citizen of the United States, or a legal alien, and unless an honorably discharged member of the United States armed forces, a resident of the State of Georgia for a period of one (1) year immediately preceding the date of filing the application. Affiant further states that (s)he has not been convicted within five (5) years of the date of application, of a felony, or of any violation of the laws of this state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, that (s)he is a person employed full-time working at least forty (40) hours per week in a management capacity at the business location. 
This affidavit is made for the purpose of application for temporary license to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to the Code of Douglas County section 3-36(c). 
    (Affiant)     
Sworn to and subscribed before me  this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
Notary Public, Douglas County, Georgia   
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Ord. of 11-20-01; Ord. of 11-1-05) 
Sec. 3-37. - Sale without license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, or possess for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage where such person does not have a license from the county to sell or possess for sale such alcoholic beverage. The license is granted to an individual on behalf of a business for the purpose of authorizing the manufacture, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages at one (1) designated location. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-38. - Excise taxes—Malt beverages. 
(a)  In addition to the business fee, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages in bottles, cans or other containers within the county an excise tax in the amount of five cents ($0.05) for each twelve (12) ounces or fractional part thereof. 
(b)  All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container and being commonly known as tap or draft beer shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in subsection (a) of this section, but in lieu thereof, there is hereby imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the limits of the county an excise tax of six dollars ($6.00) for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the county, and a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(c)  No decal, stamp or other identifying marking shall be required on malt beverages sold within the county. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-39. - Same—Wine. 
In addition to the business license tax, there is hereby assessed an excise tax in the amount of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-40. - Same—Payment. 
The excise taxes shall be paid by the retail licensee and collected by the wholesale licensee at the time of delivery to the retail licensee. All assessments collected by the wholesale licensee shall be remitted on or before the tenth day of the month following the month of sale. The wholesale licensee shall be permitted to retain a sum not greater than two (2) percent of the assessments collected by said licensee to help defray the administration costs of collecting, accounting for and remitting the assessments collected by said licensee. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-41. - Same—Additional to other taxes, etc. 
The excise taxes provided for hereinabove shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale, within the limits of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-42. - Same—Reports; penalties for delinquency and false return. 
(a)  Each wholesale dealer who sells alcoholic beverages or wine within the county shall file a report by the tenth of each month itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all such beverages by size and container for the month sold within the county. 
(b)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent of the total amount due during the first thirty-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of twenty (20) percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive thirty-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to thirty (30) percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(c)  Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report, shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license by the county of said wholesale licensee or retail licensee. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-43. - Storage of beverages. 
All licensed retailers shall store all alcoholic beverages in their possession on the premises for which the license was issued, and at no other place except upon written permission from the governing authority upon written application therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-44. - Transportation and receipt of beverages. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the county to make deliveries in said county. 
(b)  Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of retail license or wholesale permit. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-45. - Sales on election day. 
Sales of alcoholic beverages on election day is permitted only if the business selling the alcoholic beverage is more than two hundred fifty (250) feet from any polling place. Distances will be calculated from the front door of the business selling the alcoholic beverage to the outermost edge of any building within which a polling place is established. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Ord. of 12-18-12, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3-46. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except from the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday; however, when the board of commissioners finds that special circumstances exist that make it reasonable to temporarily alter the hours that alcohol may be sold for on-premise consumption by licensed retailers, the board may effectuate such a temporary change through the adoption of a resolution at a regular or special called duly advertised meeting. The resolution shall specify the hours that alcoholic beverages may be sold for onsite consumption by licensed establishments and the date or dates that the temporary hours shall be in effect. 
(b)  Licensees for the package sale, or sale for off premises consumption, of malt beverages and wine shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 12:00 a.m. Monday and 11:55 p.m. Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Res. of 12-19-95; Ord. of 12-17-02; Ord. of 12-18-12, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 3-47. - Illegal acts on licensed premises. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail in the unincorporated areas of the county, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, nor any employer of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell alcoholic beverages to an underage person; 
(2)  Sell alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition; 
(3)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises on any day or at any time when such sale is prohibited by law, or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon at any time without an on-premises consumption license; 
(4)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of peace, or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices; 
(5)  Allow a nonemployee to have control or supervision of the licensed premises; 
(6)  Permit any employee who is a minor to have control or supervision of the licensed premises; 
(7)  Permit the sale of alcoholic beverages in the licensed premises in the absence from the licensed premises of the licensee or a responsible employee over the minimum age prescribed by state law, except to the extent authorized by state law. No person shall allow or require a person in such person's employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. This provision shall not prohibit persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Amd. of 12-21-99) 
Sec. 3-48. - Sale outside of building. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, or any employer of the licensee, to sell alcoholic beverages through facilities known customarily as "drive-in windows" or other such means. All purchases shall be made within the building of any licensed business premises. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-49. - Distance limitations—Off-premises consumption. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold closer than six hundred (600) feet to a school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus, or state-licensed child care facility. The aforesaid distance may be three hundred (300) feet when the alcoholic beverages are sold in a grocery store having at least twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet of usable floor space. All measurements shall be made by the most direct legal route of travel on the ground. The measurement shall start at the front door of the licensee, down the closest drive or sidewalk to the nearest travelled road, street, or highway leading to the school, college or state-licensed child care facility, down the drive or walk to the street or sidewalk and then: 
(1)  If the school, college or state-licensed child care facility is on the opposite side of the street than the licensee, or on another street than the licensee, then down the right-of-way to the nearest crosswalk or intersection and then back up the public right-of-way to the school, college, school grounds or state-licensed daycare facility; or 
(2)  If the school, college or state-licensed child care facility is on the same side of the same street as the licensee, then down the right-of-way to nearest drive or walk to the college, school, school grounds or state-licensed child care facility. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold closer than one hundred (100) feet to a residential dwelling, as measured from the corner of the building of the licensee to the closest property line of the residential dwelling. The aforesaid distance requirements may be waived with the written consent of all property owners adjoining the licensee. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Code section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-7-14, § 3; Ord. of 1-19-16, § 2) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 7, 2014, repealed the former § 3-49, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 3-49 pertained to distance limitations and derived from an ord. adopted Dec. 3, 1991; and a res. adopted Jan. 21, 1997. 
Sec. 3-50. - Illegal acts by underage persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an underage person to attempt to purchase, to purchase, or for any other person to purchase alcoholic beverages for an underage person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an underage person to exhibit faked, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an underage person to loiter in an establishment selling alcoholic beverages at retail. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an underage person not in active employment of the licensed establishment to have alcoholic beverages in his or her possession. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91) 
Sec. 3-51. - Violations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other penalties contained in this article, if any person should violate the terms and provisions of this article for which penalties are not stated, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code and the license may be suspended or revoked as provided herein. Violations of section 3-47(1) may result in a civil penalty imposed against the licensee. 
(b)  In addition, the board of commissioners may require that the licensee re-attend an approved responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop at the licensee's expense prior to return of the license. The board of commissioners may consider mitigating and aggravating circumstances in considering sanctions. These include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Evidence of written policies and procedures for the responsible sale of alcoholic beverages that were implemented prior to the incident as well as evidence that such written procedures have been implemented subsequent to the violation; 
(2)  Evidence of comprehensive formalized education and/or training for ownership licensee, management and employees; 
(3)  The type and content of training for ownership, licensees, management and employees, and the frequency of such training; 
(4)  Evidence of prior violations or lack thereof; 
(5)  Evidence of action taken by management prior and subsequent to the violation regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages so as to prevent future violations; 
(6)  Evidence of the implementation of procedures, their content, and the measures to monitor staff compliance (for example, self-monitoring through the use of mystery shopping or similar services. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Ord. of 12-17-02; Ord. of 11-1-05) 
Sec. 3-52. - Revocation and suspension of license; imposition of civil penalty; hearing. 
(a)  The governing authority, on the basis of citations issued by the head of the business license department, zoning officer, law enforcement officer, other authorized representative of the county or Georgia Department of Revenue officer, shall have the right to suspend and/or revoke any license issued under this chapter whenever the licensee shall violate any county code, rule, regulation, or ordinance or any state or federal code, rule, regulation, ordinance or statute, pertaining to such business. In the case of a violation of section 3-47(1), the governing authority shall have the right to impose a civil penalty up to $ ____________ for each violation. 
(b)  Any person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall be given written notice of such violation by a representative of the county and shall be entitled to have a hearing on any proposed suspension, revocation or civil penalty. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to legal representation and shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the county. No hearing provided for herein shall be conducted sooner than ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of the said written notice. 
(c)  Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, the governing authority shall have sole discretion to suspend the license and place of operation of the sale of alcoholic beverages from any operations involving alcoholic beverage sales for the violation of any ordinance of Douglas County or law or rule or regulation of the state of Georgia or its agencies charged with supervision of the sale of alcoholic beverages; further, the governing authority may set such terms and conditions for suspension of the license or to place on a probationary period, the licensee for a period of time during which the sale of alcoholic beverages may be sold. During the period of such probation as established after hearing by the governing authority, in the event of any subsequent violation of county ordinances or State of Georgia rules and regulations the governing authority may thereafter either suspend, continue the period of probation or revoke licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-3-91; Ord. of 11-1-05) 
Sec. 3-53. - Temporary alcohol permits authorized. 
(a)  Outdoor or special events. 
(1)  No alcohol may be served and/or sold at any outdoor or special event location unless the owner or operator of the location has an alcohol license or unless the host receives a temporary alcohol license. If the outdoor or special event is utilizing a facility or location where an alcohol license has already been issued and that license is currently active, the host must utilize the services of the on-site license holder for purposes of serving/selling alcohol. No additional temporary alcohol permits will be issued. 
(2)  If the outdoor or special event host is utilizing a facility with no current county issued alcohol license, the applicant shall complete and submit a temporary alcohol permit application with a temporary event permit application. The temporary alcohol permit application and temporary event permit application must be submitted at least thirty (30) days in advance of the event. 
(3)  The occupational tax department will forward a recommendation to the chairman of the board of commissioners for approval or denial of the application. no temporary alcohol permit will be approved unless the associated temporary event permit application is first approved by planning and zoning, the county department of transportation, the county sheriff's department, and the county fire department. 
(b)  Fees, duration and other requirements. 
(1)  The fee for a temporary alcohol license fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per event where alcohol (beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits) is served, for applicants that are non-profit organizations. Applications for such temporary permit must include a copy of an official document such as a nonprofit certification by the Internal Revenue Service, or constitution and bylaws of the organization, or corporate charter which clearly states the purpose of the organization as being charitable or nonprofit. The maximum number of temporary alcohol permits in any calendar year for any organization is four (4). 
(2)  For all other applicants, the temporary alcohol license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for beer or wine; fifty dollars ($50.00) for distilled spirits; one-hundred dollars ($100.00)for beer and wine; and one-hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for beer and wine and distilled spirits. The fees are per event where alcohol is served. The maximum number of events in any calendar year for any organization or individual is four (4). 
(3)  The maximum number of temporary alcohol licenses for any one (1) location is four (4). The owner of any one (1) location desiring additional alcohol licenses will be required to obtain regular alcohol license(s) and pay the associated fees. 
(4)  The applicant must obtain a license to serve alcohol at the outdoor or special event from the state, and must supply the county with a copy of said license no later than three (3) business days prior to the outdoor event. 
(5)  No location that has had an alcoholic beverage sales license suspended shall be approved as a permitted location under the provisions of this article during the period of such suspension. 
(6)  No organization or individual that has had an alcoholic beverage sales license suspended shall be approved for a temporary alcoholic beverage permit under the provisions of this article during the period of such suspension. 
(7)  Any applicant seeking to obtain an alcoholic beverage license in the county must provide proof of attendance at, and completion of, a responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop that has been approved by the development services director. Such workshop shall be attended by the applicant prior to the issuance of any alcohol license and shall be at the applicant's expense. If, at the time the application is considered by the county, the applicant has not provided evidence to the board that the applicant has successfully completed an approved RASS workshop, the license shall be denied. Once the license is granted, the licensee will be required to meet the remaining requirements set forth in this section. RASS certification must be renewed every two (2) years. 
(Ord. of 4-4-17, § 1) 
Secs. 3-54—3-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 3-60. - Definitions. 
All words which have been previously defined in this Chapter of the Code of Ordinance of Douglas County, Georgia are hereby declared to be applicable to this article and all persons applying for or holding any license issued under this article. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brewpub means an establishment as provided in O.C.G.A. section 3-5-20 et seq. authorized to manufacture, pour and wholesale malt beverage as provided therein. 
Director means the director of the building and occupational tax department of the city. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater, cafe or other establishment which offers live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Pour means sell for beverage purposes, "sell for consumption on the premises," "sell by the drink, and "allow patrons to bring their own liquor, wine or malt beverages for the purposes of mixing drinks and/or consuming same on the premises." The sale of "mixes or set-ups" or advertising to "bring your own" or the possession by patrons in the premises of liquor, wine or malt beverages, shall be prima facie evidence of pouring. 
Pouring license means a license issued by the board of commissioners that authorizes on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Pouring outlet means any place where liquor, wine and/or malt beverages are poured or proposed to be poured and shall mean only a restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-61. - Necessity for license. 
It shall be unlawful to pour or offer to pour any distilled spirits, within the unincorporated limits of the county without first having obtained a pouring license, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this article. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-62. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to supplement return or other date required by the county, who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(b)  Any default or delinquency of the tax levied under this article shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of license. 
(c)  Should the board of commissioners determine that a person holding a pouring licensee has been chronically delinquent or chronically in default in the payment of taxes authorized under this article, the board of commissioners may, when considering the application of such licensee for renewal, consider such delinquency as grounds for nonrenewal. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-63. - Separate license for each outlet; license not transferable; surrender of license. 
(a)  License for each location. A separate license shall be required for each pouring outlet, and separate application shall be made for each place of business. 
(b)  Transferability. Licenses under this section shall be transferable only upon proper application and prior approval by the board of commissioners and upon payment of ten (10) percent of the amount of the license fee. 
(c)  Death of licensee. In case of the death of any person holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, be transferred to the administrator, executor of the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(d)  Withdrawal of partner. Nothing in this section shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license from withdrawing from the partnership in favor of one (1) or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of such license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(e)  Transfer of location. Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return or refund of any license fee, and the new location shall require a new license under this article. 
(f)  Addition of partners, stockholders. However, a licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined by the board of commissioners that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business, or for building new facilities and were it appears that neither the licensee himself, nor any partner or stockholder therein receives, directly or indirectly, any of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(g)  Transfer from agent to agent; name change. Where licenses are held by agents, upon the resignation or removal of any agent holding a pouring license for a particular location, the partners, owners or stockholders of the business entity shall immediately appoint a new agent to hold a pouring license, which agent shall apply to the board of commissioners for the reissuance of the pouring license for the stated location in his name. Upon a completion of the law enforcement background check and investigation as required herein, a recommendation to the board of commissioners for the approval or disapproval of the transfer of agent shall be made by county staff. In such transfer, it will be required that a new investigation fee be paid for the investigation of the new agent. In those instances which only the name of the establishment holding a pouring license is to change, with no change in the ownership or agent holding the license, the partners, owners or stockholders shall notify the occupation tax office of the change of name, which notation shall be made on the records. No charge will be made for this name change. 
(h)  Sale or closing of business. Immediately upon the sale or the closing of a pouring outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to notify the board of commissioners and to surrender license upon demand. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-64. - Considerations and guidelines for granting or denying license. 
The board of commissioners, in making its final determination upon an initial application, may be guided by the following factors as whether or not to grant such license: 
(1)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominately residential, industrial or business. 
(2)  The proximity of churches, hospitals, schools, public parks, community centers, and the like. 
(3)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(4)  Whether the proposed location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(5)  The criminal record of the applicant and outlet manager and their general good character and reputation and their financial responsibility; provided that nonpayment of state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence as to lack of financial responsibility. 
(6)  Report of the director. 
(7)  Consideration of information required in the application and whether requirements as to notice and advertisement have been met. 
(8)  Such other evidence as may be presented to the board of commissioners. 
(9)  Whether any previous license issued for the applicant, outlet manager or for the location has been suspended or revoked. 
(10)  Whether the applicant holds any other license for the sale of alcohol. 
(11)  The history or reputation of the proposed location of the outlet for gambling, illegal sex acts, fighting or other acts of violence, and/or violations of the law. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-65. - Grounds for denial of license. 
(a)  Prohibited locations. It shall be unlawful to grant a pouring license for sale of liquor within the following unincorporated areas of the county: 
In an existing building or establishment having a history of or reputation for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; other violations of the law. 
(b)  Prohibited persons. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of liquor to: 
(1)  A person who does not meet the residency requirements as set forth in section 3-27 of this chapter. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who has been, within the preceding five (5) years, convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or who has been convicted of a crime involving violation of the Code of Ordinances of the county relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of beer, wine or liquor, or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of beer, wine or intoxicating liquors, or taxability thereof. 
(4)  A person whose license under this article has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this article revoked for cause. 
(5)  A person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) years or who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(6)  An officer or employee of the county, or any person who resides in the officer or employee's household. 
(7)  A person who already holds a license in the classification applied for or a wholesale license. 
(Res. of 11-24-98; Ord. of 10-7-14, § 4) 
Sec. 3-66. - License for pouring; license fee. 
(a)  Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Liquor pouring. Outlet for pouring liquor, which shall permit only the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Wine and malt beverage pouring. Outlet for pouring wine and malt beverage, which shall permit only the sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises as provided under article I and II of this chapter. 
(3)  Brewpub. Outlet for pouring malt beverages, which shall permit only the manufacture, sale at wholesale and pouring of malt beverages as provided at O.C.G.A. sections 3-5-20 et seq. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class is specified in section 3-35: 
(1)  Retail liquor sale for consumption on premises; 
(2)  Brewpub. 
(c)  The license fee for any license granted under section 3-68 of this article shall be prorated by the length of time that such license is in existence on a monthly basis with each month, or any part thereof, being equal to one-twelfth ( 1/12 ), as multiplied by the appropriate license fee under this article. In no event shall an interim fee be less than one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the license fee for a particular interim license which is granted. 
(Res. of 11-24-98; Ord. of 12-18-12, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3-67. - Application and qualification for license. 
(a)  Applications for a pouring license or a brewpub license shall include the same requirements as are applicable to the sale of beer and wine, as set forth in sections 3-21, 3-22, 3-24, 3-27, 3-28, 3-30, 3-31, and 3-32 of this Chapter; as well as all provisions of this article. Additionally, each applicant for a license authorized under this article shall pay an applicant fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the investigation and processing the application. 
(b)  No application shall be considered from nor any pouring license granted to any applicant whose business location for a pouring outlet is anything other than a restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge. Sale of distilled spirits (liquor) for consumption on the premises by restaurants, hotels, private clubs and lounges shall be permitted only if lawfully operating under the Code of Ordinances of the county. 
(c)  It is the intention of this article that liquor and malt beverage by the drink be sold only in bona fide restaurants, hotels, lounge, and private clubs under the restrictions herein set out and not sold at walk-in bars or sham establishments. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 17, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-68 in its entirety. Former § 3-68 pertained to interim licenses, terms and conditions; and derived from a resolution of November 24, 1998. 
Sec. 3-69. - Renewal, suspension and revocation of licenses. 
The provisions set forth in sections 3-47, 3-48, 3-50, 3-51, and 3-52 relating to the renewal, suspension and revocation of licenses shall be fully applicable in the renewal, suspension and revocation of licenses for brewpubs and pouring licenses issued under this article. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-70. - Additional requirements applicable to pouring outlets. 
The following regulations shall apply to pouring outlets: 
(1)  The building or proposed building where pouring will take place shall meet all requirements of the chief county building official and county fire marshall. 
(2)  No percentage leases of buildings for pouring shall be permitted. 
(3)  Hours: 
a.  Alcoholic beverages by the drink for on premises consumption shall not be sold except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 2:55 a.m. of the next day, on Monday through Saturday; and between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
1.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 3-3-7(m), alcoholic beverages by the drink for on premises consumption may be poured until 2:55 a.m. on any Sunday which falls on a January 1; and 
2.  Alcoholic beverages by the drink for on premises consumption liquor may be poured from 12:01 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. on any Monday which falls on a January 1. 
b.  Malt beverages and wine for on premises consumption shall not be sold except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 2:55 a.m. of the next day, on Monday through Saturday; and between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
1.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 3-3-7(m), malt beverages and wine may be poured until 2:55 a.m. on any Sunday which falls on a January 1; and 
2.  Malt beverages and wine may be poured from 12:01 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. on any Monday which falls on a January 1. 
c.  The business hours of any wholesaler licensed under this chapter shall only be from sunup to sundown each day, Monday through Saturday. 
d.  Should lounges keep their doors open to the public, or allow members of the public to remain on the premises, beyond the prohibited hours of consumption, such conduct shall constitute prima facie evidence that liquor, wine and/or malt beverages are being consumed on the premises in violation of this chapter. 
e.  In no event shall drinks be mixed or sold, nor malt beverages sold, during the prohibited hours, based upon the timely sale of tickets, chits, or other devices. 
f.  All sales of any alcoholic beverage as authorized by this article shall be sold only by an employee of the licensee which holds a valid alcohol beverage employee identification card. 
g.  No manager, nor other employee of any pouring outlet, shall permit any violation of the above sub-sections. 
(4)  Pouring licensees shall not sell, or permit the sale of liquor beverages by the package, for consumption on the premises. 
(5)  Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant in their premises, provided the hotel and the franchisee meet all the requirements of this article. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to employ knowingly in any pouring outlet in any capacity whatsoever, any person, including performers, entertainers and musicians, who has plead guilty or been convicted of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in drugs, sex offenses, or for any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors. 
(7)  No signs, advertising sale by the drink or soliciting patrons to bring their own or to "brown bag", may be affixed to the premises nor appearing therein shall be permitted; provided, however, there shall be no prohibition against utilizing signs showing the name of the pouring outlet. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the management of a pouring outlet to maintain a copy of this article at the outlet and to instruct each employee on the contents of this article and the terms therein. 
(9)  The state laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits in this state, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, and especially as relate to retail sale of consumption, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article. 
(10)  A pouring licensee shall make an immediate report to, and receive approval by, the director of any change in the interests in or ownership of the pouring outlet and/or any change in the information as stated in the original application for license, including the list of employees. 
(11)  No person already holding a wine or malt beverage license shall be granted a pouring license without obtaining a pouring license under this article. 
(12)  No pouring license shall be issued to any amusement establishment. An amusement establishment shall include but not be limited to motion picture theaters, skating rinks, health spas and game rooms or similar establishments, including pinball, electronic or video games. 
(13)  The county prohibits the sale, serving or use of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises of any billiard room or any place operated in connection therewith unless the principal business of the establishment is the serving of meals which, excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages, account for at least fifty-one (51) percent of the gross revenue and meets all other requirements of a restaurant. Additionally, billiard halls, pool rooms and other similar establishments as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 that sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall comply with all the rules and regulations set forth in this article unless such rules and regulations are specifically prohibited by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 11-24-98; Ord. of 12-18-12, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-18-18, § 1) 
Sec. 3-71. - Entertainment at pouring outlets. 
(a)  Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at pouring outlets unless: 
(1)  Adequate space does not exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety codes are not met; and 
(3)  The appropriate license fee and all applicable taxes have not been fully paid. 
(b)  No adult dancing establishment, adult entertainment establishment, or adult motel as said terms are defined in chapter 12, article XII, of the Code of Ordinances of Douglas County, Georgia nor an erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, distribute, or suffer consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances upon the premises of the licensee. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may require a pouring outlet providing music and dancing to provide security or security personnel to be in attendance and provide such protection as, in the discretion of the sheriff, is adequate to meet the needs of the public's safety. 
(Res. of 11-24-98; Ord. of 9-18-01) 
Sec. 3-72. - Taxation. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchase of an alcoholic beverage for beverage purposes by the drink within the county a tax in the amount of three (3) percent of the purchase price of such beverage. 
(1)  As used in this section, "alcoholic beverage" means any beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation, including and distilled or fermented liquid containing consumable alcohol, mixed with water or any other substance in solution, and included brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, vodka, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called, including fortified wines, but shall not include nonfortified wines, beer, ale or malt liquors. 
(2)  As used in this section, "purchase price" means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including receipts, credit, property or services of any kind whatsoever, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
(b)  Every licensee or his agent is authorized and directed to collect tax imposed in this section from the purchaser of alcoholic beverages by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or his agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the director, or his designee, the sheriff, or county manager to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this section shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any alcoholic beverage sold under this article. All amounts of such tax collected shall be due and payable to the county each month. This amount shall be payable on or before the tenth day of each month next succeeding the preceding monthly period for which the taxes were collected. A "monthly period", as used in this subsection, shall mean once a month for each calendar month within any year. 
(d)  On or before the tenth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the director, or his designee, in such form as may be prescribed by every licensee liable for payment of tax under this section. All returns shall show the gross receipts of the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and the amount of tax collected on such drinks. 
(e)  Licensees collecting the tax imposed by this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax accounted for and due. The amount shall be reimbursed to the licensee in the form of a deduction from the amount reported and submitted to the director. Provided, however, the percentage deduction allowed each licensee will not be allowed where the taxes submitted are delinquent. The rate of the deduction for this tax shall be the same rate as authorized for deduction from state tax under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
(f)  The tax imposed under this section shall be paid by brewpub operators in addition to annual licenses fees and other applicable fees. There is hereby levied and imposed upon each brewpub selling malt beverages at wholesale within Douglas County and excise tax is six dollars ($6.00) for each barrel or bulk container having capacity of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons sold by such brewpub operator within the county and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(g)  In addition to any annual license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter or fractional portion thereof, which shall be paid to the director on all liquor sold, displayed or stored in the county. 
(1)  This excise tax shall be paid by the wholesale distributor on all liquor sold to any retailer in the unincorporated county. Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering liquor to any such retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery, and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(2)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to this county on or before the tenth of each month following such purchase. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-73. - Deficiency determinations, penalties; action for collection. 
(a)  Computation of deficiency. If the director has cause to believe or is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person is not proper, the director may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service. The director, or his designee, shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; such service shall be addressed to the licensee at this address as it appears on the application or renewal application as filed with the county. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Determination if no tax return is made. If any licensee fails to make a return, the director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(f)  Penalty for nonpayment. Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the county within the time required shall pay a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid portion thereof. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-74. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of director. The director, or his designee, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in this county shall maintain such records, receipts, invoices documents and papers which are related to or pertinent to transactions authorized by this article in such form and condition with on site availability for review as the director may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The director, or his designee, or any person authorized in writing by the director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee which sells alcoholic beverages by the drink and any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the director when required by the director, and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase, and such other information as the director may require. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Sec. 3-75. - Employee identification; alcohol employee identification card. 
(a)  Any person who serves or works in the serving area of a restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge that has a pouring license for the sale of liquor, wine and/or malt beverages shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, and all such persons shall apply to the director for an alcohol beverage employee identification card, which card shall expire twelve (12) months after issuance and shall be renewable on or before that time. An alcoholic beverage employee identification card shall be valid for such work at any location having a valid pouring license within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  Alcohol beverage employees shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other investigating as may be required by the director. 
(c)  The director will, upon the request of the director, or his designee, investigate all employee applications made pursuant to this section and report any detrimental information to the director. The director may refuse to issue an employee identification card to any proposed employee who has been convicted of a felony within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date upon which the application for an employee identification card was made, or who any application who has been convicted in two (2) or more misdemeanors within five (5) years immediately preceding the applicant's application for an employee identification card, or who has been convicted within a period of five (5) years immediately preceding the application of any of the following offenses: 
(1)  D.U.I.; 
(2)  Pandering, prostitution or soliciting prostitution; 
(3)  Gambling; 
(4)  Illegal sale of controlled substance or narcotic; or 
(5)  Where the record indicates such employee would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, or violate the law. 
(d)  No licensee under the provisions of this article shall hire any person, nor permit any person to work or assist in an outlet which is subject to the provisions of this section, until such person has procured an alcohol beverage employee identification card as above prescribed. 
(e)  The director may provisionally grant an identification card to an applicant, pending investigation and report. Where the report, when received, is unfavorable as set out in subsection (c) of this section, the director may revoke the card and demand its return. 
(f)  The director may revoke an identification card should the employee violate any provision of this article, furnish false or misleading information in the employee's application card or commit conduct adversely affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose card has been revoked, when demand for surrender of a card has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy such card. 
(h)  Each employee shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the identification card. Each employee shall also obtain a background check from the county sheriff's office and submit to the occupational tax department. 
(Res. of 11-24-98; Ord. of 12-18-12, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3-76. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(Res. of 11-24-98) 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS 

Sec. 4-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Amusement center: Any establishment that allows or provides three (3) or more coin-operated amusement machines for use within one (1) enclosure. 
Coin-operated amusement machine: Any amusement machine operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines which do not incorporate gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical machines. 
Operator: Any person who provides for operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose of operation by another, any machine as herein defined, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such machine, or otherwise. 
Poolroom: Any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of pool or billiards. The terms "pool" or "billiards" shall include any game played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue. 
Proprietor: Any person who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor, has under such person's control any establishment, place or premises in or at which such machine is provided for use or play. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-401; Ord. of 3-19-85, § 3.1) 
Sec. 4-2. - License—Required; constitutes a privilege; nontransferable. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of amusement center or poolroom as herein defined without first having obtained the proper license therefor, after payment of the proper fee as hereinafter defined and after having complied with the other provisions hereof. 
(b)  Any license required under this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property. 
(c)  The license is not transferable in any manner. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-404; Ord. of 3-19-85, §§ 3.4, 3.5) 
Sec. 4-3. - Same—Application. 
Application for amusement center or poolroom licenses shall be made to the permit office with the payment of the annual license fees prescribed therefor. The application must be signed and sworn to by the applicant in the case of a sole proprietorship. In case the applicant is a partnership, all partners must sign and verify the application. In case the applicant is a corporation, any authorized officer and the secretary must sign and verify the application and indicate their official position. The information required in the application form must be furnished as to each person signing the application. Each application shall be accompanied by the required license fee and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name. 
(2)  The applicant's residence address. 
(3)  The applicant's business address. 
(4)  The address of the proposed amusement center. 
(5)  The name and address of every person who has any interest in the amusement center, and the nature of that interest. 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, or of pandering, gambling, operation of a gambling device, operating of a gaming house or being a keeper of a house of ill fame or any other misdemeanor. 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant is at the time of making the application keeping or in any way connected with a gaming house or a house of ill fame. 
(8)  Whether or not the applicant or the applicant's spouse or any member of the applicant's household is a member or employee of the sheriff's department of the county; whether or not any member or employee of the sheriff's department of the county is interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the license applied for, the devices or the operation of the same; and whether or not the applicant has received or borrowed money or anything else of value or accepted credit from any member or employee of the department or the spouse or any member of the household of any member or employee. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant permits a record of such applicant's fingerprints to be made by the sheriff's department for the purpose of additional investigation to determine whether or not the application should be granted. 
(10)  Written approval of the sheriff or the sheriff's authorized representative who shall issue such approval when such officer or representative finds that the applicant is not guilty of any of the violations or facts listed in subsections (6), (7) or (8) above. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-411; Ord. of 3-19-85, § 3.12(A)) 
Sec. 4-4. - Same—Investigation and inspection to determine compliance; conditions of issuance; issuance; display. 
(a)  Investigation and inspection; conditions. Before any license under this chapter shall be issued, investigation of the application and inspection of the premises shall be made by the county building inspector, fire marshal, sheriff's department, and such other county departments and agencies as may be deemed necessary to determine whether the applicant, the devices or machines and the premises fully comply with all pertinent ordinances and regulations. For standards for such determination the following shall be considered: 
(1)  No license shall be issued where the location of the premises or any device or machine located therein shall constitute a nuisance or danger so as to impede safe ingress or egress from the premises. 
(2)  All wiring and connections to each machine or device shall comply with the electrical code and fire code of the county. 
(3)  No machine or device shall be placed or located so as to constitute a nuisance to others through sound or otherwise. The placement and control by licensee of each machine shall, at all times, not be such that the sound is disturbing to the public in the street or in any other portion of the building. 
(4)  There shall be sufficient parking on or about the premises so as to provide parking for the licensee's customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. Minimum off-street parking facilities provided shall be not less than one (1) space for each two (2) devices or machines. 
(5)  Amusement centers and poolrooms shall only be permitted in areas zoned under the county zoning ordinance. No license shall be granted in an area zoned for other than General Commercial or Neighborhood Shopping use under the present or any future zoning ordinance of the county. 
(6)  No license shall be granted to any applicant who makes any false or misleading statement in the application or who has been convicted or a crime involving moral turpitude, or for the sale or use of any drug, alcohol or other intoxicant. 
(7)  No license shall be granted to any applicant at any location unless every provision of this chapter is complied with and completed; later noncompliance shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(8)  No license shall be granted for any location unless lighting outside the proposed location is adequate to deter illegal or illicit activity immediately surrounding the premises. 
(b)  Issuance authorized; continued compliance. Upon receipt of the proper application and the fee and approval, the permit office may then issue a license for the amusement center or poolroom. The standards set forth in this section shall be complied with in full throughout the operation of the amusement center or poolroom. 
(c)  One location. No license shall be valid except for the location shown in the application. Not more than one (1) location shall be operated under one (1) license. 
(d)  Display. Each licensee shall display on the amusement center or poolroom premises an approved license provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, §§ 61-405.1, 61-406, 61-407, 61-409(e), 61-411(b), (c); Ord. of 3-19-85, §§ 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.10(E), 3.12(B), (C)) 
Sec. 4-5. - Same—Annual fees. 
(a)  All licenses must be renewed annually, at which time the permit office may request reverification of all requirements under this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the applicant has conformed to the rules and regulations of this chapter in determining whether such license shall be renewed. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application for the license, the applicant shall pay a fee, the amount to be set from time to time by the governing body. A schedule of the fee may be maintained in the office of the board of commissioners and the permit office for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-408; Ord. of 3-19-85, § 3.9) 
Sec. 4-6. - Same—Suspension or revocation. 
The right to suspend or revoke every license issued under this chapter is hereby expressly reserved, should the location, the licensee or the operation of any coin-operated amusement machine or pool or billiard table be contrary to any provision of this chapter. Licensee shall be given five (5) days' notice at the licensed location of time, date and place of hearing to show cause why such license should not be suspended or revoked, together with the violations of this chapter or law charged. The licensee may appear at such hearing, with or without counsel, and submit evidence in such licensee's defense. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-410; Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3-11) 
Sec. 4-7. - Opening premises for inspection. 
Each operator or licensee shall, at all times, open every portion of the licensed premises for inspection by the sheriff's department and other county departments for the purpose of enforcing any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(a); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(A)) 
Sec. 4-8. - Security guard or supervisor. 
Each operator or licensee shall have present on the premises or on such portion of the premises where any coin-operated amusement machines, pool or billiard tables are located and where any bowling alley facility or skating rink facility is operated, and in the parking lot provided for patrons of such facilities at least one (1) security guard or supervisor at all times that the facilities or premises are open to the public and which guard or supervisor shall be a person who has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or drug or alcohol abuse. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(b); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(B); Ord. of 5-2-89) 
Sec. 4-9. - Sound control. 
The licensee shall, at all times, control the sound so as not to cause a disturbance or nuisance to others in the vicinity of the machines. The licensee shall, at all times, place the machine so that the part of the machine from which the sound emits shall not be within five (5) feet of the front entrance of the place of business, and the licensee shall not, at any time, place a music machine so that the sound is disturbing to the public in the street or to other persons occupying the building in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(c); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(C)) 
Sec. 4-10. - Hours of operation. 
Amusement centers, including but not limited to facilities where coin-operated amusement machines, pool or billiard tables are located, bowling alleys and skating rink facilities are permitted to operate only during the hours from 9:00 a.m. through midnight on Mondays through Thursdays and from 9:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays through 2:00 a.m. on the next succeeding day and from 1:00 p.m. until midnight on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(f); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(F); Ord. of 5-2-89) 
Sec. 4-11. - Overcrowding of premises. 
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the licensed premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(h); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(H)) 
Sec. 4-12. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of operating an amusement center to sell, offer for sale or knowingly permit to be sold or offered for sale or to be dispensed or consumed or brought on the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(f)(i); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(I)) 
Sec. 4-13. - Intoxicated persons. 
No operator or licensee shall permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(d)(iii); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(D)(2)) 
Sec. 4-14. - Pornographic devices not permitted. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any machine or device which exhibits or allows viewing of photographs or moving pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature or in any manner prohibited by law or by the ordinances of the county. The machines of any operator or proprietor or other person who shall permit in any way, either directly or indirectly, any such use of any device or machine, shall be subject to immediate confiscation by the sheriff's department as contraband and such person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-403; Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.3) 
Sec. 4-15. - Indecent, etc., acts prohibited; maintaining order. 
(a)  No operator or licensee, personally, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee, shall permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct such as would constitute criminal activity under the laws of the state. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain order on the licensed premises at all times. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(d)(i), (g); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(D), (1), (G)) 
Sec. 4-16. - Gambling and gambling devices not permitted. 
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism which has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law or that may be contrary to any future law of the state. Gambling shall be prohibited. Gambling shall not be permitted, nor shall the use, possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia in the premises be permitted. The winning of anything of value as a result of the operation of a machine, as well as other acts, shall constitute gambling. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, §§ 61-402, 61-409(d)(ii); Ord. of 3-18-85, §§ 3.2, 3.10(D)(2)) 
Sec. 4-17. - Use of drugs. 
No operator or licensee shall permit the possession or use of any unlawful drug or narcotic, including marijuana, on the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-23-84, § 61-409(d)(iv); Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3.10(D)(2)) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Douglas County Animal Control Ordinance." 
Sec. 5-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases have the following meanings for the purpose of this chapter: 
(1)  Abandonment (of an animal): The act of any person who: 
a.  Abandons an animal by leaving an animal unattended for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours without food, water, adequate ventilation or shelter on public or private property, including but not limited to the property of the owner/custodian. 
b.  Puts out, leaves, abandons, or in any other way discards any animal on public or private property, including but not limited to the property of the owner/custodian, and including but not limited to leaving an animal contained in a box, bag, fence, house or other structure or tethered; or 
c.  Places an animal in the custody of a state licensed entity, such as but not limited to a veterinary clinic, grooming facility, boarding or other care, and fails to reclaim the animal by the agreed upon time. The entity shall abide by the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 44-14-490 in disposing of the animal. 
(2)  Adequate: Sufficient; commensurate; equally efficient; equal to what is required; suitable to the case or occasion; satisfactory. 
(3)  Adequate exercise: Bodily exertion suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal to maintain normal good health, muscle tone, non-aggressive temperament, and normal behavior. 
(4)  Adequate or humane care: Attention to the needs of an animal, including but not limited to, the provision of adequate water, food, shelter, bedding, sanitary conditions, ventilation, heating/cooling (temperature control), space, exercise, and veterinary medical attention necessary to maintain the health of the animal with regard to the specific age, size, species, and breed of animal. 
(5)  Adequate shelter: Protective cover for a domestic animal appropriate for the species and providing adequate space to maintain the animal in good health, which also prevents pain, suffering or a significant risk to the animal's health. 
"Adequate shelter" includes but is not limited to the following: sufficient coverage and insulation to protect an animal from extreme hot and cold temperatures; sufficient protection from the elements to keep the animal dry; sufficient shade and ventilation to prevent an animal from overheating and/or dehydrating; and adequate bedding or resting area suitable for the breed, species, age, size, and medical condition of the animal. 
"Adequate shelter" is structurally sound housing which provides an animal with: 
a.  Adequate space; 
b.  Four solid walls or an "igloo" type of structure; 
c.  A roof; 
d.  A dry floor that is either: solid or grids, provided the animal can easily stand, walk, lay and sit on the grids without its feet or body parts being caught, damaged, or injured. The grids and area under the grids must be designed so that they can be cleaned and sanitized. 
e.  Adequate ventilation; 
f.  An entrance; and 
g.  Adequate space for the number of animals on the property. 
Materials not suitable for shelters include but are not limited to: inadequately insulated containers; crates with exposed sharp edges; metal or plastic drums; abandoned or parked vehicles; porches or decks; lean-tos; any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection from the elements; and any other structure that is not safe or suitable for housing the species. 
(6)  Adequate ventilation: Fresh air sufficient to provide for the health of an animal. 
(7)  Adequate water: Clean, fresh water sufficient to prevent dehydration, properly sustain health, and prevent significant risk to the animal's health. For the purposes of this chapter, snow, ice or rancid/contaminated water are not considered adequate water. 
(8)  Animal: Any description of vertebrate, excluding Homo sapiens. 
(9)  Animal bite: Any physical contact of the teeth, nails, or claws of an animal with human flesh, including but not limited to a scrape, puncture, pierce, scratch or tear, so long as bleeding results. 
(10)  Animal control department: The Douglas County Animal Control Department. 
(11)  Animal establishment: Any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
(12)  Animal shelter: Any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society, or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
(13)  At large: Any animal is at large when it is not under control as provided herein. 
(14)  Auctions: Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as herein defined. 
(15)  Breeder: A person or entity that owns an animal and allows it to reproduce, whether planned or unplanned. 
(16)  Confinement: Restriction of an animal to a home, basement garage, building, pen, or other escape-proof enclosure. Confinement by a rope, chain, tether, fenced yard or other area accessible by other animals or persons, other than the caretaker, is not considered confinement. 
(17)  Cruelty: Every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
(18)  Fence: A structure of wire, wood, stone or other materials, including invisible fencing, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against the passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. 
A fence does not include an "invisible fence" if the fence is: 
a.  Turned off or the animal is not wearing a properly operating signaling device; 
b.  Ineffective for any animal that has learned it can cross the fence line; 
c.  Intended to be a means of keeping people or animals out of an enclosed area; or 
d.  Buried in or adjacent to the county right-of-way. 
e.  An invisible fence is not an acceptable means of control for an animal that is classified as vicious, dangerous, potentially dangerous, or is in estrus/heat. 
(19)  Fowl: Any warm-blooded, feathered, flying or nonflying animal. 
(20)  Humane manner: Care of an animal to include, but not to be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
(21)  Kennel: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals. 
(22)  Licensing authority: The agency or department of the county or any designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(23)  Livestock: Any animal that has hooves. 
(24)  Neutered: Incapable of sexual reproduction. 
(25)  Nuisance: An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
a.  Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
b.  Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; 
c.  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; 
d.  Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; or 
e.  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
(26)  Owner: Any person owning, keeping or harboring one (1) or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) consecutive days or more. 
(27)  Performing animal exhibition: Any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used. 
(28)  Pet: Any animal kept for pleasure, excluding livestock. 
(29)  Pet shop: Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two (2) or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
(30)  Potentially dangerous dog means: Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to make unprovoked attacks, cause injuries or otherwise threaten the safety of any human being. Potentially dangerous dog shall also mean any dog which, when unprovoked, inflicts a bite upon a human being or chases or approaches a human being on any public property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of an attack. 
(31)  Primary enclosure: Any structure or device used to restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, such as a fence building, room, pen, run, cage, stall, paddock, or pasture, that provides adequate space and shelter. 
(32)  Proper enclosure: An enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious animal securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of another animal or any person other that the owner or caretaker. The enclosure must: 
a.  Be designed to prevent the animal from escaping, and 
1.  If the enclosure is a fence, the fence must be high enough to keep the animal from climbing over and must be secured at the bottom to keep the animal from digging under. 
2.  If the enclosure is a pen or structure other than a fence, the pen or structure must have secure sides, top and bottom constructed or secured in such a manner to prevent the animal's escape, and be of a height and strength to maintain the animal within it. 
b.  Provide adequate shelter. 
c.  Provide adequate space for the animal. 
(33)  Provoked attacked: An attack resulting when a domestic animal is placed in a situation such that an expected reaction would be to bite or attack. 
(34)  Responsible person: Any accountable human being. 
(35)  Restraint: See "Under control." 
(36)  Spayed: Incapable of sexual reproduction. 
(37)  Tether: Any chain, rope, leash, tie out or wire designed to restrain an animal which is attached to an animal's collar or halter and is also attached to a stationary object. 
(38)  Under control: Any animal shall be considered under control if it is confined by fence, pen, cage or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner, or is secured by a leash, chain or lead of sufficient strength to prevent if from escaping from the premises of its owner, or is restrained by leash, chain or lead or confined in an automobile when away from the premises of the owner. 
(39)  Unprovoked attack or without provocation: An attack that is not provoked as defined by this chapter. 
(40)  Veterinary clinic or hospital: A clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
(41)  Vicious animal: Any animal that attacks or attempts to attack without provocation a human being or domestic animal. This phrase shall not be construed to include dogs that are part of a governmental operation, nor a professionally trained certified guard dog in the performance of its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person. 
(42)  Wild and exotic animals: Include any monkey or other nonhuman primate, such as raccoon, skunk, wolf, wolf-hybrid, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, ferret, bear, wild rabbit, tarantula, wild rodent, and reptiles, including, but not limited to, crocodiles, alligators, snakes, caiman, and gavials, and any other animal so designated by the animal control department. 
(Ord. of 10-20-92; Ord. of 1-15-08, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 1, 2007, § 2, amended the Code by repealing former § 5-3 in its entirety. Former § 5-3 pertained to the establishment of an animal control board, and derived from a resolution of October 17, 1995. 
Secs. 5-4—5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 5-20. - Generally. 
(a)  No person or business shall own, keep, harbor or permit to be kept or harbored a wild or exotic animal within the county, other than licensed animal establishments which are approved in writing by the animal control department, which licenses may granted upon presentation of evidence satisfactory to the animal control department that appropriate safeguards for protection of the public are maintained. 
(b)  The provisions of this section for licensure shall not apply to any person or business that is required to be licensed and permitted by state and/or federal agencies for keeping and maintaining wild or exotic animals, where it appears that such person or facility is in fact continuously so licensed and/or permitted. 
Sec. 5-21. - Sales. 
Any animal establishment approved by the animal control department for offering for sale any wild and exotic animal shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display a notice in form and substance approved by the animal control department that no person may lawfully own, keep, harbor or permit to be kept or harbored, any wild and exotic animal within the county, including any monkey or other nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, wolf, wolf-hybrid, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, ferret, bear, wild rabbit and wild rodent, and reptiles including but not limited to crocodiles, alligators, caiman, and gavials, and any other animals so designated by the animal control department. 
(Ord. of 10-20-92) 
Sec. 5-22. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The animal control department may impound any wild or exotic animal that is owned, kept or harbored in violation of this chapter, and may destroy or rehabilitate any such animal upon conviction of its owner or other responsible person for a violation of this article, notwithstanding the impoundment provisions of this chapter, provided no such animal may be destroyed without first obtaining approval of the board. 
(b)  Any wild or exotic animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article shall remain impounded or confined by the animal control department until a final order of disposition is entered by a court of competent jurisdiction with respect to the violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 5-23. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day such violation continues, together with all costs of court and a ten-dollar fee per day for board for each day the animal is impounded in the animal shelter. 
Secs. 5-24—5-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VACCINATION 

Sec. 5-30. - Generally. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the county unless such dog or cat is vaccinated as herein provided. 
(b)  The animal control department shall maintain a record of all certificates issued. 
Sec. 5-31. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats over three (3) months of age within the county shall be vaccinated against rabies and revaccinated as recommended by the current State of Georgia Rabies Control Compendium by a licensed veterinarian according to the type of vaccine and the duration of its effectiveness. The veterinarian will issue to the owner a durable metal tag and a certificate of vaccination approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Tags must be attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and be worn at all times. Tags are not transferable from one dog or cat to another dog or cat. 
(b)  The animal control department may adopt such other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 11-2-15, § 1) 
Sec. 5-32. - Health regulations incorporated. 
All rules and regulations of the county board of health and the Georgia Department of Human Resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
Sec. 5-33. - Kennel license fees. 
Applicants for kennel licenses shall pay fees annually in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Kennel, per kennel: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00); 
(2)  During "Responsible Pet Owners Month," the applicant for a kennel license shall pay one-half of the fee provided in the applicable category provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
Secs. 5-34—5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRAINT 

Sec. 5-40. - Maintenance of premises and disturbing noises. 
(a)  An owner of an animal shall maintain the area in which such animal is kept in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens or any areas in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing within a reasonable distance of said premises, and the animals themselves shall be restrained in such a fashion that noise emanating therefrom shall not be disturbing to such persons. 
(b)  Any animal which barks, whines, howls or causes other objectionable noise in succession for a period, although not necessarily constant or continuous, of twenty (20) minutes or more on more than one (1) occasion, or which is at large or chases or runs after persons or vehicles, or which destroys or damages any property of another person, or which causes serious annoyance to a neighboring resident and interferes with reasonable use and enjoyment of his property, or which is otherwise offensive so as to create a nuisance, shall be deemed to be a nuisance and a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(c)  If any two (2) citizens of the county, not residing in the same household, shall sign and file with the magistrate court an affidavit stating that an animal, which resides or is commonly kept or housed within audible distance of their residences or places of business has become a nuisance as defined in subsection (b) of this section, the owner or keeper of that animal shall be summoned into the magistrate court to answer the charge made by the affidavits and show cause why such animal owner should not be found in violation of this section. 
(1)  After such an affidavit is filed in the magistrate court, the court shall notify animal control. An animal control officer or other agent of the county authorized by the county governing authority will personally serve a summons to appear in magistrate court upon the animal owner. 
(2)  The summons shall state the offense alleged, the name of the accused, the time and place of the trial, the date of the offense, the date of service; shall bear an identifying number by which it is filed with the court and be signed by the county agent who completed and served it. 
(d)  The owner of any animal found by the court to be in violation of this section may be punished in accordance with section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-19-00(1)) 
Sec. 5-41. - Animal or fowl enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, control or possess any pasture or enclosure for livestock or fowl in any fashion not authorized by the zoning ordinances of the county. See Appendix A, containing the Douglas County Zoning Ordinance. All pastures or enclosures shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition. 
Sec. 5-42. - Confinement of animals generally, vicious animals, etc. 
(a)  An owner of a domesticated animal, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall confine such domesticated animal within an adequate fence or enclosure or within a house, garage or other building to prevent the animal from running at large. No animal shall be tied or tethered as a permanent measure of restraint. No animal shall be left unattended on a chain, lead, runner, cable, rope, leash or similar tethering device. 
(b)  An owner of a dog or cat, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall prevent such dog or cat from becoming a danger to persons or property at any location, or trespassing upon another persons' property without that person's permission. 
(c)  An owner of a dog or cat, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall prevent such dog or cat from running at large upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public places in the county. 
(d)  An animal, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, not under control as provided in this chapter which attacks or attempts to attack without provocation a human being or domestic animal is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or ordered confined by the animal control department for a period of thirty (30) days, provided that, if an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any such animal for any violation of this chapter, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that such animal be humanely destroyed. 
(e)  Any owner of a vicious animal, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall confine it within a building or secure enclosure sufficient to prevent the animal from escaping and to prevent a person or another animal from entering the enclosure and not release it therefrom unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint by a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age or older. Any vicious animal not under control as provided in this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or confined by the animal control department for a period of thirty (30) days, provided that, if an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended within the discretion of the animal control department until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any such vicious animal for any violation of this chapter, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that such animal be humanely destroyed. 
(f)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary clinic or hospital or in a kennel in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another dog or cat, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow such owner's dog or cat to enter any food store or place where food is exhibited for sale, except those animals trained for the blind and hearing impaired. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chickens, ducks, horses, cows, goats, pigs or any other type of animal, livestock or other fowl within the county to permit them to run at large or be a menace or nuisance to such person's neighbors or the public in general. 
(Ord. of 12-2988, § 2; Ord. of 11-21-89; Res. of 6-19-90; Ord. of 1-15-08, § 2) 
Sec. 5-43. - Rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the Georgia Development of Human Resources and the animal control department all cases of rabies in animals treated by such veterinarian, giving the name and address of the owner. Every veterinarian shall also report the names and addresses of the owner of any animals bitten by such rabid animal, so far as known. 
(b)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report such information, to the extent known, to the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the animal control department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal or person has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to incarcerate or impound the animal in the facility of some competent veterinarian within this county, where the animal shall be held for observation for such period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether the animal is infected with rabies. 
Secs. 5-44—5-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CRUELTY 

Sec. 5-50. - Prohibited treatment; removal of mistreated animals; payment of expenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either by commission or omission, to: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal; 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal with adequate food and veterinary care; 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal with access to adequate shelter consisting of not less than three (3) walls and a roof adequate to protect it from all types of weather, twenty-four (24) hours daily; 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal access to adequate water at all times; 
(5)  Abandon any animal; 
(6)  Intentionally poison any animal; 
(7)  Allow or promote any fight between animals, or to allow or permit any such fight in or upon any premises in such person's possession or under such person's control; 
(8)  Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions; 
(9)  Keep or confine an animal in other than a humane manner; 
(10)  No animal may be transported in the back of a pickup truck without the pickup truck bed being enclosed or the animal confined so that it may not jump, fall or be injured in any manner. 
(Ord. of 1-15-08, § 3) 
Secs. 5-51—5-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 5-60. - Permit required; term; removal; one per establishment; display. 
(a)  No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit from the animal control department in compliance with this chapter, nor may any person operate an animal establishment in a manner in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The license period shall begin with the first day of the calendar year and shall run for one (1) year. Renewal application for permits shall be made thirty (30) days prior to and up to sixty (60) days after January first of each year. Application for a permit for a new establishment under the provisions of this chapter shall be made within sixty (60) days of the start of business or operation. 
(c)  Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise, requiring an individual permit (e.g., two (2) kennels at different locations but owned by the same person shall be considered as two (2) animal establishments). 
(d)  Permits obtained in accordance with this article shall be displayed in a prominent location on the premises of the animal establishment. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or gratuitously distribute any animal, fowl or reptile in a public place without a license or permit as set forth in this article. This prohibition shall include but shall not be limited to such distribution in commercial areas and along public roadways. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the gratuitous distribution of pets from private residential areas. 
(Res. of 4-16-91) 
Sec. 5-61. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Each animal establishment shall annually file an application for permit with the animal control department within the time periods provided by this chapter, provided that all preexisting establishments shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date of this chapter to file such application. 
(b)  The permit application shall be made on a form provided by and available from the animal control department. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the animal control department shall make an inspection of the facility to ensure that all animals are provided for in a humane manner and that the establishment is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. The animal control department shall be permitted to make such inspection at any reasonable time during normal business hours. 
(d)  The animal control department shall either issue or decline to issue a permit to the applicant. If a permit is not granted, it shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. 
(e)  Any animal establishment denied a permit may not reapply for a period of at least thirty (30) days. Each reapplication shall describe any previous denial or revocation. 
(f)  If an applicant is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on any application, the animal control department may refuse to issue or is entitled to revoke any permit. 
Sec. 5-62. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The animal control department may revoke any permit if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, or any other law or regulation governing the protection and keeping of animals, including refusal to allow inspection of the animal establishment as provided in this article. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is revoked for cause, or pending any proceedings to contest such action, the animal control department shall have power of entry to inspect all premises where the animals are being kept and shall notify the owner in writing as to the period of time that reasonably shall be allowed for removal of animals from such premises and shall state the specific reasons for revocation. In the event any such owner shall fail to remove such animals as directed, the animal control department may impound such animals pursuant to the impoundment provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 5-63. - Compliance with Code. 
(a)  An animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any dog or cat over three (3) months of age unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(b)  The animal control department shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept, other than those animal establishments exempted by section 5-66 hereof, at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Animal establishments exempted as provided in section 5-66 may be inspected by the animal control department upon receipt by the animal control department of a request to make inspection from any state and/or federal agencies which license and/or permit such establishments, which inspection may be made at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all regulations pertaining thereto. 
Sec. 5-64. - Standards for kennels. 
All kennels shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for kennels are as follows: 
(1)  Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting. 
(2)  Building temperature shall be maintained at a comfortable level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained. 
(3)  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top of cages. 
(4)  Cages are to be of material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing. 
(5)  Cage floors shall be of concrete, unless radiantly heated, and shall have a resting board or some type of bedding. 
(6)  Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface. 
(7)  All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition. 
(8)  The food shall be free from contamination, and shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(9)  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. 
Sec. 5-65. - Standards for pet shops. 
All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall in addition to the other requirements of this chapter comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for pet shops are as follows: 
(1)  Water. There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of one hundred sixty (160) degrees for washing cages and disinfecting, and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water for consumption shall be available to all species of animals at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
(2)  Room temperature. The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop. 
(3)  Cages and enclosures. All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to such animal's full length. 
Sec. 5-66. - Exemptions. 
Any animal establishment as defined herein that is required to be licensed and permitted by state and/or federal law, and which is in fact continuously so licensed and/or permitted, shall be exempt from sections 5-60, 5-61 and 5-62 of this article. 
Secs. 5-67—5-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES 

Sec. 5-70. - Health of the animal. 
No animal shall be permitted to pull any carriage unless the animal is in good health and meets at least the following requirements: 
(1)  All draft animals must weigh at least one thousand (1,000) pounds. 
(2)  The animal must have no major open sores or wounds and not be lame or have any other ailment, unless a veterinarian states in writing that the animal shall not be affected unduly by the proposed work. 
(3)  The hooves of the animal must be properly shod and trimmed. 
(4)  The animal must be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff or a poor or dirty coat. 
(5)  The animals must have adequate flesh and muscle tone. 
Sec. 5-71. - Animal working conditions. 
(a)  No animal shall be worked under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  No animal shall be permitted to draw a carriage equipped with ball bearing wheels which hauls more than twelve (12) people (including the driver) or a carriage equipped with bushing wheels which hauls more than nine (9) people (including the driver). 
(2)  Total hours worked may not exceed eight (8) in any twenty-four-hour period, with fifteen-minute rest periods between each trip, if the animal is used to haul people or goods. 
(3)  Between the dates of June first and August thirty-first, total hours worked by any animal shall not exceed six (6) in a twenty-four-hour period with a fifteen-minute rest for every hour worked. 
(4)  The animal pulling a carriage shall not move at a speed faster than a slow trot. 
(5)  No animal shall work with equipment causing an impairment of vision, other than normal blinders. 
(6)  No animal shall be subject to any condition which will impair the good health and physical condition of the animal. 
(b)  The animal control department may order the temporary suspension of the operation of any animal-drawn vehicle upon a determination that special circumstances exist which jeopardize the safety of the animal, such as bad weather or other environmental problems. 
Sec. 5-72. - Equipment and facilities. 
Equipment and facilities with respect to animal-drawn vehicles must meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The harness and bit shall be of standard construction and appropriate for the animal. It shall be properly fitted, padded and maintained, and kept free of makeshift wire, sisal rope and chain. The harness must be oiled and cleaned so as to be soft at all times. 
(2)  Carriages must be properly lubricated and wheels must spin freely. 
(3)  No driver may whip any animal with more than a light touch by a light whip. 
(4)  Adequate water shall be provided in the working area and stables at all times. 
(5)  Drivers of animal-drawn vehicles shall maintain stands in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(6)  Stalls and stables must comply with the following: 
a.  Ceilings in stalls and stables must be at least ten (10) feet high from bedding and flooring. Bedding therein must be at least six (6) inches deep and dry enough so as not to show wetness under the pressure of the animal's hoofs. Sharp surfaces shall not be permitted in any area or building where they may come in contact with the animals. 
b.  Roofs must be kept free of leaks. 
c.  Each animal must have a stall large enough for the animal to turn around. 
d.  Food must be kept free of contamination. 
e.  Animal areas must be treated to exterminate and repel insects. 
f.  Ventilation must be provided in hot weather. 
Sec. 5-73. - Inspections. 
The animal control department shall be permitted to inspect all animals, carriages, stalls and stables at any reasonable time to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
Secs. 5-74—5-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPOUNDMENT; ADOPTION 

Sec. 5-80. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any animal at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be impounded in the animal shelter in a humane manner, for a period of not less than three (3) days. If within such time an animal so impounded has not been reclaimed by its owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, such animal shall become the absolute property of the animal control department, which may convey ownership of such animal to any responsible person on such conditions as the animal control department may prescribe, or the animal control department may humanely destroy such animal. 
(b)  An animal control officer may follow an animal that has been seen by that officer running at large onto private property to capture and impound that animal. No injunction, action or claim for damages may be brought against the animal control department or its officers, agents or employees with respect to actions herein contemplated. 
(c)  The animal control department shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of any animal impounded in the animal shelter that the animal has been impounded, the manner by which the animal may be reclaimed, and that the animal may be destroyed and shall become the property of the animal control department as provided herein. 
(d)  Following the impoundment of an animal found at large which animal has on it its owner's address and prior to its destruction, the animal control authority shall give the owner five (5) days' notice of the proposed destruction by certified letter, return receipt requested. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the animal control department may refuse to release any animal impounded in the animal shelter for rabies or contagious disease quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution, for such time period as the animal control department may determine. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the animal control department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the animal control department reasonably believes that destruction of the animal is necessary to prevent disease or injury to the animals or to humans due to overcrowding in the animal shelter, the presence or threatened presence of contagious disease, the likelihood of danger or injury to humans or animals, or any other condition. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the animal control department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the animal control department reasonably believes the animal has sustained an injury or disease which will likely result in maiming, prolonged and/or severe suffering or death. 
(Ord. of 12-29-88, § 3) 
Sec. 5-81. - Reclaiming impounded animals. 
(a)  The owner of an animal impounded in the animal shelter may reclaim the animal, upon presenting evidence satisfactory to the animal control department of compliance with all provisions of this chapter, and upon payment of fees and charges as hereinafter provided, credited to the account of the animal control department, and which fees and charges shall not be in lieu of any fine or penalty otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Fees for reclaiming impounded animals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Vaccinated dogs or cats: 
First offense ..... 25.00 
Second offense ..... 35.00 
Third offense ..... 70.00 
Subsequent offense ..... 100.00 
(2)  Unvaccinated dogs or cats: 
First offense ..... 35.00 
Second offense ..... 70.00 
Third offense ..... 200.00 
Subsequent offense ..... 250.00 
(3)  Rabbits, poultry and birds: 
Each offense ..... 25.00 
(4)  Other animals: 
Each offense ..... 45.00 
(5)  Animals impounded for rabies quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution: 
Per day ..... 10.00 
(6)  In addition to the foregoing fees, the per-day board for each day the animal is impounded in the animal shelter ..... 5.00 
(c)  The owner of an animal impounded in the animal shelter shall be liable for the foregoing fees and charges, notwithstanding the destruction or adoption of the animal. 
(Ord. of 7-15-97) 
Sec. 5-82. - Adoption. 
The animal control department may convey ownership (permit adoption of) any animal which has become the property of the animal control department to a responsible person subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the animal control department, including, but without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control department that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other disease administered; 
(2)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control department that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07, § 3) 
Secs. 5-83—5-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES 

Sec. 5-90. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control department and by the county sheriff's department. 
Sec. 5-91. - Interference. 
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control department or any other officer in the performance of its duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control department, except as herein provided. 
Sec. 5-92. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The animal control officers, sheriff's deputies and other enforcement officers of the county are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this chapter, including but not limited to an animal that has bitten a person within ten (10) days. 
(b)  The animal control department may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle between the dates of May first and September thirtieth. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the animal control department or its officers for this action. 
Sec. 5-93. - Summons. 
Representatives of the animal control department and officers of the county sheriff's department are hereby authorized to issue a summons to any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. The summons shall be in a form approved by the county magistrate court, shall designate the offense charged and shall require the person so charged to appear before the county magistrate court on a date certain to answer the charges therein contained. 
Sec. 5-94. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than eight hundred dollars ($800.00), and public service work not to exceed one hundred (100) hours (work to be performed at the animal shelter). If such violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-15-97) 
Sec. 5-95. - Equipment. 
The animal control department is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but without limitation to, humane wire box traps; and the animal control department may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
Secs. 5-96—5-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RECORDS 

Sec. 5-100. - Required to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
Secs. 5-101—5-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ANIMAL ADVISORY BOARD[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 1, 2007, § 1, amended the Code by repealing former art. XI, §§ 5-110 and 5-111, and adding a new art. XI. Former art. XI pertained to the animal control shelter committee, and was part of the original 1988 Code. 

Sec. 5-110. - Animal control advisory board. 
(a)  Membership. The county animal advisory board is hereby created. The Douglas County Animal Control Advisory Board (ACAB) shall be composed of eight (8) members. Five (5) members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. Two (2) members shall be appointed by the City of Douglasville mayor and council. The remaining member shall be a veterinarian appointed by the remaining seven (7) members. An elected official may not serve as a member of the Board. All members of the Board must reside within Douglas County. A member of the county animal services department will serve as secretary to the ACAB. Unless otherwise authorized by subsequent ordinance, the members of the ACAB shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  Terms. Initially, three (3) of the county's appointees and one (1) of the city's appointees shall serve a one-year term. The remaining appointees shall serve a two-year term. All members shall thereafter serve two-year terms. 
(c)  Duties. In addition to such other powers and duties as may be set forth in this chapter, the ACAB shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Study animal related issues and make recommendations to the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Review and make recommendations to the board of commissioners regarding ordinances relating to the control and welfare of animals in the unincorporated county; 
(3)  Supply reports to the board of commissioners at such frequency as the board may require; 
(4)  Other duties as prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-1-15, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 1, 2015, amended § 5-110 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5-110, pertained to animal advisory board, and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted May 1, 2007. 
Secs. 5-111—5-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - INJUNCTION 

Sec. 5-120. - No injunction against department. 
No injunction shall be granted against the animal control department, or any of its officers or agents, except upon court order after due notice and proper hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07, § 4) 
Secs. 5-121—5-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL 

Sec. 5-130. - Adoption of the responsible dog ownership law. 
The board of commissioners does hereby adopt and expressly incorporate herein by reference, the terms and provisions of the Georgia Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. sections 4-8-1 through 4-8-33. The board does further set and establish the penalties therein stated and does approve and adopt the charging of a registration fee and confiscation fee for dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. The board does further repeal only those portions of the county animal control ordinance that are expressly inconsistent with the terms and provisions of the responsible dog ownership law. 
(Ord. of 12-29-88, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-07, § 5; Ord. of 12-18-12) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building permit required, App. A, § 118; building standards for fire safety, § 10-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Building department—Official, inspector, employees, fees, records, general administrative provisions, etc. 
(a)  The provisions of administration of the Standard Building Code, latest edition, are hereby adopted in all respects and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(b)  The term "governing body" or "applicable governing body" as used in the Standard Building Code or in any other uniform or standard codes adopted in this chapter shall refer in each instance to the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Enforcement powers. 
The enforcement provisions of all codes related in this chapter are hereby adopted in all respects and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91) 
Sec. 6-3. - Building code—Adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the design, erection and construction of buildings and structures the Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code, latest addition, as adopted by the State of Georgia. In addition appendices A, B, C, D, E, G and H thereto are adopted. The Southern Standard Building Code is published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, and each of said codes are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. At least one (1) copy of the building codes are on file in the office of the building official. 
(b)  There are likewise adopted in various provisions of this chapter other uniform or standard codes as noted in various articles hereof. At least one (1) copy of such uniform or standard codes are on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 8-15-89; Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Sec. 6-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 17, 1991, amended the Code by deleting provisions contained in § 6-4. Said provisions pertained to amendments to the Standard Building Code and derived from an ordinance adopted Jan. 17, 1989; and a resolution adopted July 17, 1990. 
Sec. 6-5. - Same—Modifications. 
The building official shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the various uniform or standard codes adopted in this chapter upon application in writing by the owner, developer or lessee, or the duly authorized agent of the owner, developer or lessee, when, in the opinion of the building official, there are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the codes, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be observed and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the building official shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Appeals. 
Whenever the building official shall disapprove an application seeking to modify any of the provisions of the uniform or standard codes adopted in this chapter, the applicant for such modification may appeal from the decision of the building official by filing a notice of appeal in writing to the board of adjustments and appeals, as provided in Article 1, section 105 of the Standard Building Code, which is expressly empowered to hear such appeal. 
Sec. 6-7. - Pretreatment certification required before occupancy. 
Prior to occupancy, all residential dwellings shall be pretreated for subterranean termite infestation, and a certification of such treatment shall be provided to the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91) 
Sec. 6-8. - Board of adjustments and appeals established; composition; quorum, records, rules, procedure. 
The provisions of the Standard Building Code dealing with the creation, operation and powers of the board of adjustments and appeals are hereby adopted in all respects and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
Sec. 6-9. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence construction of any building or to commence the moving or alteration of any building until a permit has been obtained from and the required fee paid to the permit office. 
Sec. 6-10. - Permit fees as filed. 
Building permit fees shall be as provided in a schedule adopted by the board of commissioners and on file in the office of the building. 
Sec. 6-11. - Compliance prerequisite to issuance of permit. 
No permit shall be issued under any provision of this chapter until the applicant has fully complied with all applicable provisions of this Code, all zoning and subdivision regulations, and all site development standards of this Code. 
Sec. 6-12. - Construction industry board license required for issuance of certain permits; work by individual on personal dwelling. 
(a)  Electrical, plumbing, gas, conditioned air and low-voltage permits shall be issued only to a holder of a valid, current state construction industry licensing board master license for the trade for which the application is made, except that a homeowner may apply for and obtain all required permits for making improvements solely to such homeowner's own dwelling, provided all provisions of state law are met. The term "dwelling" for purposes of this section shall mean the permittee's primary, single-family residence. 
(b)  In the event that the permit holder is unable to finish the job for which the permit was issued or is fired from or refuses to complete a job, then the owner or general contractor shall notify the permit holder in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the employment of the permit holder is terminated and that application is being made to transfer the permit to another qualified license holder. 
(c)  In addition to those license holders noted in subsection (a), the provisions of subsection (b) shall apply to general contractors, with the exception that a master license is not required of a contractor to obtain a building permit. 
Sec. 6-13. - Framing and construction advisory board. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established the framing and construction advisory board, which shall consist of three (3) members. Such board shall be composed of three (3) general contractors or residential buildings with at least five (5) years' building experience. Said board shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners and shall take office immediately upon appointment. The board shall elect a chairman. 
(b)  Term of office. One (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) for a term of two (2) years and one (1) for a term of three (3) years, and thereafter, they shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Absence at three (3) consecutive meetings by any member of the board shall, at the discretion of the chairman, subject such member to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Duties. The powers of said board are expressly limited to advisory powers with respect to building construction and framing, except where additional powers are expressly set out in this Code. Two (2) members of said board shall constitute a quorum thereof for the transaction of business properly coming before them. 
(d)  Procedure. The board shall establish rules and regulations or its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman. 
(e)  Records. The building official or the official's designate shall act as secretary of the board and shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
Sec. 6-14. - Revocation of permits. 
The revocation provisions of the Standard Building Code authorizing the building official to revoke permits are hereby adopted in all respects and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
Sec. 6-15. - Code compliance bond. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be the duty of every builder, general contractor, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor or other person or entity that contracts for the erection, construction or repair of buildings for which a building permit is required to give good and sufficient bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to be approved by the building official, conditioned to conform to the building regulations provided in this chapter and other ordinances or laws of the county and the state in reference to buildings. 
(b)  Any licensed plumbing contractor or licensed HVAC contractor may, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-14-12(b), execute and deposit a code compliance bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with the probate judge in the county of such contractor's principal place of business. Such bond shall be a cash bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or be executed by a surety authorized and qualified to write surety bonds in the state. Such bond shall comply with and conform to the requirements specified by O.C.G.A. § 43-14-12(b) as to form and must be approved by the probate judge. Prior to the issuance of any building permits by the building official or his designee, any licensed plumbing contractor or licensed HVAC contractor who chooses to execute and deposit a code compliance bond pursuant to this subsection must furnish a copy of the approved code compliance bond to the building official or his designee. 
Any licensed plumbing contractor or HVAC contractor who has not executed and deposited with the judge of the probate court in the county of his principal place of business a code compliance bond as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 43-14-12(b) shall instead be subject to the code compliance bond requirements outlined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any final inspection report and certificate of occupancy issued for any structure shall have noted thereon: "To the best of the county's knowledge and belief at the time of inspection, the structure has been erected in substantial compliance with applicable building codes. No oversight by the office of the building official shall excuse violation of any ordinance of Douglas County." 
(d)  After issuance of any final inspection report, the county reserves the right for a period of one (1) year to reinspect a dwelling for latent code violations that existed at the time of final inspection but were not detected. Inspections made after the issuance of the final inspection report and before the termination of the one-year requirement by the office of the building official shall be in response to a written complaint by the owner. 
(e)  The builder, electric contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity securing the permit shall be responsible for the correction of any code violations by him or her that are discovered and reported in writing to the building official during the period of construction or within the one-year period beginning at the date of final inspection, excepting routine maintenance, abuse, modification and normal wear and tear. 
(f)  Should the office of the building official determine that there exists in any structure covered by a bond issued pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) of this section, any violations of this Code, the principal on any such bond, being the builder, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity obtaining a permit for construction, shall be notified by certified mail of the violation and shall be allowed ten (10) working days from the receipt of the notification to respond to the charge of violation and to meet with the office of the building official regarding a remedy for the violation. 
(g)  Should the principal on the bond decide within the ten-day period provided in this section to appeal the charge of violation, he will be given an additional ten (10) working days to file such appeal to the board of appeals. The board of appeals shall have the authority and duty to render decisions in any appeal brought by a builder, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, or individual who holds a construction permit and who has issued to the county a code compliance bond or, where applicable, a copy of a code compliance bond, and who has been determined by the building official to have failed to correct building code violations. Should the board of appeals find the principal in violation of the code, the principal shall have thirty (30) days to remedy the violation to the satisfaction of the office of the building official. All decisions of the board of appeals are final and may only be reviewed by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(h)  Should the principal not correct the violation in a manner satisfactory to the office of the building official, or, in the judgment of the building official, have not made satisfactory progress in remedying the violation within this thirty-day period, then he shall be notified in writing of his default and the surety shall be called upon to remedy the default within forty-five (45) days of notification. 
(i)  The surety's obligation shall be limited to an amount required to remedy the code violation, but in no event shall the obligation exceed the amount of the bond. 
(Ord. of 1-20-04) 
Secs. 6-16—6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE 

Sec. 6-20. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county finds and declares that within the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the county; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the county where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the county finds that there exist in the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this section shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the county. 
(Ord. of 12-18-01) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 18, 2001, amended the Code by repealing former § 6-20 and added a new § 6-20 to read as herein set out. Former § 6-20 pertained to adoption of the unsafe building abatement code, and derived from ordinances of September 17, 1991 and August 19, 1997. 
Sec. 6-21. - Nuisance abatement procedures. 
(a)  Continued use of other laws and ordinances. It is the intent of the board of commissioners that nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this section shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Applicable codes means (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
(3)  Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2 of chapter 13 of title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
(4)  Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
(5)  Governing authority means the commissioners of the county. 
(6)  Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
(7)  Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(8)  Parties in interest means: 
a.  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
b.  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a fifty-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
c.  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
d.  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
(9)  Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
(10)  Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. section 41-2-7, section 41-2-8 and section 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this section adopted under section 41-2-7, section 41-2-8, and sections 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this section or any agent of such officer or officers. 
(11)  Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(12)  Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(c)  Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(1)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(2)  The board of commissioners of the county appoint or designate the community service department, county fire marshall, county fire chief, county sheriff and his/her designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this section; 
(3)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the county charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. section 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(4)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41, of the O.C.G.A. qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(5)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following works: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful. 
(6)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the county are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(7)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
a.  The lien provided for in paragraph (c)(7) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. section 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection real property ad valorem tax, including specifically chapter 4 of title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
b.  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. section 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
c.  The County may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
d.  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. section 5-3-29. 
e.  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
f.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(d)  Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure, of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing). 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(e)  Powers of public officers. The public officer(s) designated in this section shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the section; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this section to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(f)  Service of complaints. 
(1)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this ordinance shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three (3) business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
a.  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
b.  Pursuant to the provision of article 5 of chapter 4 of title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
c.  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(2)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(4)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative reside outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (f)(6) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing in which judge shall stand in place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(5)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(6)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (f)(3) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(7)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(8)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Ordinance on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 12-18-01-A) 
Secs. 6-22—6-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-30. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of electrical systems and electrical materials, the Georgia State Minimum National Electric Code, latest addition, as adopted by the State of Georgia. The National Electric Code published by National Fire Protection Association, 60 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, and said code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. At least one (1) copy of the electrical code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Sec. 6-31. - Electrical advisory board. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established the board to be called the electrical advisory board, which shall consist of four (4) members. Each member shall be a master electrician registered by the county. Said board shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and shall take office upon appointment. The board shall elect a chairman. 
(b)  Term of office. Each member shall serve a term of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled by the board of commissioners. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the chairman, render any such member liable to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Duties. The powers of said board are expressly limited to advisory powers with respect to electrical installation, except where additional powers are expressly set out in this Code, three (3) members of said board shall constitute a quorum thereof for the transaction of any business properly coming before them. 
(d)  Procedure. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(e)  Records. The chief electrical inspector shall act as a secretary of the electrical advisory board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
Sec. 6-32. - Electrical permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any electrical installation until a permit has been obtained from and the required fee paid to the permit office. 
Sec. 6-33. - Permit and/or inspection fees. 
Electrical permit and/or inspection fees shall be as provided in a schedule adopted by the board of commissioners and on file in the office of the building official. 
Sec. 6-34. - Electrical installation or maintenance by homeowner. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent a homeowner from installing or maintaining electrical systems for residential purposes within such person's own property boundaries, provided such electrical work is done personally and is used exclusively by such person or such person's family. Such privilege does not grant the right to violate any of the provisions of the code, nor is it to be construed as exempting any such property owner from obtaining a permit and paying the required fees therefor. 
Sec. 6-35. - Electrical installation for mobile homes. 
No installation of electrical service for mobile homes shall be made without complying with the specifications for installation on file in the office of the building official. 
Secs. 6-36—6-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 6-40. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of gas systems and gas materials, the Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code, latest edition, as adopted by the State of Georgia. In addition appendices A, D and E thereto are adopted. The Standard Gas Code is published by Southern Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35212-1206, and each of said codes are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. At least one (1) copy of the gas code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Sec. 6-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 17, 1991, amended the Code by deleting provisions contained in § 6-41. Said provisions pertained to amendments to the Standard Gas Code and carried no history note. 
Sec. 6-42. - Gas installation for mobile homes. 
No installation of gas service for mobile homes shall be made without complying with the specifications for installation on file in the office of the building official. 
Sec. 6-43. - Gas permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any gas installation until a permit has been obtained from and the required fee paid to the permit office. 
Sec. 6-44. - Permit and/or inspections fees. 
Gas permit and/or inspection fees shall be as provided in a schedule adopted by the board of commissioners and on file in the office of the building official. 
Secs. 6-45—6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-50. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of warm air heating and air condition the Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code, latest edition, as adopted by the State of Georgia. In addition, appendices A and C thereto are adopted. The Standard Mechanical Code is published by Southern Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35212-1206, and each of said codes are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. At least (1) copy of the mechanical code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Sec. 6-51. - Mechanical advisory board. 
(a)  Appointment. Such board shall be composed of four (4) air conditioning and heating contractors and engineers familiar with air conditioning and heating, each of whom is licensed in the county. The board shall elect a chairman. 
(b)  Term of office . Each member shall serve a term of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled by the board of commissioners. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the chairman, render any such member liable to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Duties. The powers of said board are expressly limited to advisory powers concerning the installation of warm air heating and air conditioning, except where additional powers are expressly set out in this Code. Three (3) members of said board shall constitute a quorum thereof for the transaction of any business properly coming before them. 
(d)  Procedure. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(e)  Records. The chief mechanical inspector shall act as a secretary of the mechanical advisory boards and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
Sec. 6-52. - Mechanical permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence the installation of warm air heating and air conditioning equipment until a permit has been obtained from and the required fee paid to the permit office. 
Sec. 6-53. - Permit and/or inspection fees. 
Mechanical permit and/or inspections fees shall be as provided in a schedule adopted by the board of commissioners and on file in the office of the building official. 
Secs. 6-54—6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 6-60. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the habitability and sanitary conditions of private premises and structures, the Standard Housing Code, latest edition, being particularly that code published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, and said code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. At least one (1) copy of the housing code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Secs. 6-61—6-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 6-80. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purposes of establishing standards and procedures affecting the installation of plumbing and plumbing materials the Georgia State Minimum State Plumbing Code, latest addition, as adopted by the State of Georgia, which code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. In addition, appendices A, B, C, D, F, G, I and J thereto are adopted. At least one (1) copy of the plumbing code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Sec. 6-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 17, 1991, amended the Code by deleting provisions contained in § 6-81. Said provisions pertained to amendments to the plumbing code and derived from an ordinance adopted July 6, 1989. 
Sec. 6-82. - Plumbing advisory board. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established the plumbing advisory board, which shall consist of five (5) members. Such board shall be composed of three (3) plumbing contractors registered by county and one (1) registered journeyman plumber and one (1) person not involved in plumbing or contracting work. The board shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. The board shall elect a chairman. 
(b)  Term of office. Each member shall serve a term of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled by the board of commissioners. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the chairman, render any such member liable to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Duties. The powers of the board are expressly limited to advisory powers concerning the installation of plumbing and plumbing materials, except where additional powers are expressly set out in this code. Four (4) members of said board constitute a quorum thereof for the transaction of any business properly coming before the board. 
(d)  Procedure. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(e)  Records. The chief plumbing inspector shall act as secretary of the plumbing advisory board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
Sec. 6-83. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 17, 1991, amended the Code by deleting provisions contained in § 6-83. Said provisions pertained to installation regulations contained in the Georgia State Plumbing code and carried no history note. 
Sec. 6-84. - Plumbing permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any plumbing installation until a permit has been obtained from and the required fee paid to the permit office. 
Sec. 6-85. - Permit and/or inspection fees. 
Plumbing permit and/or inspection fees shall be as provided in a schedule adopted by the board of commissioners and on file in the office of the building official. 
Secs. 6-86—6-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOL CODE 

Sec. 6-90. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures affecting the design, erection and construction of building and structures, the Standard Swimming Pool Code, latest edition, being particular that code published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, and said code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. At least one (1) copy of the code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Sec. 6-91. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a swimming pool until a building permit has been obtained from and the required fee paid to the permit office. 
Secs. 6-92—6-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Former art. IX, §§ 6-100—6-119, which pertained to sign regulations, has been treated as being repealed by an ordinance of October 5, 2004, which created the Unified Development Code. Similar provisions can be found in the Douglas County Unified Development Code. Former art. IX derived from an ordinance of March 17, 1992 and a resolution of September 19, 1995. 

Secs. 6-100—6-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 6-140. - Moving permit—Required; number limited. 
A house, building or other structure or any part of a house, building or other structure shall not be moved or caused to be moved by any person through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within the governmental limits of the county, without such person first obtaining a permit from the building official. Furthermore, no contractor or developer who is engaged in the business of restoring moved-in houses shall be allowed more than one (1) building permit for the reconstruction of moved-in houses at any one (1) given time. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85, § 55-1101) 
Sec. 6-141. - Same—Application; inspection. 
(a)  Any person desiring to move a building, house or other structure shall first file with the building official a written application setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Type and kind of building to be moved. 
(2)  The original cost of such building. 
(3)  The extreme dimensions of the length, height and width of building. 
(4)  Its present location and proposed new location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers, or plat and legal description if not within a subdivision. 
(5)  The approximate time such building will be upon the streets, and contemplated route that will be taken from present to new location. 
(6)  The complete name, address and telephone number of the current owner. 
(7)  A written contract between the mover of the structure and the party for whom the structure is moved, or proof of ownership of the structure by the mover. 
(b)  The building official shall conduct a preliminary inspection of the house, building or other structure proposed to be moved at its present location prior to its removal and relocation. If in the opinion of the building official, the moving of any structure will cause serious injury to persons or serious damage to property or serious injury to the streets or other public improvements, or the structure to be moved has deteriorated more than fifty (50) percent of its original value by fire or other element, or the moving of the structure will violate any of the requirements of this Code or of the zoning regulations, the permit shall not be issued and the structure shall not be moved over the streets. Any structure being moved for which a permit was granted shall not be allowed to remain in or on the streets for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application and processing fee as prescribed from time to time by the board of commissioners, on file in the office of the clerk, shall be paid to the county at the time the written application required in subsection (a) hereof is submitted to the county. The applicant shall also pay to the county an inspection fee calculated at an hourly rate as provided from time to time by the board of commissioners, on file in the office of the clerk, for each hour that the building official or the building official's delegate is away from the county office in connection with the inspection of the house, building or other structure at its present location, together with mileage expenses for each mile the building official or delegate travels from the county office to the house, building or other structure, at the rate prescribed from time to time by the board of commissioners, on file in the office of the clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85, § 55-1102) 
Sec. 6-142. - Bond. 
The building official, as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit, shall require a bond to be executed by a person desiring such removal permit, with corporate surety to such official's satisfaction. Such bond shall be made payable to the applicable governing body and for such amount as the building official prescribes. It shall indemnify the applicable governing body against any damage caused by the moving of a structure to streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways and any other property which may be affected by the moving of a structure. Such surety bond shall also be conditioned upon and liable for strict compliance with the terms of said permit, as to route to be taken and limit of time in which to effect such removal and to repair or compensate for the repair and to pay said applicable governing body as liquidated damages an amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) to be prescribed by the building official for each day's delay in completing such removal or in repairing any damages to property or public improvement or in clearing all public streets, alleys or highways of all debris occasioned thereby. In lieu of the foregoing, if the mover of the structure is licensed by the state public service commission and shows proof that all appropriate bonds have been submitted to and accepted by the public service commission, then the within and foregoing bond requirements shall be waived. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85, § 55-1103) 
Sec. 6-143. - Notices to be given by building official. 
Upon the issuance of aforesaid moving permit, the building official or some other party acting upon the building official's request shall cause notice to be given to the fire marshal, chief of the fire department, telephone, gas or light companies, or others whose property may be affected by such removal. The building department shall set forth in all notices the route that will be taken, time started, and approximate time of completion. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85, § 55-1104) 
Sec. 6-144. - Public safety requirements. 
(a)  Every building, house or other structure which occupies any portion of public property after sundown, shall have sufficient lights continuously burning between sunset and sunrise for the protection of the public. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum of five (5) red lights placed on each street side of the building, house or other structure; such red lights shall be attached to the structure in such a fashion as to indicate extreme width, height and size. 
(c)  There shall be placed in addition to the red lights, on the structure, flares at regular intervals for a distance of two hundred (200) feet up the street on each side of the building, house or other structure. 
(d)  When more than fifty (50) percent of the street, measured between curbs, is occupied at night by the structure, or when in the opinion of the building official, flagmen are necessary to divert or caution traffic, the owner or person moving such building shall employ at such owner's or person's expense, two (2) flagmen, one (1) at each street intersection beyond the building; such flagmen shall remain at these intersections diverting or cautioning traffic from sunset to sunrise. Red lights shall be employed in flagging traffic at night. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85, § 55-1105) 
Sec. 6-145. - Improvements by owner required; building permit. 
(a)  The owner of any house, building or other structure proposed to be moved shall make all necessary improvements required in order for said house, building or other structure to comply with the requirements of the building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes as adopted in the county, within ninety (90) working days (defined as Monday through Friday) from the date the house, building or other structure is moved into the county and placed on the site where it shall be permanently located. The owner shall be required to acquire a building permit from the building official at the time improvements are begun to the house, building or other structure. Rates for the building permit shall be those established by the county. The permit shall be valid for a period of sixty (60) working days (the "initial term") from the date the house, building or other structure is moved into the county and placed on the site where it shall be permanently located, and it may be renewed for an additional period of thirty (30) working days at the expiration of the initial term upon payment to the county of a renewal fee established by the county, provided the foundation, roof, windows and all exterior finish are completed, the house is dampproof, and the plumbing, electrical and mechanical systems are roughed-in, all to the satisfaction of the building official. Extensions of such time for construction as deemed reasonable may be granted by the building official upon a showing of delay caused by matters beyond the control of the owner. If the reconstruction is not completed to the degree hereinabove required at the expiration of the initial term, and if the time for completion is not otherwise extended by the building official as provided herein, then the owner shall pay a fine to the county of a sum as prescribed from time to time by the board of commissioners, on file in the office of the clerk, per working day for each working day that the required construction is not completed. If the required construction is not fully completed following the renewal term of thirty (30) working days after an extension is given, and if the time for completion is not otherwise extended by the building official as provided herein, then the owner shall also pay a fine to the county in the same amount as above provided, per working day for each working day that the construction is not fully completed. 
(b)  The application for the moving permit shall be accompanied by an application for a building permit and, except for single-family residential dwellings, a complete set of plans and specifications showing all contemplated improvements, signed by the owner or the owner's agent. 
(c)  No house, building or other structure may be occupied by any person until a final certificate of occupancy is granted by the building official. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85, § 55-1106) 
Secs. 6-146—6-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Former art. XI, §§ 6-150—6-158, which pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control, has been treated as being repealed by an ordinance of October 5, 2004, which created the Unified Development Code. Similar provisions can be found in the Douglas County Unified Development Code. Former art. XI derived from an ordinance of November 20, 2001. 

Secs. 6-150—6-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Former art. XII, §§ 6-170—6-191, which pertained to flood damage prevention, has been treated as being repealed by an ordinance of October 5, 2004, which created the Unified Development Code. Similar provisions can be found in the Douglas County Unified Development Code. Former art. XII derived from an ordinance of February 3, 1987. 

Secs. 6-170—6-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - EXCAVATING AND TRENCHING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—7 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 5, 1989, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. XIII, §§ 6-200—6-206. 
Cross reference— Excavations and backfilling relative to utility easements, § 14-49. 

Sec. 6-200. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Certificates means the certificate issued upon satisfactory completion of a mandatory training/educational program regarding excavation and trenching safety practices, such program to be provided by or approved by the Douglas County Fire Department. 
Certificate holder means the holder of the "certificate" identified above. 
Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, wall, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions by reasons of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth-to-width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing or controlling an excavation or trenching site. 
Trench is a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of a trench is not greater than fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89, § 1; Ord. of 3-20-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-201. - Prohibition. 
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in compliance with the provisions of this article and in compliance with any applicable laws of the State of Georgia or of the United States or Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), or any other state or federal governmental entity or department rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89, § 2) 
Sec. 6-202. - Adoption of OSHA safety and health regulations. 
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly part 1926, Subpart P—Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring Section 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, 1926.653 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended, are adopted as a part of this article the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89, § 3) 
Sec. 6-203. - Certificate required. 
(a)  Douglas County will honor certificates issued by other agencies if such agencies can satisfactorily show proof that their training/educational program meets or exceeds the Douglas County program regarding excavation and trenching safety practices. 
(b)  The directors of the departments of safety and emergency management, engineering/public works, health, maintenance, the chief building inspector, the code compliance officer or a designated representative of either of these officers shall have the authority to cause any trenching or excavation work in progress to be halted upon a finding that these certificate requirements are not being met on the particular job site. The said director may issue a verbal warning or a written citation in his discretion or he may recommend to the board of commissioners a revocation of the permits of responsible persons. 
(c)  No certificate shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, and after a hearing before the board of commissioners of Douglas County upon written notice to the holder of such certificate of the time, place and purpose of such a hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. Three (3) days notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. Due cause for revocation shall consist of the violating of any laws or ordinances regulating excavating or trenching. At any such hearing, the certificate holder shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney and to cross examine any witnesses who may appear and to present evidence in his own behalf. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89, § 4; Ord. of 3-20-90) 
Sec. 6-204. - Permit required. 
No excavating or trenching shall be performed until a permit for same has been obtained from Douglas County engineering department. All applicants shall be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before a permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the job site. No such permit shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing before the board of commissioners after notice to the permit holder of the date, time and place of hearing, along with a statement of the charges upon which the hearing is to be had. The violation of any laws or ordinances regulating excavating or trenching as set forth hereinabove shall constitute due cause for suspending or revoking such permit. Three (3) days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. At such hearing, the permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney, to cross-examine all witnesses who may appear against him, and to present evidence in his own behalf. 
After March 1, 1990, no permit shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89, § 5) 
Sec. 6-205. - Inspection by Douglas County. 
The directors of the department of public safety and emergency management, engineering/public works, health, maintenance, the chief building inspector and the code compliance officer shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permits, the existence of required "certificates" and compliance with OSHA safety standards hereinabove adopted. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89, § 6) 
Sec. 6-206. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this article may result in revocation or suspension of any "certificate" issued hereunder as set out above. 
(b)  Violations of this article may result in revocation or suspension of excavating/trenching permits issued hereunder as set above. 
(c)  When oral notice is not deemed sufficient a written notice of violation may be issued for any deficiency. Upon receipt of such notice, the deficiency shall be corrected immediately. 
(d)  The directors named in sections 6-203(b) and 6-205 above shall cause excavation and trenching work upon any job site to cease immediately upon discovery that there is trench activity by any person not a "certificate" holder, when there is a refusal or failure to correct deficiencies immediately and/or when such work is being done without a permit. 
(e)  If deficiencies identified in a notice or violation are not timely corrected, the building permit, land disturbance permit or any other permit issued by Douglas County may be suspended or revoked for due cause upon the conditions herein identified for revocation of authorization. 
(f)  Flagrant and/or repeated violations shall be reported by Douglas County to OSHA for action by that agency. 
(g)  Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or six (6) months imprisonment or both for each violation. 
(h)  In addition, every violation of the terms of the article by any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity of any kind whatsoever, shall be deemed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued; and such violation is subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state. 
(i)  Any violation of this article shall be subject to injunction. 
(j)  The above named remedies are in addition to any and all other remedies available under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89, § 7) 
Secs. 6-207—6-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Former art. XIV, §§ 6-250—6-255, which pertained to tree protection, has been treated as being repealed by an ordinance of October 5, 2004, which created the Unified Development Code. Similar provisions can be found in the Douglas County Unified Development Code. Former art. XIV derived from an ordinance of October 21, 1997. 

Secs. 6-250—6-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 17, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. XV, § 6-270 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-270. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and procedures for structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and indoor air quality, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of existing buildings and structures, the Standard Existing Code, latest edition, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35212-1206, which code is hereby adopted by reference thereto. At least one (1) copy of the code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Secs. 6-271—6-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ENERGY CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 17, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. XVI, § 6-280 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-280. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted the Georgia State Minimum Energy Code, latest edition, as adopted by the State of Georgia, which code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. At least one (1) copy of the energy code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91; Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Secs. 6-281—6-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - LIFE SAFETY CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 17, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. XVII, § 6-290 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-290. - Code adopted as reference. 
The Life Safety Code, latest edition, shall be referred to and shall be authoritative when it addresses matters not addressed in the Georgia State Minimum Codes in their latest editions as listed hereinabove. 
(Ord. of 9-17-91) 
Secs. 6-291—6-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - LOW FLOW PLUMBING FIXTURES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 17, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. XVIII, §§ 6-300—6-307 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-300. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Promote greater efficiency in residential and commercial water use and preserve the natural resources of this county; 
(2)  Reduce consumer water and energy costs by reducing indoor water use, reducing the need for new water supplies and treatment facilities, lowering operation and maintenance costs for water and sewer utilities, and reducing the amount of energy used to heat, treat, and transport water; and 
(3)  Generate consumer awareness of the need to save water and of the savings that can result from the use of efficient plumbing products. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 1) 
Sec. 6-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Commercial building as referred to in this article means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures as referred to in this article shall mean any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building as referred to in this article, means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet as referred to in this article, shall mean any fixture consisting of a water flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal as referred to in this article, shall mean any fixture consisting of a water flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 2) 
Sec. 6-302. - Standards. 
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the Georgia State Plumbing Code. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 6-304 below. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992 and for commercial buildings shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to above should not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
a.  Toilets ..... 1.6 gallons per flush 
b.  Urinals ..... 1.0 gallons per flush 
c.  Showerheads ..... 2.5 gallons per minute  at 60 psi gage pressure 
d.  Kitchen faucets ..... 2.5 gallons per minute 
e.  Bathroom and lavatory  faucets ..... 2.0 gallons per minute 
(2)  The flow restrictive device in a showerhead shall be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1). 
(4)  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) herein. 
(5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for "low consumption" water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 3) 
Sec. 6-303. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards listed in section 6-302 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described below and providing upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the director of the building department. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 6-307 of this article. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 4) 
Sec. 6-304. - Exceptions. 
The following fixture uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in section 6-302 above: 
(1)  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or showerheads required by section 6-302 installed; 
(3)  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  When units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 5) 
Sec. 6-305. - Application for exemptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in section 6-303 above shall be obtained from the director of the appropriate governmental department administering these rules. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 6) 
Sec. 6-306. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any building or plumbing contractors, developers, etc., who violate the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension of their business license for a period of up to ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 7) 
Sec. 6-307. - Compliance and enforcement. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 6-305 below, Douglas County may take other actions as described below to compel compliance and may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(1)  Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation in section 6-302 shall be determined by the building official or his agent in cases of new or replacement plumbing fixture installations and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any occupancy permit. 
(2)  The appropriate water authority or water service agency may deny any service connection to an establishment which does not comply with the standards set forth in section 6-302. 
(3)  Compliance with the requirements in section 6-303 above regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale, shall be determined by the building official or his/her agent. The agency shall have access to all establishments which offer for retail sale or sell plumbing fixtures at retail for purposes of determining compliance with section 6-303. 
(Ord. of 12-17-91, § 8) 
Secs. 6-308, 6-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - CEMETERY AND BURIAL GROUND PRESERVATION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2008, amended the Code by repealing former art. XIX, §§ 6-310—6-325, and adding a new art. XIX. Former art. XIX pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of June 20, 1995. 

Sec. 6-310. - Purpose and intent. 
The county has been richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased, and many of these people, in their time, were native pioneers of the county who have played an integral part in making this county what it is today; many of those who passed on have been memorialized with resting places in cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds that have been abandoned, desecrated, neglected, unmarked, and are threatened by unknowing development; such abandoned, desecrated, neglected, and unmarked cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds are not a befitting tribute to such honorable citizens of the past. 
Therefore, it is the desire of the county board of commissioners to provide for the preservation, protection, and maintenance of all such family/community cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds. 
The board of commissioners hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a commission for the purpose of providing a uniform procedure for the identification, preservation, protection, and maintenance of cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-311. - Definitions. 
(a)  Abandoned cemetery: A cemetery which shows signs of neglect including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
(b)  Archaeologist: Any person who is: 
(1)  A member of or meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologists and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves; or 
(2)  Employed on July 1, 1991, by the state or by any county or municipal governing authority as an archaeologist. 
(c)  Burial ground: An area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains including, without limitation, privately owned burial plots, individually and collectively, once human remains have been buried therein. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
(d)  Burial object: Any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker, or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term also includes any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
(e)  Cemetery or cemeteries: Any land or structure in this state dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for interment of human remains. It includes sites for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one (1) or more thereof. 
(f)  DCCPC: The Douglas County Cemetery Preservation Commission. 
(g)  Descendant: A person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 19, and as may be amended from time to time. 
(h)  Cemetery association: An organization of individuals founded to preserve and maintain a cemetery. 
(i)  Genealogist: A person who traces or studies the descent of persons or families and prepares a probative record of such descent. 
(j)  Human remains: The bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
(k)  Preserve and protect: To keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and so as to aid in the preservation and protection of such cemetery or burial ground. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-312. - Creation. 
(a)  Creation of the Douglas County Cemetery Preservation Commission (DCCPC), members, number, appointment, terms. The title of the commission shall be the "Douglas County Cemetery Preservation Commission" (DCCPC). The DCCPC shall consist of ten (10) members appointed by the board of commissioners, who shall be residents of the county who have demonstrated special interest in the identification, preservation, and maintenance of the county cemeteries and graveyards. The DCCPC may appoint an eleventh ex officio non-voting member who shall be an archeologist or other person with expertise in cemetery issues. Such ex officio member is not required to be a resident of the county. Each member of the board of commissioners shall be entitled to appoint two (2) members to the commission. The term of each member shall run concurrently with and at the pleasure of the appointing commissioner's term of office and until a successor is appointed and qualified. If an appointing commissioner is no longer in office due to a general election or a special election in which more than one (1) year remains in the commissioner's term, any member appointed by such commissioner shall be subject to removal with or without cause and without regard to any un-expired term by the newly elected commissioner filling such seat. The newly elected commissioner shall have the right to appoint a new member to the DCCPC under the same requirements as his or her predecessor as set forth in this section. Members do not receive a salary and are not considered employees of the county by virtue of such appointment. All commission members shall be subject to any and all codes of ethics which may apply to the county board of commissioners. Members may be reimbursed for expenses if pre-approved by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the DCCPC. The DCCPC shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Formulate a county-wide cemetery preservation plan, including but not limited to: 
a.  Identification and location of all cemeteries and burial grounds in the unincorporated county to the extent possible. 
b.  Creation of a map containing all known cemeteries and burial grounds. This map once adopted by the board of commissioners may be used by all citizens, county departments, developers, and other interested parties. 
c.  Determine status and needs of each cemetery and prioritize its need for essential maintenance to be performed. Such maintenance shall be designed to prevent the deterioration or loss of the burial ground and/or any burial objects it may contain. The intent of maintenance is to prevent a burial ground from being lost, becoming an eyesore, or a public nuisance that would invite vandalism or other illegal activities. Such maintenance shall not compel repair or restoration by the county of any extant burial objects such as grave markers or the burial ground generally. 
d.  Establish and publish guidelines regarding cemetery preservation, maintenance, landscaping, security, development and other information. 
e.  Work with the development services department. 
f.  Provide impact study statements on properties under review in the development services department. 
(2)  Make recommendations in accordance with the purpose and intent of this article to the board of commissioners, the planning and zoning commission, and the board of appeals on any zoning or variance applications involving properties containing cemeteries or burial grounds or properties adjacent to cemeteries or burial grounds. 
(3)  Recommend to the commissioners specific cemeteries and burial grounds determined to be abandoned or not maintained by the person legally responsible for the upkeep of the property on which the burial ground is located that: 
a.  Should be acquired by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-72-3. 
b.  Should be preserved and protected by the county. 
Such recommendations should include a plan that provides regular maintenance such as removal of encroaching underbrush, leaves and leaf litter, storm debris, deadfall, and trash resulting from littering. 
(4)  Provide a plan for the preservation and maintenance of those cemeteries that have been placed under the jurisdiction of the county pursuant to section 6-313 or otherwise on an "as needed" basis. Public funds may be disbursed upon approval by the board of commissioners as may be needed under particular circumstances. 
(5)  Conduct educational programs regarding cemetery preservation as a means of increasing public awareness and support. 
(6)  Assist the county in any legal action, as required, regarding cemetery relocation, maintenance, and security measures. 
(7)  Establish appropriate and necessary liaisons with other appropriate boards, commissions, county departments, organizations, and municipalities within the county. 
(8)  Provide guidance and suggestions to the county board of commissioners relative to ordinances dealing with cemeteries. 
(9)  Provide guidance and suggestions to the state legislature regarding changes/updates to Georgia Code relative to cemetery preservation. 
(10)  The DCCPC shall not financially obligate the county in any manner without the prior approval of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  DCCPC's power to adopt rules of procedure. The DCCPC shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, officers and the elections and duties, provision for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. The DCCPC shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedures without amendment to this article. A quorum shall consist of a majority of its members. Robert's Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings. 
(d)  DCCPC's authority to receive funding. The DCCPC shall have the authority to accept donations in addition to county appropriated funds if such funds are approved by the board. 
(e)  DCCPC meetings. A record shall not be kept of the DCCPC's resolutions, proceedings and actions. All meetings shall be open to the public and comply with the Open and Public Meetings Law, O.C.G.A. 50-14-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-313. - Mitigation requirements for the preservation of burial grounds. 
The DCCPC may assist landowners in protecting burial grounds located on their property. Development standards that shall be required as part of the application process for a land disturbance permit, building permit or preliminary plat on any parcel containing a cemetery or on any parcel adjacent to a cemetery include: 
(1)  A twenty-five-foot natural undisturbed buffer around the perimeter of the outermost burials; 
(2)  A temporary tree protection fence installed on the outer perimeter of the twenty-five-foot undisturbed buffer before any land disturbing activity begins; 
(3)  An appropriate permanent enclosure as may be required by the DCCPC and development services; 
(4)  A maintenance plan for a cemetery located on the parcel of land for which a land disturbance permit or building permit is sought. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-314. - Preservation of abandoned or improperly maintained cemetery or burial ground. 
If the board of commissioners determines that a cemetery or burial ground is abandoned or not being maintained by those legally responsible for the upkeep of the property upon which it is located, the county is authorized: 
(1)  To preserve and protect such cemetery or burial ground, regardless of the financial ability of those legally responsible. The board of commissioners may then seek reimbursement from the person legally responsible for the upkeep of such cemetery or burial ground. If the responsible party fails to reimburse the county, the board of commissioners may collect the amount owed by levying upon any property of the responsible person. 
(2)  To expend public money to preserve and protect such cemetery or burial ground, regardless of the financial ability of those legally responsible. The board of commissioners may then seek reimbursement from the person legally responsible for the upkeep of such cemetery or burial ground. If the responsible party fails to reimburse the county, the board of commissioners may collect the amount owed by levying upon any property of the responsible person. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-315. - Notification of discovery or disturbance of human remains, burial objects, cemeteries or burial grounds. 
(a)  Any person who knows or has reason to know that a human burial ground or cemetery is being disturbed, destroyed, defaced, mutilated, removed, excavated, or exposed shall immediately notify the sheriff's department and the board of commissioners. The DCCPC shall be notified as soon as practical, by any county agent or agency of such reports. 
(b)  Any law enforcement agency or county department, or other source which finds evidence or receives a report that human remains or burial objects have been discovered or a report that a burial ground or cemetery has been located shall notify the county coroner, the county board of commissioners, and the county cemetery preservation commission, or cause such entities to be notified. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-316. - Suspension of development or activity upon discovery of human remains or burial objects; establishment of protective buffer. 
(a)  When human remains or burial objects are discovered, all activities that may affect the burial ground shall immediately cease. After the discovering party has notified the county sheriff's department and the county coroner of the discovery, the owner or agent of the property, at their own expense, shall immediately take steps to determine the estimated number of graves and their approximate location through an archaeologist. 
(b)  Once the archaeologist has established the approximate boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground, a protective buffer shall be determined by the department of engineering. Such barrier shall meet the same buffer requirement listed in section 6-313. In determining any additional requirements, the department of engineering shall consider the following non-exhaustive list of factors: 
(1)  The slope of the land in and surrounding the boundaries; 
(2)  The proximity of the burial ground or cemetery to any flood plains; 
(3)  The proximity to any body of water or storm water runoff; 
(4)  The natural vegetation within and surrounding the boundaries; 
(5)  The nature of any land disturbing or development activity in the area adjacent to the boundaries; and 
(6)  Any other factors determined relevant by the director of engineering. 
(c)  No activity may occur on the property where the cemetery or burial ground is discovered or on a neighboring property that will cause the destruction, defacement, mutilation, removal, or exposure of a burial place pending the application and appeal period. 
(d)  No activity shall resume within the protective buffer unless: 
(1)  Authorization is received from the director of engineering or his or her designee; or 
(2)  The burial disturbance application and appeal period is completed and the activity is in compliance: 
a.  With the terms of an approved burial disturbance permit as issued by the board of commissioners or as modified by the superior court or other reviewing court; and 
b.  With any applicable provisions of the Douglas County Code, including but not limited to the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and the zoning regulations. 
(e)  The owner or agent may appeal the determination of the protective buffer by the director of engineering to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-317. - Application for burial disturbance permit. 
Any person or entity seeking a burial disturbance permit from the board of commissioners pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-72-4 shall comply with the following: 
(1)  An application shall be filed with the board of commissioners containing the following: 
a.  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search. 
b.  A report prepared by an archaeologist stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit. 
c.  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archaeologist's report. 
d.  A plan prepared by a genealogist for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. The applicant shall implement its plan for identifying, locating and giving notice to descendants no later than the date that the application is submitted to the board of commissioners. 
1.  After DCCPC review of the proposal, recommendations regarding the sufficiency of the application will be submitted to the board of commissioners. The commissioners may require the applicant to utilize additional reasonable methods to identify and locate descendants. Additional requirements imposed may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
i.  Newspaper notices in communities where descendants are believed or likely to be located. 
ii.  Further title research than is normally required on the property where the burial ground or cemetery is located or on adjacent property if it may assist in the identification of descendants. 
2.  The applicant shall notify possible descendants of their rights under this ordinance and O.C.G.A. 36-72-1 et seq., and how to contact the board of commissioners for further information regarding any mitigation proposals, the terms of any permits issued, the time and place of any scheduled public hearings, appeal procedures and events. 
3.  If those buried or believed to be buried in the cemetery or burial ground are of aboriginal or American Indian descent, the genealogist must consult with the Council on American Indian Concerns created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 44-12-280. In such case, the notification shall include any American Indian tribes as defined in paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. 44-12-280 that are culturally affiliated, as well as any known descendants of those presumed buried. 
e.  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify: 
1.  The method of disinterment; 
2.  The location and method of disposition of the remains; 
3.  The approximate cost of the process; and 
4.  The approximate number of graves affected. 
f.  An application fee not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), which shall reflect the cost of the county: 
1.  To process and review the application; 
2.  To advertise and conduct a public hearing to consider the application; 
3.  To hire an attorney, if desired by the county, to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan; 
4.  To hire an independent archaeologist, if desired by the county, to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan; 
5.  To hire an independent surveyor, if desired by the county, to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan. 
(2)  A copy of the application, at its time of filing, shall be submitted to the DCCPC for additional review and recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-318 - . public hearing on burial disturbance permit application. 
Fifteen (15) days after the board of commissioners is satisfied that all reasonable effort has been made by applicant to notify descendants, the board of commissioners shall set the date and time for a public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard on the issue of the burial disturbance permit application. 
(1)  The applicant shall be required to post a notice of the public hearing at the public road nearest to the burial ground and any other reasonable place that the board of commissioners may deem appropriate not less than thirty (30) days prior to a public hearing. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall cause notice of the public hearing to be advertised in the legal organ of the county once a week for the two (2) consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which the hearing is held. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-319. - Decision on burial disturbance permit application. 
Burial grounds are part of the finite, irreplaceable and nonrenewable cultural heritage of the people of the county, which should be protected. It is the intent of the county board of commissioners to require respectful treatment of human remains in accord with the equal and innate dignity of every human being and consistent with the identifiable ethnic, cultural and religious affiliation of the deceased individual as indicated by the method of burial or other historical evidence or reliable information. Three (3) basic principles should guide the treatment of human remains, burial objects, and their historic context. The first is respect for the dead; the second is respect for the religious beliefs of all peoples; the third is the integrity of historic sites, because these sites are part of our common heritage. 
(1)  In determining whether to deny or grant the burial disturbance permit application, the board of commissioners shall consider the following issues: 
a.  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed; 
b.  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
c.  The balancing of the applicant's interest in disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment; 
d.  The economic and other costs of mitigation; 
e.  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects; and 
f.  Any other compelling factors which the board of commissioners deem relevant. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall notify the applicant in writing within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing of its decision to: 
a.  Deny the application for burial disturbance permit. Such notification shall include the reasons for the denial. 
b.  Issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part. 
c.  Issue a permit, adopting the application in whole or in part, including additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground. Such requirements may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Relocation of the proposed project; 
2.  Reservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land; 
3.  Respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-320. - Appeal of decision on application for burial disturbance permit. 
Any applicant or descendant who is dissatisfied with a decision of the board of commissioners to grant or deny a burial disturbance permit may file an appeal in the superior court of the Douglas Judicial Circuit within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-321. - Development activities pending appeal. 
(a)  The applicant may not begin or resume any activities in the cemetery or burial ground until the thirty-day time period for appeal of the board of commissioners' decision has expired. 
(b)  The applicant may not begin or resume activities within the established protective buffer surrounding the cemetery or burial ground pending the appeal unless approval is received from the director of engineering. The director of engineering may require written assurance from the applicant's archaeologist or an independent archaeologist that the proposed activity will not affect or harm the cemetery or burial ground. 
(c)  If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only: 
(1)  Upon consent of the board of commissioners and the party seeking judicial review; or 
(2)  Upon order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-322. - Disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects. 
The applicant's archaeologist shall supervise, monitor and carry out any disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects permitted by this article. All associated costs shall be borne by the permit recipient. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-323. - Burial disturbance permit expiration and non-transferability. 
(a)  A burial disturbance permit shall expire if the relocation activity described in the permit is not in compliance with the original approval by the board of commissioners. Any such expired permit may be renewed by the BOC following the same procedures as the original approval. 
(b)  A burial disturbance permit may convey to a new owner if the original applicant transfers ownership of the property before cemetery relocation takes place if the new owner complies with all of the terms and conditions of the approved permit and relocation plan. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-324. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  This article may be enforced by the sheriff's department, the engineering department, the planning and zoning department, or other person designated by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The department of engineering and/or the planning and zoning department shall have the authority to issue a stop work order to obtain compliance with this article. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall cause inspections as necessary to determine whether the applicant has complied with the provisions of this article requiring cessation or limitation of activity and to determine whether the applicant has complied with the terms of the permit as issued by the board of commissioners or as modified by the superior court or other reviewing court. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-325. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article to knowingly disturb, destroy, deface, mutilate, remove, excavate or expose a burial place without first obtaining a burial disturbance permit from the board of commissioners as required by O.C.G.A. 36-72-1 et seq., or as it may be amended from time to time, and following the requirements of this article. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article to fail to report the discovery of human remains or burial objects to the county sheriff's department, county coroner, the DCCPC, or the county board of commissioners. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article to fail to report the disturbance of any human remains, burial objects, cemeteries or burial grounds to the county sheriff's department. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article to fail to observe the provisions of section 6-316, section 6-321, or the protective buffer requirements imposed by the department of engineering. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this article to fail to observe the conditions and provisions of a burial disturbance permit granted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-326. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person is hereby deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided herein, the county may seek injunctive relief to cease and remove any violations of this ordinance in the appropriate court against the appropriate person or entity. 
(c)  In addition, any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance, and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceeding allowed by law in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Sec. 6-327. - Effective date and validity. 
(a)  Effective date . This article shall become effective on the twentieth day of June, 1995. 
(b)  Validity . If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2-08) 
Secs. 6-328—6-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 19, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. XX, § 6-331 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-331. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, latest edition, which code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. In addition, appendix A thereto is adopted. 
(Ord. of 8-19-97) 
Secs. 6-332—6-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 6-341. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the county is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The county board of commissioners, hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, building, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. of 6-15-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-342. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Building. A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness. A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features. The architectural style general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features. All those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district. A geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the county board of commissioners as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 6-344(b) of this article. 
Historic property. An individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the board of commissioners as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 6-344(c) of this article. 
Material change in appearance. A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object. A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure. A work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 6-15-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-343. - Creation of the tourism and historic commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be Douglas County Tourism and Historic Commission (hereinafter "Commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the board of commissioners. The Commission shall be part of the planning functions of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Commission members—Number, appointment, terms and compensation. The commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the board of commissioners. All members shall be residents of the county, and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience of education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
To the extent available in the county, at least three (3) members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one (1) member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. 
Members shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: two (2) members for one (1) year; three (3) members for two (2) years; and two (2) members for three (3) years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of the commission's powers. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the county having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the board of commissioners specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Recommend to the board of commissioners that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by board of commissioners; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the board of commissioners of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A., section 44-10-1 through 5); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the county, Douglasville, Georgia, and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the board of commissioners itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the county board of commissioners concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the board of commissioners historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate board of commissioners without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the board of commissioners enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statutes and in the board of commissioners charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 6-15-99, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-09) 
Sec. 6-344. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the county. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the board of commissioners for designation. The commission shall present to board of commissioners recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to board of commissioners for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one (1) or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one (1) or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the county. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district). 
b.  Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in (b)(1)). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, the county, or the state, for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to Douglas County, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural of historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the board of commissioners, the commission, or 
a.  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designation of any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name (s) of the owner (s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the county, and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission and board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least one (1) consecutive issue in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on board of commissioners tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic the commission must submit the report, required in section 6-344(a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designation. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to board of commissioners. 
(6)  The board of commissioners action on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the board of commissioners may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by board of commissioners, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by board of commissioners, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the county tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the county of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 6-15-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-345. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the county and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  Commission action. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed; approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(2)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and site features, and to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structure, sites, trees judged to be fifty (50) years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambience of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the county. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object form collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provision, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The board of commissioners or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six (6) months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable. 
(l)  Recording applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by board of commissioners and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to board of commissioners. Any such appeal must be filed with the board of commissioners within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 6-345(h)(1) of this article or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within fifteen (15) days of the expiration of the forty-five-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection 6-345(h)(2) of this article. The board of commissioners may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of board of commissioners may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for county ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 6-15-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-346. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The Commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have thirty (30) days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in thirty (30) days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 6-347 of this article and, at the direction of the board of commissioners the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-15-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-347. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations under the zoning ordinance of the County. 
(Ord. of 6-15-99, § 1) 
Secs. 6-348, 6-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 6-350. - Adopted. 
The 2006 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, as amended from time to time, is adopted by reference, subject to all exceptions, amendments and modifications contained in this article, which in the event of conflict shall supersede and take priority over the adopted housing code or any published amendments thereto. Amendments contained in this article, if any, shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07; Ord. of 1-6-09) 
Sec. 6-351. - Amendments. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert "Douglas County, Georgia" as the name of jurisdiction. 
Section 103.5. Insert "Said schedule shall be the actual cost to the County to perform the activities and services." 
Section 302.4. Insert "8 inches" as the maximum permissible height that grass and weeds can reach. 
Section 304.14. Insert "February" to "December" as the months during which property owners will be required to have insect screens on all doors, windows and other outside openings. 
Section 602.3. Insert "September" to "April" as the months during which landlords will be required to furnish heat to their tenants. 
Section 602.4. Insert "September" to "April" as the months during which heat must be available to indoor occupiable workspaces. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Chapter 7 - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 7-1. - Declaration of policy. 
It is essential to the proper government and administration of the county that its board of commissioners and other appointed officials covered by this chapter be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial, that public service not be used for private gain, and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the county government. Because the attainment of one (1) or more of these ends is impaired whenever there exists in fact, or appears to exist, a conflict between the private interests and public responsibilities of county officials, the public interest requires that the county protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the officials covered by this chapter in situations where a conflict may exist. It is also essential to the efficient operation of the county that those persons best qualified be encouraged to serve in positions of public trust. Accordingly, the standards hereinafter set forth must be so interpreted and understood as not unreasonably to frustrate or impede the desire or inclination of those best qualified to seek and serve in public office. To that end, the officials herein noted should not, except as otherwise provided by law, be denied the opportunity available to all other citizens to acquire and maintain private, economic and other interests except where a conflict of interest situation would necessarily result. The policy and purpose of this chapter, therefore, is to make clear those standards of ethical conduct that shall be applicable to the officials herein noted in the discharge of their official duties, to implement the objective of protecting the integrity of the county's government, and to prescribe only such essential restrictions against conflicts of interest as will not impose unnecessary barriers against public service. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § A) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Appointed official: Appointed official means the county manager, the county attorney, the clerk of the board of commissioners, all county department heads (as defined in the merit system regulations, section 13-14, definitions), any county employee exempt from the merit system regulations and all persons appointed by the board of commissioners to boards who receive compensation. 
Business: A corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
Business relationship: An agreement between parties which is designed to result in an enterprise for profit to the parties. 
Censure: An expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
Confidential information: Any information which, by law or practice, is not available to the public. 
Contract: Any lease, claim, account or demand against or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory verbal or in writing. 
Employment: Any rendering of services on request, whether paid or unpaid. 
Immediate family: An official or appointed official and such official's or appointed official's husband, wife, father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, step-father, step-mother, and step-children. 
Interest: Any director or indirect pecuniary or material benefit held by or accruing to an official or appointed official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county. Unless otherwise provided, the term "interest" does not include any remote interest. For the purpose of this chapter, an official or appointed official shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving any one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Any person and such person's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship (either written or implied) exists, whereby such person may receive any payment or other benefit, including an agreement for employment; 
(3)  Any business in which such person is a director, officer, employee, prospective employee or substantial (greater than ten (10) percent) shareholder. 
Official. The chairman and any member of the board of commissioners of this county. 
Official act or action: Any executive, legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of the board of commissioners or appointed official taken pursuant to a regular discharge of such official's or appointed official's official duties. 
Paid: The receipt of, or right to receive, a salary or a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee. 
Participate: To take part in official acts, actions or proceedings personally as an official or an appointed official through approval, disapproval, decision, or the failure to act or perform a duty. 
Person: As defined in section 1-2, specifically including any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust or association, whether paid or unpaid, and includes any official or appointed official. 
Property: Any property, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, and includes currency and commercial paper. 
Reprimand: An expression of disapproval. 
Transaction: The conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, B; Ord. of 8-7-90) 
Sec. 7-3. - Impartiality. 
No official or appointed official shall, by such official's or appointed official's conduct, give reasonable basis for the impression that any person improperly can influence such official or appointed official or unduly enjoy such official's or appointed official's favor in the performance of official acts or actions, or that such official or appointed official is affected unduly by the kinship, rank, position or association with any person. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § C) 
Sec. 7-4. - Gifts and favors. 
No official or appointive official shall directly or indirectly request, exact, receive or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value for such official's or appointed official's self or another person. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional, nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value (less than $250.00); 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; and 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any official or appointed official from accepting a gift on behalf of the county, provided that the person accepting the gift shall promptly report the receipt of such gift to the board of commissioners, which shall have the gift added to the inventory of property of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § D) 
Sec. 7-5. - Campaign contributions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to campaign contributions made to an official in compliance with the Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act (O.C.G.A. Chapter 21-5). 
(Code of 3-17-87, § E) 
Sec. 7-6. - Confidential information. 
No official or appointed official, whether paid or unpaid, shall disclose confidential information, nonpublic information or undisclosed information concerning the property, governing operations, policies, decisions, plans or affairs of the county, nor shall such official or appointed official use such information or any acquired in such official's or appointed official's official capacity to advance the financial or personal interest of that party or others under any circumstances. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § F) 
Sec. 7-7. - Representation. 
Except in the regular discharge of official duties, no official or appointed official shall appear on such official's or appointed official's own behalf, or represent, or appear on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person before any court or legislative, administrative or quasi-judicial board, agency, commission or committee appointed by the board of commissioners, or an official or appointed official concerning any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the county, or otherwise use or attempt to use such official's or appointed official's official position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for such official's or appointed official's self or other persons. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § G) 
Sec. 7-8. - Incompatible employment. 
No official or appointed official shall engage in, accept employment with or render services for any person or business when such is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of such official's or appointed official's official duties. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § H) 
Sec. 7-9. - Abstention. 
An official or appointed official who has an interest that such official or appointed official has reason to believe may be affected by such official's or appointed official's official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the county shall disclose that interest and shall abstain from participating in such official acts or actions affected thereby. That interest shall be disclosed by such official or appointed official prior to there being taken any official act or actions. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § I) 
Sec. 7-10. - Contracts. 
Any official or appointed official who shall violate the terms and provisions of O.C.G.A. section 36-1-14 or any provisions of any county ordinances, rules, and/or regulations shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties herein stated. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § J) 
Sec. 7-11. - Zoning. 
All officials and appointed officials are deemed subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Chapter 36-67A et seq., shall make the disclosures therein required, and shall be subject to the penalties therein stated. In addition, any official or appointed official required to make the disclosures set forth in the aforesaid provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall be prohibited from participating in the zoning matter in which such official or appointed official has a direct or indirect interest. A violation of the aforesaid provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
The disclosure requirements set forth in Chapter 36-67A of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the prohibition from participation imposed in the preceding paragraph shall also pertain to all officials and appointed officials who are involved in the process of approving and/or disapproving residential and commercial subdivision plats. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § K) 
Sec. 7-12. - Disclosure of relationships. 
(a)  Each party subject to this chapter shall submit in writing to the full board of commissioners the following information: 
(1)  Any business interests between or among any parties subject to this chapter, with complete description of said involvement. 
(2)  Any business interests between or among any parties subject to this chapter which have been terminated within the past six (6) months. 
(3)  Any business interests between or among any parties subject to this chapter anticipated in the next six-month period. 
(4)  Any business interests in which any official or appointed official owns an interest equal to ten (10) percent of the net worth of the business or twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), whichever is less. 
(5)  Any employers, clients or business interests which pay to any official or appointed official an amount equal to ten (10) percent of that official or appointed official's total gross revenues in any one (1) year or twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in one (1) year, whichever is less. 
(6)  Any real estate holdings in which an official or appointed official has an interest which is located in the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(b)  Henceforth, each party subject to this chapter shall inform the full board of commissioners in writing of any such business relationships or interests within thirty (30) days of the creation of any such contractual relationship or acquisition and shall provide all of the information requested in subparagraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (a) of this section. Notwithstanding the preceding reporting requirement, however, it is required that at least one (1) report be made by each official or appointed official at least once annually, which report shall be made on the first day of May of each year. 
(c)  Failure on the part of any party subject to this chapter to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  All information supplied hereunder shall be received by the board of commissioners, sealed by it, and delivered to the judge of the probate court for retention. The information shall not be available for review by any person or entity other than the committee designated in section 7-15 to hear complaints, and such release shall be authorized then only in the event of a complaint having been filed as provided in this chapter. The committee shall have the right to review the records of only the official or appointed official charged. The records may also be subject to review upon the issuance of a subpoena for the production of such documents by a court of competent jurisdiction or upon order of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § L) 
Sec. 7-13. - Use of county property. 
No official or appointed official shall use any county property, services, personnel, labor or other thing of value for personal gain or for any purpose other than the official business of the county. Any parties so violating this provision shall be required to pay to the county a sum equal to the value of the benefits so received, and shall likewise be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § M) 
Sec. 7-14. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
No official or appointed official shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by any law, now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him or her by virtue of his or her office. Without limiting the applicability of other statutory provisions, the provisions of O.C.G.A. section 45-10-1 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § N) 
Sec. 7-15. - Violations. 
Complaints regarding alleged violations of this chapter by an official or appointed official shall be referred to the current foreman of the then-impaneled grand jury by any person having personal knowledge of such violation. A complaint shall be in writing and shall specify in detail the circumstances constituting the alleged violation, the transaction or matter to which the violation relates, and the official or appointed official alleged to have violated this chapter. Upon receipt of a complaint, the foreman shall designate a committee composed of two (2) members of the then-impaneled grand jury and a third party to be selected by the official or appointed official alleged to have violated this chapter. The committee thus formed shall make such investigation of the complaint as it deems appropriate with respect to the matters contained in the complaint and, within thirty (30) days of its appointment, shall report its findings to the full board of commissioners. In the event that the committee finds that a violation has occurred, it shall also recommend whether the board of commissioners shall either censure or reprimand the official or appointed official or take no further action. The board of commissioners at its next regular meeting not less than fifteen (15) days after the committee makes its report, shall, by majority, act upon the report by either censuring or reprimanding the official or appointed official or, in their discretion, taking no further action. In the event a member of the board of commissioners is the party under investigation, such member shall not participate in the deliberations and voting by the board of commissioners. The report of the committee shall be made a part of the minutes of the board of commissioners and a copy thereof forwarded to the district attorney of the Douglas Judicial Circuit for such further legal action as the district attorney shall consider appropriate. 
In the event that the two (2) members of the then-impaneled grand jury are not capable of serving for any reason, then the two (2) such members shall be designated by a mutual decision of the probate judge and the judges of the superior court of the county. 
All proceedings and records of the aforesaid committee are confidential, although the report of the committee may be made public. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § O) 
Sec. 7-16. - Construction; application. 
(a)  This chapter shall be construed liberally to effectuate its purposes and policies and to supplement such existing laws as may relate to the conduct of the persons made subject to this chapter. 
(b)  The propriety of any official act or action taken by or transaction involving any official or appointed official immediately prior to the time this chapter shall take effect shall not be affected by the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87, § P) 
Sec. 7-17. - Executive sessions. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. shall be open to the public. When any portion of a meeting of the board of commissioners is closed to the public pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. all members of the commission, attending any portion of such closed meeting, shall limit all discussion to those items exempt under state law and shall execute and file with the official minutes of the meeting a notarized affidavit stating under oath that the subject matter of the meeting or the closed portion thereof was devoted to matters within the exceptions provided by law and identifying the specific relevant exceptions. The commissioners, attending any portion of the closed meeting, shall execute the affidavit immediately upon the adjournment of the executive session and before the adjournment of the public portion of the meeting. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Chapter 7.5 - EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 16, 1990, amended the Code by the addition of a chapter relative to the emergency communications service district, said provisions being codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Ch. 7.5, §§ 7.5-1—7.5-8. 
Cross reference— Emergency medical service, Ch. 8. 

Sec. 7.5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
District means the corporate boundaries, including its municipalities, of Douglas County, Georgia, providing an enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system. 
Enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system means emergency "911" service that provides the telephone number and the location of the calling party to the public safety answering point. 
Exchange access facilities means the access from a particular telephone subscriber's premise to the telephone system of a service supplier. Exchange access facilities include service supplier provided access lines, PBX trunks and centrex network access registers, all as defined by tariffs of telephone companies as approved by the Georgia Public Service Commission. Exchange access facilities do not include service supplier owned and operated telephone pay station lines, wide area telecommunications service (WATS), foreign exchange (FX), or incoming other lines. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of Douglas County. 
Public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting, law enforcement, emergency medical, suicide prevention, civil defense, poison control, or other emergency services. 
Service supplier means any legal entity providing exchange telephone service to any service user in the district. 
Service user means any legal entity who is provided exchange telephone service in the district. 
Tariff rate means the rate or rates billed by a service supplier as stated in the service supplier's tariffs and approved by the Public Service Commission that represent the service supplier's recurring charges for exchange access facilities exclusive of all taxes, fees, licenses, or similar charges whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7.5-2. - Establishment of district. 
There is hereby established an enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system district within the corporate boundaries of Douglas County, Georgia to include all incorporated municipalities and unincorporated areas located wholly, or in part within the boundaries of Douglas County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Sec. 7.5-3. - Purpose of district. 
The purpose of the district is to plan, acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and maintain an enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system to support the district public safety agencies in the provision of emergency services and law enforcement services, resulting in the saving of life, a reduction in the destruction of property, quicker apprehension of criminals, and ultimately the saving of moneys. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Sec. 7.5-4. - Funding of district. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an emergency telephone service charge to be imposed uniformly throughout the district. The emergency telephone service charge shall be determined by the board of commissioners as follows: The amount shall be the total operating budget of the emergency telephone number 911 system divided by the total number of exchange access facilities within the district. In any event, the service charge shall not exceed the sum of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per month per exchange access facility provided to the service user. 
(b)  The service charge collected shall be utilized solely to defray the actual cost of communication equipment and communication personnel hired primarily to operate and maintain the enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system. 
(c)  (1) Every billed service user shall be liable for any service charge imposed under this section until it has been paid to the service supplier. The duty of the service supplier to collect any such service charge shall commence on the first day of August, 1990. Any such emergency telephone service charge shall be added to, and may be stated separately in, the bill by the service supplier to the service user. 
(2)  The service charge shall be collected at the same time as the tariff rate in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier; provided, however, that no such charge shall be levied or collected prior to thirty (30) days following the date the enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system becomes fully operational. 
(d)  (1) The amounts collected by the service supplier attributable to any emergency telephone service charge shall be due quarterly to the governing authority. The amount of service charge collected in one calendar quarter by the service supplier shall be remitted to the governing authority no later than sixty (60) days after the close of a calendar quarter. Said amounts shall be deposited and accounted for in a separate special revenue fund maintained by the governing authority. 
(2)  On or before the sixtieth day after the close of a calendar quarter, a return, in such form as may be mutually agreed to by the governing authority and the service supplier, shall be filed with the governing authority, together with a remittance of the amount of service charge collected payable to the governing authority. 
(3)  The service supplier shall maintain records of the amount of the service charge collected for a period of at least three (3) years from date of collection. The governing authority may, at its expense, require an annual audit of the supplier's books and records with respect to the collection and remittance of the service charge. 
(4)  The service supplier shall be entitled to retain as an administrative fee an amount equal to three (3) percent of the gross receipts to be remitted to the governing authority. 
(e)  In order to provide additional funding for the district, the governing authority may receive federal, state, municipal, or private funds which shall be expended for the purposes of this act. 
(f)  The emergency telephone service charge is not subject to state and local tax. 
(g)  The charge does not apply to exchange access facilities provided to federal, state, and local governments. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Sec. 7.5-5. - Advisory board. 
(a)  In order to assist the governing authority in implementing and managing the district, an advisory board to be known as the Douglasville-Douglas County Emergency Communications Advisory Board (hereinafter referred to as "advisory board") shall be created and comprised of eight (8) members as follows: 
(1)  A member of the board of commissioners of Douglas County, Georgia, to be named to a three-year term by such board, the initial such term to commence upon such member's appointment and terminate on December 31, 1991; 
(2)  The mayor, or a duly elected member of the city council of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, to be named to a three-year term by the mayor and approved by resolution of the city council, the initial such term to commence upon this member's appointment and approval and terminate on December 31, 1990; 
(3)  The county manager; 
(4)  The chief of the Douglas County Fire Department or a representative, who shall be a full-time, permanent employee of the Douglas County Fire Department, appointed by the chief of the Douglas County Fire Department; 
(5)  The chief of the Douglasville Police Department or a representative, who shall be a full-time, permanent employee of the Douglasville Police Department, appointed by the chief of the Douglasville Police Department; 
(6)  The sheriff of Douglas County or a representative, who shall be a full-time, permanent employee of the Douglas County Sheriff's Office, appointed by the sheriff of Douglas County; 
(7)  A private citizen who resides in Douglas County and who is elected to a two-year term by the advisory board at the last regularly scheduled meeting of each odd-numbered year and whose two-year term commences January 1 of the following even-numbered year, the first such term to commence upon the member's election and terminate on December 31, 1991; 
(8)  A private citizen who resides in the City of Douglasville and who is elected to a two-year term by the advisory board at the last regularly scheduled meeting of each even-numbered year and whose two-year term commences January 1 of the following odd-numbered year, the first such term to commence upon the member's election and terminate on December 31, 1990. 
(b)  The advisory board shall assist the governing authority in: 
(1)  Reviewing and analyzing the progress by public safety agencies in developing enhanced 911 system requirements; 
(2)  Recommending steps of action to effect the necessary coordination, regulation, and development of an enhanced 911 system; 
(3)  Identifying mutual aid agreements necessary to effect the enhanced 911 system; 
(4)  The promulgation of necessary rules, regulations, operating procedures, schedules, and other such policy and administrative devices as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; 
(5)  Providing other services as may be deemed appropriate by the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Sec. 7.5-6. - Employees. 
The governing authority shall employ such individuals as are necessary to operate the system and carry out the purposes of this chapter. Such individuals shall be the employees of the governing authority and shall be subject to the same rules and regulations and entitled to the same benefits as any other employee of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Sec. 7.5-7. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall become effective and be in force from and after the sixteenth day of January, 1990. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Sec. 7.5-8. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or if the provisions of any part of this chapter as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid, or the application of this chapter to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent of the board of commissioners that this chapter would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 1-16-90) 
Chapter 7.6 - 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE 

Sec. 7.6-1. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of seventy-five cents ($0.75). 
(Ord. of 10-18-11) 
Sec. 7.6-2. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. of 10-18-11) 
Sec. 7.6-3. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this chapter and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 465-134.2(j)(1), within ten (10) days of enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-18-11) 
Sec. 7.6-4. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this chapter shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. of 10-18-11) 
Sec. 7.6-5. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby prospectively repealed. The county reserves all rights under prior ordinances and laws existing prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-18-11) 
Chapter 7.7 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 7.7-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 7.7-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the chairman of the board of commissioners may declare an emergency for the county. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of emergency, the chairman may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of emergency shall continue until the chairman finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chairman shall execute and file with the clerk of the board of commissioners a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chairman. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Douglas Emergency Management Agency ("DEMA") director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chairman is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chairman may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: sections 7.7-5 (overcharging prohibited), 7.7-6 (registration of building and repair services, and 7.7-7 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections is included in a declaration of emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be in effect until the declaration of emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 7.7-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives, and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters. 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide welfare benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of emergency, an official "Declaration of Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, Douglas County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [ DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chairman of the Douglas County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Douglas Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Douglas County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the Douglas County Emergency Management Agency activate the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)  That the following sections of the Douglas County Code be implemented : [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 7.7-5, Overcharging; Section 7.7-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section 7.7-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews] ; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 7.7-2(a)(4)c, d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE]. 
[Signed] 
Chairman, Douglas County Board of Commissioners" 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the county's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the board of commissioners may contract with any municipality for the administration of an emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11; Ord. of 12-18-12) 
Sec. 7.7-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the chairman or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chairman or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the DEMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the sheriff's office, the DEMA director and development services. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 7.7-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by unified development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and development services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 7.7-5. - Overcharging prohibited. 
To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the unincorporated portions of the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed six months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three months. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 7.7-6. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the county development services department and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past twelve (12) months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three (3) months. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11) 
Sec. 7.7-7. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chairman until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chairman shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chairman shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the county emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (DEMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by DEMA, the director of public safety, and/or the sheriff of the county. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11) 
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE AND AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS 
ARTICLE I. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE 

Sec. 8-1. - Emergency medical service generally. 
(a)  The Emergency Medical Service for Douglas County hereinafter in this Code referred to as the "E.M.S." exists to provide emergency medical care for citizens for Douglas County, subject, however, to the limitations of the rules and regulations adopted hereinbelow. 
(b)  The E.M.S. is a division of the Douglas County Fire Department, and is under the supervision of the Douglas County Fire Chief. This emergency medical practice is also an extension of and under the direction of the medical license of the medical director of the E.M.S. service. Further direction and supervision may be extended by other E.M.S. physicians participating via direct communication with hospitals. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-2. - Regulations adopted. 
There are hereby adopted the current rules and regulations for ambulance services of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Chapter 290-05-30, and the current rules and regulations of the Composite State Board of Medical Examiners. At least one (1) copy of such rules and regulations is on file in the office of the Douglas County Fire Department. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-3. - Fees. 
(a)  The E.M.S. shall assess a charge for the care, treatment, and transportation of any person transported to or from any medical facility or office. Such charge shall be billed to and is payable by the patient served, or, if a minor or incompetent, the lawful guardian of such minor or incompetent. 
(b)  The fees for such care, treatment, and transportation shall be such as are adopted by the Douglas County Board of Commissioners. A copy of the fee schedule is on file in the office of the Douglas County Fire Department. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Secs. 8-4—8-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-10. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed. 
Advanced cardiac life support: Includes basic life support plus the use of adjunctive equipment, the establishment of an intravenous line, the administration of fluids and drugs, cardiac monitoring, defibrillation, the control of arrhythmias, and postresuscitation care. It also includes establishing the communications necessary to ensure continuing care. 
Ambulance service provider: Any person furnishing convalescent or emergency care and transportation on the streets and highways of the county for wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or incapacitated human beings to or from a place where medical or hospital care is furnished. 
Basic life support: That particular phase of emergency cardiac care that either (1) prevents circulatory or respiratory arrest (or insufficiency) through prompt recognition and intervention, or both, or (2) externally supports the circulation and respiration of a victim of cardiac or respiratory arrest through CPR. 
E.M.S.: The provision of emergency medical evaluation, management, and transport by trained and certified medical technicians in the out-of-hospital environment. E.M.S. is the practice of emergency medicine in this environment and must conform to recognized and acceptable standards. 
Emergency medical technician (E.M.T.): A professional provider of emergency care who has been certified by the Georgia Department of Human Resources after having successfully completed an emergency medical care training program approved by the department. 
Private call: Any call to an ambulance service provider initiated by any private person and not requiring involvement, investigation or follow-up by any Douglas County department or agency. 
Public call: Any call to an ambulance service provider initiated by a department or agency of Douglas County, including but not limited to such matters as calls to ambulance service providers by private persons concerning injuries related to shootings, automobile accidents and other matters which require the investigative involvement of Douglas County. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS 

Sec. 8-11. - Private ambulance service authorized. 
(a)  A private ambulance service may be granted a county business license subject to the guidelines for operation within the county, for the purpose of providing convalescent transportation to the citizens of the county. 
(b)  Each such private service shall enter into a licensing agreement on a form prepared and approved by the county. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-12. - Compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations required. 
(a)  At all times during the life of its license, the private service shall be subject to the current rules and regulations for ambulance services of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Chapter 290-05-30, and the current rules and regulations of the composite state board of medical examiners. 
(b)  The private service is also subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the federal, state, and local governments, and to such reasonable regulations as the county shall hereafter provide. 
(c)  Each private service shall be required to have and maintain a current state license as an ambulance service provider. 
(d)  A private service under this article is expressly prohibited by this article from competing with the county in the delivery of emergency medical services, except under the following conditions. 
(1)  Where such emergency services arise in the course of non-emergency medical transportation. 
(2)  Private ambulance services complying with all requirements of this chapter may provide emergency services on public calls at the request of the county. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit any licensed private ambulance service provider from responding to a private call. If the private provider receives a public call from an initiator other than the Douglas County E.M.S., then the provider shall immediately notify the dispatcher of the Douglas County E.M.S. that it is responding to the call. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-13. - Private ambulance service provider to hold county harmless; required insurance. 
(a)  A private service under this article shall pay, and by its acceptance of a business license, specifically agrees that it will pay any judgement obtained against the county and all expenses incurred by the county in defending itself with regard to all damages claimed as a result of such license. A private service shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a business license specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of such license, liability insurance insuring the county and the private service with regard to all damages mentioned above in the following amounts: 
(1)  Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person. 
(2)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident. 
(3)  Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for all other types of liability, including malpractice. 
(4)  Notwithstanding all other provisions of insurance, each such private ambulance service shall carry insurance which will provide not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of liability coverage for any single accident or occurrence, generally known as an "umbrella" coverage. 
(b)  All private ambulance services, as described herein and which are operating under these rules and regulations shall provide a certificate from a company licensed to do business in Georgia which certifies that the minimum coverages described above are in full force and effect for the protection of the public and will not be cancelled without thirty (30) days notice in writing to the fire chief of Douglas County, Georgia with a copy to the Douglas County Permit Department. Failure to provide such insurance or notice of cancellation shall cause the business license to be cancelled effective with date of cancellation of the insurance required. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-14. - Right of county to amend certain ordinances. 
The county may amend this article from time-to-time as may be deemed necessary or advisable in the public interest. Such action shall only be taken after first giving the private service thirty (30) days written notice. This section shall not be construed to affect the right of the county to revoke or terminate a business license as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-15. - Termination of a private ambulance service providers business license. 
The Douglas County Board of Commissioners may, if it finds by a preponderance of the evidence that any of the provisions of this article or state, local or federal law have been violated or that the private service failed to provide adequate medical care to the public, place a private service on probation for a stated period of time, reprimand, warn, or revoke the business license. Any combination of these sanctions may be imposed by the county commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
ARTICLE III. - QUALITY ASSURANCE 

Sec. 8-16. - Need. 
The commission has determined that quality emergency medical care must be rapidly provided to the citizens of Douglas County. Response times by an emergency medical service dispatch to any emergency call may not exceed the following criteria: 
(1)  First responder and/or basic life support services must be provided by the service within six (6) minutes from the time of dispatch of the call in ninety (90) percent of calls. 
(2)  Advanced life support services must be provided, when appropriate, within ten (10) minutes of the time of dispatch in ninety (90) percent of calls. 
(3)  Patient transport services must be provided, when appropriate, within ten (10) minutes of request by medical personnel on scene in ninety (90) percent of calls. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-17. - Authority; standards. 
The county commission had determined that all emergency medical services provided for the citizens of Douglas County fall under regular quality assurance review. These standards are addressed in the department of human resources rules and regulations. The commissioners will periodically determine that all E.M.S. services meet Douglas County and department of human resources standards on rules and regulations. 
(a)  Quality assurance standards: 
(1)  All medical record copies will be entered into computer for routine data analysis. 
(2)  Random review of all basic life support runs will be conducted to determine adherence to minimum acceptable quality standards. 
(3)  One hundred (100) percent of all advanced life support runs will be reviewed to determine adherence to minimum acceptable quality standards. 
(4)  The commissioners will determine that E.M.S. services appropriately monitor unit-hour utilization of E.M.S. 
(5)  Regular review will be conducted to ascertain that all ambulances are appropriately equipped, including meeting department of human resources standards. 
(6)  Regular review will be conducted to ascertain that all ambulances, convalescent cars, and first response vehicles meet department of human resources and department of transportation standards and all safety regulations established by the county. 
(7)  Sufficient hospital outcome data will be collected to allow review of the care given by personnel and to allow regular conduct of a morbidity or mortality review. Coroner reports may be requested for the purpose of conducting this review. 
(8)  Utilization of on-line medical control will be reviewed. Compliance with on-line medical control standards will be assured. Any required base station certification will be assured. 
(9)  Sufficient records will be reviewed to ascertain a ninety (90) percent or better compliance with acceptable documentation standards. 
(10)  Utilization of medical dispatch will be monitored to ascertain compliance with acceptable standards. 
(11)  Periodically, contact with all active emergency medical services will be made to ascertain that medical malpractice insurance and operating liability insurance is being maintained covering the agency and the individuals offering medical service. 
(12)  All active E.M.T.'s in Douglas County will meet annual department of human resources recertification standards. 
(13)  The need for retraining requirements for E.M.T.'s will be determined. 
(14)  Baseline criteria for E.M.T. hiring will be established. 
(b)  Staff support: The county commission will establish sufficient staff support to provide for the needs of monitoring emergency medical service quality. 
(c)  Committees: Such committees as are necessary to gain information in the monitoring emergency medical service quality assurance may be appointed. 
(d)  Method of review: Determinations made by the commissioners will be made directly to the involved E.M.S. The county commission may establish such hearing mechanism as is necessary to allow appropriate response by the involved agency. 
In the event of non-compliance by the involved agency, the county commission may elect to suspend the involved agency's participation in the provision of emergency medical services within Douglas County. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-18. - Levels of care. 
The county commission may establish what are the acceptable levels of E.M.S. to be offered to its citizens by way of an overall emergency response plan. This plan must include all mutual aid agreements between and among all E.M.S. providers operating in the county. This plan must be developed in concert with recommendations from all E.M.S. agencies. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-19. - Single emergency call receiving agency. 
The county commission has determined that the citizens are best served in the provision of E.M.S. by having a single central agency for the purpose of receiving public calls for help. These calls will be distributed to the agencies responsible for dispatching response vehicles and personnel. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 8-20. - Unit inspection. 
(a)  Any ambulance more than seven (7) years in age or in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) miles on the chassis must be certified by two (2) independent inspectors and the department of public safety. 
(b)  The county fire chief or his designee shall have the right to inspect the private services vehicles and equipment at any time during normal business hours without prior notice. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Sec. 8-21. - Vehicles and equipment requirements. 
(a)  Ambulances shall meet the construction requirements of the current rules and regulations for ambulance services of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Chapter 290-05-30. 
(b)  Ambulances shall carry and maintain the minimum ambulance medical equipment listed in the current rules and regulations for ambulance services of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Chapter 290-05-30. 
(c)  Ambulances shall have regularly scheduled preventive maintenance checks to insure an acceptable state of repair. 
(d)  Any ambulance, upon completion of repairs for structure damage caused by any means, shall be certified as safe by a competent motor vehicle repair inspector prior to being placed in service. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89) 
Chapter 9 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, Ch. 12; beer and wine excise taxes, § 3-34 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1—9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 9-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is as follows: 
(1)  To seek lower costs, better quality and purchase terms for acquisitions of goods and services for the county by: a. seeking standardization of purchasing procedures and processes; b. encouraging the reduction and eventual elimination of small orders and emergency purchases; c. encouraging advanced planning; d. reducing paper work through combined purchases; and e. encouraging cooperative, intergovernmental purchasing by departments. 
(2)  To assure that the greatest value is received for the tax dollar expended. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87) 
Sec. 9-21. - Purchasing department—Required; purchasing agent in charge. 
There shall be maintained at all times a purchasing department under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. The purchasing department shall be under the direction of a purchasing agent and such subordinate personnel as may be necessary to maintain and carry out the functions of the purchasing department. The purchasing agent shall be under the supervision of such official as may be designated by the board of commissioners, which official shall serve as a department head for the purchasing department. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 9-22. - Same—Bond of purchasing agent. 
During the entire length of service to the county, the county purchasing agent and such agent's subordinate personnel shall be bonded in an amount determined by the county commissioners. The bond will serve to indemnify the county for the failure of the purchasing agent or the subordinate personnel of the purchasing agent to faithfully exercise the duties assigned to them under this article. The premium for such bond shall be paid from county funds. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 9-23. - Same—Duties of purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To purchase, pursuant to the regulations herein promulgated, and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment required by any department, office, official, board, commission or other agency of the county for which payment is made from county funds, except for: a. vehicle maintenance repair parts and vehicle repair services; b. food and medical care for prisoners; c. purchases from a petty cash fund; and d. purchases for emergencies as herein provided. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  To process approved requisitions, issue purchase orders, prepare bid documents and maintain appropriate records in an efficient manner. 
(4)  To seek and obtain the lowest available prices for materials, services and supplies bought by the county. 
(5)  To maintain and keep current a file of acceptable vendors for all supplies, services, materials and equipment purchased by the county. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Ord. of 7-21-92; Amd. of 5-20-03, § 3) 
Sec. 9-24. - County purchases. 
(a)  All purchases on behalf of the county by any employee or official shall be made through the purchasing agent in the manner herein provided. It shall be a breach of duty on the part of any employee or official, of the county to make any purchase, or aid or abet the making of any purchase, in any manner other than through the purchasing agent. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the purchase of vehicle repair parts by vehicle maintenance, the purchase of food or medicine for prisoner care by the sheriff's department, purchases related to security and confidentiality issues involving law enforcement, purchases from a petty cash fund, the purchase of accident and sickness insurance for county employees or component services where this county has established a self-funded benefit plan for county employees, the purchase of property and liability insurance for the county, or emergency purchases as defined in section 9-26. Such purchases shall be authorized by the respective department heads, except for emergency purchases, which shall be made as provided herein. 
(c)  Purchases by department heads pursuant to subsection (b) above shall be monitored by the purchasing agent who shall recommend to the board of commissioners budgetary controls on such purchases based upon previous years' acquisitions. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Mo. of 10-1-96; Amd. of 5-20-03, § 2) 
Sec. 9-25. - Purchase procedures. 
(a)  No employee or official of the county shall request vendors to deliver materials, supplies, services or equipment to the county except upon a regular purchase order issued by the purchasing agent. Requisitions must be completed prior to the purchase and submitted to the purchasing agent. 
(b)  To obtain a purchase order, a requisition shall be prepared by the department desiring the supplies, materials, services or equipment and shall be written with specifications that will best serve the interests of the county. All specifications shall be definite, certain and shall permit free and open competition. The requisition must include the department name and number, a specific and detailed description of the goods or service requested, an approximate cost of the item, and the signature of the department head or designated employee. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall review the requisition, shall review the budget of the department for availability of funds in the budget of the department, shall, if proper, obtain all required approvals necessary, shall proceed with bids from approved vendors lists, if bids are required under the procedure herein established, and shall recommend the purchase from a certain vendor base on this procedure. The purchasing agent shall approve or deny requisitions for purchases utilizing both the general budget and SPLOST accounts. 
(d)  Requisitions of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less shall be reviewed and approved or denied solely by the purchasing agent. Requisitions over two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be approved or denied either by a member of the board of commissioners or the county manager/administrator. Requisitions of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be approved or denied by either a majority of the commissioners or the county manager/administrator and one or more of the commissioners. Except as otherwise required for road construction, requisitions over twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be approved or denied by a majority of the commissioners and the county manager/administrator. Requisitions over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall follow the bid procedure established in section 9-28, except as provided in subsection (e) hereof. Requisitions for professional services rendered to the county by attorneys at law, engineers, accountants, medical doctors, insurance agents and other such professional personnel shall be approved or denied by a majority of the commissioners. 
(e)  If in the opinion of the purchasing agent the material, supplies, services or equipment is available through only one (1) source or supplier, due to the unusual or unique nature of the specifications, manufacturing processing, quality, type, performance ability or suitability of the particular materials, supplies, services or equipment, then and in that event purchases in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be made by the board of commissioners with out utilizing the bid procedure established herein. The recommendation of the purchasing agent to make a purchase from a sole source supplier shall be accompanied by an opinion of the county attorney that the research of the purchasing agent confirms that the proposed purchase does satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(f)  When material, supplies, services or equipment is available for purchase through an existing contract or schedule with the state or federal government, the purchase can be made if the purchase is made pursuant to the price, terms and conditions of said contract and if the county receives all the benefits of such contract, without utilizing the bid procedures established herein. It is this county's opinion that the existing contracts and schedules have completely satisfied the bid process, therefore it is practical, and cost effective to utilize this method when possible. This applies regardless of the cost of the materials, supplies, services or equipment. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Ord. of 7-21-92; Res. of 7-15-97; Res. of 5-5-98; Amd. of 8-2-05; Ord. of 1-6-09, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-14, § 1) 
Sec. 9-26. - Emergency purchase procedures. 
(a)  Emergency purchases are defined as those purchases, irrespective of amount, made necessary by situations which could not be anticipated by the department head, usually involving life-threatening circumstances or risks of injury, or resulting in work stoppages, undue delay or occurring during nonbusiness hours when the ordinary purchase procedures cannot be followed. 
(b)  If an emergency requiring a purchase occurs during business hours and time permits, the department head shall contact the purchasing agent and obtain an emergency purchase order number. The item sought may then be acquired using that number. If time does not permit or the emergency occurs during nonbusiness hours, the department head shall make the purchase and, immediately upon the resolution of the emergency, a requisition shall be prepared stating that nature of the emergency. The requisition shall be forwarded promptly to the purchasing agent together with the purchase receipt and a memorandum from the department head setting forth the details of the emergency shall likewise be submitted. 
(c)  Any department head who is an elected official, or who is under the supervision of an elected official not the board of commissioners, shall submit to the purchasing agent the written certification of that elected official as to the emergency nature of the purchase along with the requisition. 
(d)  All emergency purchases shall be approved by the county manager/administrator. The purchasing agent shall review emergency purchases which exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) at the first meeting of the board of commissioners following such emergency purchase. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Amd. of 5-20-03, § 4; Ord. of 1-6-09, § 2) 
Sec. 9-27. - Petty cash purchases. 
(a)  Petty cash funds are relatively small amounts of cash issued to a department head for a specified purpose and to be used by the department head to make small purchases of items where it is either inefficient to handle such purchases through the purchasing system or when it is a small purchase on an emergency basis. A petty cash fund is not to be used to circumvent the purchasing procedures and shall never exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), except as authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  A petty cash fund is issued solely to a department head who must sign for the funds and is personally responsible for the entire amount at all times. Only authorized purchases are to be made with such funds and then only with a receipt. The fund at any given point in time must consist of cash and receipts totaling the original amount of the fund. It must be available for audit at all times. No money should be disbursed without an authorized receipt, which receipt may include a certification of an advance made by the official controlling the petty cash fund. The fund will be reimbursed as needed upon a requisition submitted with authorized receipts. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 9-28. - Bid procedures. 
(a)  When the purchase price of any materials, supplies, services, new or used vehicles, or equipment exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the purchasing agent may purchase the item only after notice requirements herein imposed have been met and after the board of commissioners or the purchasing agent have opened and reviewed, and the board of commissioners has awarded the bid to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(b)  A department head requesting a purchase in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall first submit a requisition to the purchasing agent for budgetary analysis and review. 
(1)  Provided that the item was approved in the county's annual budget for that fiscal year, that sufficient funds are available in the appropriate line item for the purchase, and that the county manager/administrator approves the request for bids in writing, the department head shall then prepare and submit to the purchasing agent detailed specifications for the purchase. 
(2)  If the item was not approved in the budget and/or sufficient funds are not available, then the board of commissioners must approve the request for bids in open meeting. After such approval, the department head shall prepare and submit to the purchasing agent detailed specifications for the purchase. 
(c)  Bids for public works projects shall be bid and let as provided in O.C.G.A. 36-91-1 et seq. Bids for road contracts shall be bid and let as provided in O.C.G.A. § 32-4-60 et seq. For all other bids, the purchasing agent shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Notice of the proposed purchase shall be mailed to recognized, acceptable vendors on the list maintained by the purchasing agent setting forth such details and specifications as will enable the public to know the extent and specifications characteristic of the work to be done and the terms and time of payment; 
(2)  Notice of the proposed purchase shall be posted on the bulletin board at the courthouse door setting forth the specifications of the requested purchase; 
(3)  Notice of the proposed purchase shall be advertised once in the legal organ of the county setting forth such details and specifications as will enable the public to know the extent and character of the work to be done and the terms and time of payment; and 
(4)  Detailed, complete specifications of the proposed purchase shall be available for public inspection at the office of the purchasing agent; and 
(5)  All notices required hereunder shall be mailed, posted or published a minimum of five (5) days prior to the date of the proposed bid opening. 
(d)  On the date of the bid opening, which may be in the office of the purchasing agent, at a meeting of the board of commissioners or elsewhere, the sealed bids shall be opened and read. The bids may be turned over to the appropriate department head for such department head's evaluation and recommendations, and thereafter, at a public meeting, the award of the bid shall be made by the board of commissioners. Bids shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder who meets the specifications. 
(e)  All bids submitted for goods or services sold to the county under these provisions shall be kept on file in the purchasing department. After an award has been made, the bids shall be subject to inspection at any time during normal business hours by any citizen of the county. 
(f)  Purchases shall be made only from vendors on an approved vendors list. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to declare a vendor who defaults on such vendor's quotations to be an irresponsible bidder and to disqualify such vendor from receiving any business from the county for a specific period of time. 
(g)  No department head, elected official or other employee, servant or agent of the county may divide, stagger, separate, time or otherwise structure purchases through the county so as to avoid purchases on a competitive basis. 
(h)  Bid bonds, performance bonds and/or payment bonds may be required from parties submitting bids to the county when deemed necessary by the purchasing agent. In the event that the purchasing agent determines that bid bonds, performance bonds and/or payment bonds shall be necessary, such fact shall be noted in the specifications for the acquisition in question. 
(i)  The provisions of this article are not applicable to professional services rendered by individuals or companies that provide services to the county, where particular knowledge or technical skill is required. Such services include, but are not limited to, actuarial, architectural, legal, dental, engineering, medical, insurance counseling and similar professional services. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92; Res. of 3-19-96; Mo. of 10-1-96; Res. of 7-15-97; Res. of 5-5-98; Amd. of 8-2-05; Ord. of 1-6-09, § 3) 
Sec. 9-29. - Purchasing analysis. 
The purchasing agent shall keep such agent's self informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, new products and vendors. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87) 
Sec. 9-30. - Approved vendors. 
The purchasing agent shall maintain a file of all qualified vendors who desire to do business with the county, which file shall be maintained according to the nature of goods and materials offered and shall contain a description of the vendor's goods and services. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87; Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 9-31. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other governmental units in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the county would be served thereby. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87) 
Sec. 9-32. - Processing time; planning. 
From the time a requisition is given to the purchasing agent, there shall be allowed ten (10) days for the acquisition of all goods and services, excluding emergency purchases and items for which bids must be received. During the ten-day period the purchasing agent shall solicit prices in such a manner as will, in such agent's discretion, enable free and open competition and will result in the lowest price which meets the specifications. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87) 
Sec. 9-33. - Discretion for certain purchases. 
The purchasing agent shall exercise discretion in making purchases where quality as well as price and service are factors for consideration. In circumstances in which brand name items are requisitioned by any department or official, the purchasing agent has the authority to determine whether similar products of equal quality are available to the county at a lower price. If so, such products shall be ordered in lieu of the brand name items. 
(Ord. of 12-15-87) 
Sec. 9-34. - County preference. 
Except for construction projects subject to state law, the county may allow local companies to be within a three (3) percent cost difference when evaluating competitive bids and making awards to local firms. 
(Amd. of 5-20-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-09, § 4) 
Secs. 9-35—9-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 9-40. - Definition. 
The term "mobile home" means a mobile home as such term is defined in subsection (2) of section 48-5-440, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Sec. 9-41. - Zoning regulations not affected. 
(a)  The issuance of a decal under the provisions of this article shall in no way be construed as waiving or superseding the zoning requirements for the location or relocation of mobile homes. 
(b)  The issuance of a decal under the provisions of this article shall not prohibit the county from requiring the relocation of the mobile home to a place where such mobile home is permitted by the zoning regulations. 
(c)  No person shall initially locate any mobile home or relocate any mobile home within the county without having made such application and obtained a permit for the county. 
Sec. 9-42. - Decal required. 
(a)  All persons owning a mobile home based in the county on January first of each year shall obtain from the tax commissioner a decal before May first, as provided in section 48-5-492, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. This requirement pertains to all mobile homes, including those exempt from taxation by homestead exemption or other provisions of state law. 
(b)  Such decals shall be affixed to the mobile homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
(c)  Owners of mobile homes locating in the county after January first of any year shall be required to report their mobile homes to the office of the tax commissioner within ten (10) working days. 
(d)  No person shall occupy any mobile home as a residence nor permit any other person to occupy any mobile home as a residence unless the decal is displayed as required by this article. 
(Res. of 8-19-97; Amd. of 4-20-04) 
Sec. 9-43. - Reports by mobile home park operators. 
(a)  Every owner and operator of a mobile home park is required to give the tax commissioner an inventory of all mobile homes based in the park as of October first of each year. This shall be done no later than October fifteenth of each year. The tax commissioner will make available an inventory of records as of October first. 
(b)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park is required to report any mobile home removal from the park prior to said home being removed, if known to the park manager, operator or owner. 
(c)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park shall furnish to the tax commissioner an updated lot map of each park, and any changes shall be reported by January first of each year. 
(d)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park is required to notify the county of any change of ownership or of name of any mobile home park within thirty (30) days of such change. 
(Res. of 8-19-97) 
Sec. 9-44. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall do any act prohibited hereby or shall fail to do any act required hereby shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per violation. 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire hydrants in subdivisions, App. B, § 85. 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-10-27—16-10-29. 

Sec. 10-1. - Fire department—Created; duties. 
There is hereby created the county fire department. The fire department shall employ personnel and maintain equipment at county expense, for the suppression of fires, for fire prevention through inspection and public education, for emergency medical service and for investigation of fire causes. 
Sec. 10-2. - Same—Fire chief; inspectors; employees. 
(a)  Fire chief. There is hereby created the office of fire chief, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners for an indefinite period until such officer is removed or until such officer's successor is appointed. Except as otherwise specifically provided by the board of commissioners or as specifically otherwise required by law, the fire chief shall be in charge of the fire department and shall be responsible for the operation of that department. The chief shall administer the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Employees. The fire chief shall employ such employees as are required for the operation of the fire department. The procedure for the hiring and employment of such personnel shall be that set forth in Article II of Chapter 13 of this Code. 
(c)  Inspectors. The chief of the fire department may designate employees of the fire department as inspectors who shall check for violations of this chapter and any other county code requirements dealing with fire and life safety. 
(d)  Investigators. The chief of the fire department may designate employees of the fire department as investigators who shall be responsible for fire cause and determination. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-3. - Same—Calls for service outside of the county. 
In addition to its duties hereinabove noted, the fire department will provide a "first alarm' response to any property located adjacent to and outside of the county when requested by the property owner, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The majority of the land owned by the property owner requesting the response is located in this county. 
(2)  In advance of any emergency the board of commissioners in the adjacent county has agreed that the fire department may provide this service to its citizens. 
(3)  In advance of any emergency the property owner has requested in writing that the fire department provide this service to such owner. 
Sec. 10-4. - Same—Authority to cut electric wires. 
While engaged in the suppression of a fire in order to protect human life, the chief of the fire department or the chief's designated agent is authorized to terminate any electrical service considered necessary for reasons of safety, without expense to the county. 
Sec. 10-5. - Standard fire safety rules and regulations. 
The State Minimum Fire Safety Standards Chapter 120-3-3, as adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq. and O.C.G.A § 8-2-200 et seq., as said rules and regulations now exist, and as they shall be lawfully amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by the county. Future amendments to and changes in said standards as reflected in future amendments to or changes in said rules and regulations are hereby adopted and shall become effective in the county upon promulgation without the necessity of further action on the part of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-6. - Automatic sprinkler systems. 
(a)  Buildings of any type construction or occupancy greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the current State of Georgia adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 13 as modified, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. A sprinkler control valve and water flow device shall be provided for each floor. This is not to restrict the fire chief or his designee, from requiring the installation of a water-based fire protection system and/or smoke detection system if, in the opinion of the fire chief or his designee, and for the public interest, the health and welfare of the firefighters, and the protection of human life, such a system would serve to benefit all parties that may be affected by the type of construction, hazard of content, limited access to the structure, and for other purposes. 
(b)  Buildings of two or more stories in height shall be protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system as specified in subsection (a) above. These types of facilities and structures shall include commercial, multifamily dwellings, motels, hotels, and townhouses. 
(c)  All hotels, motels, dormitories, apartments, lodgings, townhouses, rooming houses, daycare facilities with more than six (6) clients as defined by NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, and all residential board and care facilities shall be protected by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the current state adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 13 or 13R as modified, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and including three (3) stories in height. Based on the type of construction and the tenant's ability to evacuate, the fire chief or his designee shall reserve the right to designate which system is best suited in each situation. Residential sprinklers shall be provided within dwelling units, apartments, and guest rooms. 
(d)  Existing buildings, when required to have automatic sprinkler protection by subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, shall be retrofitted for automatic sprinklers as required by the fire chief or his designee in accordance with NFPA 13 or 13R, when the cost of renovation exceeds fifty (50) percent of the latest tax approved assessed value of the building. These buildings shall be required to upgrade in the renovation to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances as applicable to required fire protection and life safety systems. The owner is responsible for having the system inspected and tested in accordance with the current state adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 25 as modified, Standard for the Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protection Systems. 
(e)  Where required, post indicator valves (PIV) and fire department connections (FDC) shall be located at or near the main entry to the site but no closer than one and one-half (1½) times the height of the building or as approved by the fire chief or his designee. Appropriate signage shall be provided to designate FDC connections. 
(f)  All water-based fire protection systems shall be provided with electronically supervised monitoring and shall be installed in accordance with the current state adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 72 as modified, National Fire Alarm Code. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-6.1. - Residential sprinkler systems. 
Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all newly constructed multi-family dwellings and duplex dwellings in accordance with the current state adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 13 or 13R as modified, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and including three (3) stories in height, regardless of the type of construction or square feet. In addition, automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all new single-family, regardless of the type of construction, whenever side yard setbacks are less than ten (10) linear feet; said systems shall be installed in accordance with the current state adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 13D as modified, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes. "New," for the purpose of this section, shall include any addition to existing buildings, whether vertical or horizontal, or any existing building or structure which shall be deemed to be new in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation or a fire or other hazard of serious consequence. For the purpose of this section, the term "substantial renovation" shall mean any construction project involving exits or internal-external features of such building or structure costing more than or equal to fifty (50) percent of the building's or structure's gross assessed value according to county tax records at the time of such renovation, repair, remodeling, or replacement thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-7. - Automatic sprinkler systems not to be disabled. 
No person shall shut off or disable any automatic fire sprinkler system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, a sprinkler system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval of the fire chief or his designee and E-911. 
A fire watch may be required during the time the water-based fire protection system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire chief or his designee, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-8. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of this chapter shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties, the county may bring an action to enjoin any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  A person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. Any party designated by the fire chief is authorized to issue citations and summons for violations and to serve same upon the proper persons. 
Sec. 10-9. - Burning of certain materials prohibited. 
No material or substance which emits noxious or poisonous gases such as nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen cyanide or chlorine or other poisonous gases that will not readily dissipate in the atmosphere may be burned within the county. 
Sec. 10-10. - Open burning. 
(a)  In general. Except as hereinafter provided in subsection (b) no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the persons responsible for same upon notice by the fire chief or the chief's duly designated agent. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Between October 1 and April 30 open burning of leaves on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises shall require a burning permit issued by the fire department. 
(2)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops shall require a burning permit issued by the fire department. 
(3)  Between October 1 and April 30 the "prescribed burning" of any land by the owners or the owner's designee shall require a burning permit issued by the fire department. Prescribed burning of land is subject to authorization by the state forestry commission. 
(4)  For recreation purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption. Recreational burning shall not exceed an area of three (3) feet in diameter without the prior approval of the fire department. Recreational burning approved by the fire department in excess of three (3) feet in diameter shall require a burning permit issued by the fire department. 
(5)  Fires set for purposes of training fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the fire chief or the chief's duly designated agent. 
(6)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment. 
(7)  Disposal of all packing materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations, shall require a burning permit issued by the fire department. 
(8)  Between October 1 and April 30 open burning of vegetative material for the purpose of land clearing using an air curtain destructor provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Authorization for such open burning is approved by and a burning permit has been issued by the fire department. 
b.  The location of the air curtain destructor is at least three hundred (300) feet from any occupied structure or public road. Air curtain destructors used solely for utility line clearing or road clearing may be located at a lesser distance upon approval of the fire department. 
c.  No more than one (1) air curtain destructor is operated within a ten (10) acre area at one (1) time or there must be at least one thousand (1,000) feet between any two (2) air curtain destructors. 
d.  Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps which are relatively free of soil are burned in the air curtain destructor. 
e.  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic based or impregnated materials are not used to start or maintain the operation of the air curtain destructor. 
f.  The air curtain destructor is constructed, installed and operated in a manner consistent with good air pollution control practice for minimizing emissions of fly ash and smoke. 
g.  The cleaning out of the air curtain destructor pit is performed in a manner to prevent fugitive dust: and 
h.  The air curtain destructor cannot be fired before 10:00 a.m. and the fire must be completely extinguished, using water or by covering with dirt, at least one (1) hour before sunset. 
(c)  Open burning on premises heretofore described shall require a person in charge of such open burning to be physically present, with an effective means of controlling the fire immediately available. No fire shall be started or allowed to burn nearer than thirty (30) feet from a property line or any structure. All such open burning shall be attended until the last embers of the fire have been extinguished; provided further that all such burning will be in conformity with state air quality control rules and regulations chapter 391-3-1. 
(d)  Open burning, whenever feasible, shall be conducted between 10:00 a.m. and one hour before sunset. 
(e)  Burning permits shall not be issued when the winds are greater than ten (10) miles per hour or during dry weather conditions. At such times all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be permitted. 
(f)  Burning permits may be cancelled at any time without advance notice due to changes in wind speed and weather conditions. 
(g)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Prescribed burning" means the controlled application of fire to existing vegetative fuels under specified environmental conditions and following appropriate precautionary measures, which causes the fire to be confined to a predetermined area and accomplishes one (1) or more planned land management objectives as specified in paragraphs 12-6-146(3), (4), and (7) of the Georgia Prescribed Burning Act or to mitigate catastrophic wildfires. Burning to facilitate land use changes (such as a change from forest land to residential, commercial, or industrial development or a different agricultural use) is not considered prescribed burning, and should therefore be considered a land clearing operation subject to the provisions of subparagraph 391-3-1-.02(5)(a)11. (Note: This definition includes what was previously defined as prescribed burning and as slash burning.) 
(2)  "Recreational burning" means the burning of materials other than rubbish where fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit and with a total fuel area of three (3) feet or less in diameter and two (2) feet (610 mm) or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-2-89; Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-11. - Obstructing fire hydrants or fire lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building materials or in any other manner whatsoever within fifteen (15) feet of any cistern or fire hydrant which would obstruct approaches to the same by any member of the fire department. No person shall put any post or installation of any nature whatsoever within eighteen (18) inches of any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the governing body. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with any vehicle or other object any designated fire lane. 
Sec. 10-12. - Persons allowed in vicinity of fire. 
No person except firefighters, members of the governing body of the county or representatives of any law enforcement agencies shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire actively under suppression without being ordered there by the fire chief or the officer in charge at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief or other person in the fire department in charge of a fire shall be guilty of violating this Code. 
Sec. 10-13. - Following fire apparatus. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or park such vehicle within four hundred (400) feet of any parked emergency vehicle at the scene of an alarm. 
Sec. 10-14. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid on any street, roadway or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
Sec. 10-15. - Obstructing fire house exitway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully or knowingly to park any vehicle or place any obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any place where fire department equipment is located. 
Sec. 10-16. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violation of the law or when responding to, but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges as set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this section; 
(2)  Proceed past a traffic light or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the speed limits specified as long as such driver does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as such driver does not endanger life or property. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when a driver of, and said vehicle while in motion, sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of such driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
Sec. 10-17. - Accessibility of buildings for fire-fighting equipment. 
(a)  Reasonable accessibility shall be provided to and around all buildings for firefighting equipment, including ladder trucks on multiple-story projects. Accessibility shall be approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  Accessibility for firefighter's equipment shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. 
(c)  Minimum widths of access roads, excluding parking, shall be twenty (20) feet. Minimum turning radius shall be thirty-two (32) feet. All access roads and fire lanes shall be capable of supporting the loads of fire apparatus and shall have a minimum of thirteen (13) feet, six (6) inches of vertical clearance. 
(d)  All access roads in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire apparatus. 
(e)  Gates securing fire apparatus access shall be provided with an automatic gate-opening device if the gates are controlled by electronic means. An approved siren operated sensor shall activate the gate-opening device. 
(f)  Gates securing fire apparatus access shall be a minimum fourteen (14) feet in clear width for divided lanes and twenty (20) feet for a single lane. Gate shall be swing or sliding type. Fire access lanes shall be straight and have no turns for fifty (50) feet on both sides of security gate. 
(g)  Additional fire apparatus access may be required based on the fire chief or his designee's opinion. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-17.1. - Aerial fire apparatus access road. 
(a)  Buildings or portions of buildings or facilities exceeding thirty (30) feet in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with approved fire apparatus roads capable of accommodating fire department aerial apparatus. Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located within the aerial fire apparatus access roadway. 
(b)  Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of twenty six (26) feet in the immediate vicinity of any building or portion of building more than thirty (30) feet in height. 
(c)  At least one (1) of the required access roads meeting this condition shall be located within a minimum of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum of thirty (30) feet from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one (1) entire side of the building. 
(d)  Commercial and industrial buildings exceeding thirty (30) feet or three (3) stories in height shall have at least three (3) means of fire apparatus access for each structure. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-18. - Fire hydrant installation—Prior to construction. 
(a)  Water mains and fire hydrants, when required by the county, shall be installed, or shall be under water pressure and ready for firefighting before any sheeting may be installed on walls and roofs of buildings other than fire-resistant construction. 
(b)  All fire hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority and the fire chief or his designee. Fire department connections shall not be less than eighteen (18) inches or more than forty-eight (48) inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. The fire department connection shall be two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter and one (1) four and one-half (4½) inches in diameter . Fire hydrants shall be painted silver in color. 
(c)  Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the current state adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 24 as modified, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances, and shall have not less than six-inch connections with the mains. The number, size and arrangement of the outlets, the size of the main valve opening and the size of the barrel shall be suitable for protection to be provided and shall be approved by the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority and the fire Chief or his designee. Fire hydrants shall be placed no closer than fifty (50) feet from the nearest building to be protected. Where it is impossible to place them at this distance, they may be put closer to the building provided they are set in locations where the chance of injury by falling walls is minimal and where firefighters are not likely to be driven by smoke or heat and must be approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
(d)  The size and shape of the operation nut, as well as the direction the hydrant stem operates, shall be uniform with hydrants in the county water distribution system's specifications. 
(e)  A three-way fire hydrant shall be located within fifty (50) feet of a fire department connection or standpipe connection. Fire hydrant shall be on the same side of the street as the fire department connection or standpipe connection. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-19. - Standard for minimum size water mains and spacing of fire hydrants for all new construction. 
(a)  In single-family residential subdivisions if an adequate water supply is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subdivision, the subdivder shall install or have installed a system of water mains and connections to each lot, which shall be in accordance with the adopted standards of the water and sewer authority. Said water mains shall be at least eight-inch ductile iron pipe and be installed to provide a minimum water flow of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per minute. Fire hydrants shall be located every five hundred (500) feet and/or at every intersection, whichever is closer. Three-way fire hydrants shall be used. 
(b)  In multifamily residential subdivisions or multifamily apartment complexes, industrial or commercial areas, to include motels, hotels, nursing homes, hospitals, education buildings, all office buildings and churches, at least eight-inch ductile iron pipe water mains shall be installed to provide a minimum water flow of one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute. Larger mains and flows may be required by the fire chief or his designee. Fire hydrants shall be three-way hydrants and shall be spaced not to exceed four hundred (400) feet with additional hydrants located as necessary to permit all portions of buildings and combustible storage to be reached by hose lays of not more than four hundred (400) feet. Fire hydrant locations shall be approved by the fire chief or his designee to allow firefighting equipment to be placed within fifteen (15) feet of said hydrants. 
(c)  In mobile home parks, fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed four hundred (400) feet with a minimum of an eight-inch ductile iron water main, which shall be installed to provide a water flow of at least seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per minute. 
(d)  Prior to any preliminary subdivision plat being submitted to the planning commission, the chief of the fire department or his designee shall review and approve the spacing of the fire hydrants, main size and water flows. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-20. - Private fire mains and hydrants. 
(a)  Water mains on private property for fire protection purposes shall be designed and installed in accordance with local regulations that apply to public mains. Size of mains and water flows shall be adequate for the protection of the property served by said mains. No water pipe smaller than a standard eight (8) inch in diameter shall be used to supply more than one (1) hydrant or one (1) hydrant on dead-end mains over five hundred (500) feet. Hydrants shall meet local governing specifications and be located as required by the Fire Chief or his designee. 
(b)  Prior to installation, two (2) sets of hydraulically engineered detailed plans, bearing a Georgia registered engineers seal or Georgia licensed sprinkler contractor's seal, shall be submitted to the fire department for approval. Before covering any installation, the fire chief or his designee will perform an inspection to assure compliance with local governing authority requirements. 
(c)  Hydrants shall be tested annually to ensure proper functioning. These tests shall include the actual measurement of static and residual pressures, and flow from hydrants. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-21. - Malfunctioning fire alarms, fee therefor. 
(a)  Recognizing that there are excessive costs incurred when the fire department responds to a false alarm and recognizing further that numerous false alarms are initiated by malfunctioning alarm systems, the fire department is authorized to assess a fee for false alarms which result in unnecessary responses by fire equipment as follows: 
(1)  The third false alarm in any calendar month and subsequent false alarms occurring on the same day as the third false alarm—$50.00 each such false alarm. 
(2)  Subsequent false alarms up to and including five (5) in the calendar month—$75.00 each such false alarm. 
(3)  Each subsequent alarm in excess of five (5) in the calendar month—$100.00. 
(b)  No fee shall be assessed for false alarms caused by storms, power losses, or malfunctioning of telephone lines provided that the occupant/owner shall act responsibly and promptly to correct the malfunction or shall notify the fire department of the false nature of the alarm in time to prevent the equipment from responding. The burden of establishing the fact of such malfunction or act of God rests upon the occupant/owner of the subject property. 
(c)  The fees set forth herein shall be assessed against the occupant of the facility from which the false alarm originates. The penalty for failure to remit the fine imposed by the fire department within thirty (30) days of its imposition shall be as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Res. of 5-21-91) 
Sec. 10-22. - Fire alarm systems. 
(a)  Fire alarm systems installed in commercial buildings shall be supervised at all times. Fire alarm systems shall be installed in accordance with the current state adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 72 as modified, National Fire Alarm Code. 
(b)  No person shall shut off or disable any fire alarm system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, an alarm system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire chief or his designee and E-911. 
(c)  A fire watch may be required during the time the fire alarm system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire officials, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-23. - Stop work orders. 
Upon written notice from the fire chief or his designee, work on any project that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this article and the codes adopted therein, being done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or without obtaining a building permit that has been approved by the fire chief or his designee and issued by the chief building official or his designee shall cease immediately. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, his agent, or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 10-24. - Certificate of occupancy. 
No building shall be occupied and no change of occupancy of a building or portions of a building shall be occupied unless a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy has been approved by the fire chief or his designee and issued by the chief building official or his designee. 
(Ord. of 8-18-09) 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency medical services vehicles, Ch. 8; convalescent carriers, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference— Adoption of rules and regulations of state department of human resources, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Intermediate care homes and nursing homes; adoption of rules. 
The rules and regulations on intermediate care homes and nursing homes of the state department of human resources are adopted. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations is on file at the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 11-22-77, § 20-400) 
State Law reference— Health care facilities, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-2. - Food service; adoption of board of health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for food service as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the board of health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the board of health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-22-77, § 20-500; Ord. of 11-16-99, § 3) 
State Law reference— Food standards, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-3. - Tourist accommodations; adoption of county board of health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for tourist accommodations as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the board of health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the board of health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-22-77, § 20-600(2); Ord. of 11-16-99, § 5) 
State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-4. - X-ray; rules adopted. 
The rules and regulations on X-ray of the state department of human resources are adopted. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations is on file at the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 11-22-77, § 20-800) 
Sec. 11-5. - Ambulances; rules adopted. 
The rules and regulations on ambulances of the state department of human resources are adopted. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations is on file at the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 11-22-77, § 20-900) 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-111 et seq. 
Sec. 11-6. - Mosquito control and other measures on impounded waters. 
The rules and regulations on mosquito control and other measures on impounded water of the state department of human resources are adopted. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations is on file at the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 11-22-77, § 20-1000) 
Sec. 11-7. - Swimming pools; adoption of county board of health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for swimming pools as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the board of health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the board of health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-26-77(1), §§ 20-300, 20-301; Ord. of 11-16-99, § 4) 
Cross reference— Swimming pool code, § 6-90. 
Sec. 11-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of January 18, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former § 11-8 in its entirety. Former § 11-8 pertained to smoking in county facilities, and derived from an ordinance of May 16, 1989. 
Sec. 11-9. - Trailer parks; adoption of board of health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for trailer parks as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the board of health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the board of health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 2) 
Sec. 11-10. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the building official, code enforcement officer and or the board of health code enforcement officers as necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 6) 
Sec. 11-11. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 6) 
Sec. 11-12. - Civil remedies. 
In the event a violation of this article is committed, or proposed to be committed, the county, the state or any property owner who would be damaged by such violation, may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct or abate such violation or threatened violation. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 6) 
Secs. 11-13—11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Burning of certain materials, §§ 10-9, 10-10; adoption of state air quality control rules and regulations, § 10-5. 

Sec. 11-20. - Odors, gases and vapors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any emission of odors, gases or vapors beyond the boundaries of such person's property of sufficient quantities, characteristics or duration as to endanger the public welfare or the health of any human, animal or plant, or to interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable per se: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture; 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining; 
(3)  Blood processing; 
(4)  Bag cleaning; 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture; 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture; 
(7)  Manure compost heaps; 
(8)  Crematory; 
(9)  Creosote treatment; 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture; 
(11)  Distillation of bones, coal or wood; 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture; 
(13)  Fat rendering; 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding; 
(15)  Glue or gelatine manufacture; 
(16)  Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal or refuse; 
(17)  Solid rubber or leather goods manufacture; 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture; 
(19)  Rubber or gutta percha manufacture; 
(20)  Sauerkraut manufacture; 
(21)  Shoe-blackening manufacture; 
(22)  Soap manufacture; 
(23)  Stockyards; 
(24)  Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture; 
(25)  Tanning, curing or storage of hides and skins; 
(26)  Tar distillation or manufacture; 
(27)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; 
(28)  Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77(1), § 36-101) 
Sec. 11-21. - Asphalt mixing plants. 
All plant mix type asphalt mixing plants operating within the county shall be equipped with a bag house type dry collector of sufficient size and efficiency to limit emissions to four-hundredths grains per standard cubic foot. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77(1), § 36-102) 
Sec. 11-22. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-23. - Adoption of state rules and regulations. 
As provided in section 10-5 all rules and regulations for air quality control now or hereafter promulgated by the state are adopted. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77(1), § 36-104) 
State Law reference— Air pollution control, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-24. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the building official and such officers of the fire department and sheriff's department as are necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77(1), § 36-105) 
Sec. 11-25. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-20-83(1), § 36-106) 
Sec. 11-26. - Civil remedies. 
(a)  In the event a violation of this article is committed, or proposed to be committed, the county, or any adjacent neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct or abate such violation or threatened violation. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77(1), § 36-107) 
Secs. 11-27—11-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT RULES OF COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Sewage disposal systems in subdivisions, App. B, § 82. 
State Law reference— Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; authority and powers of county board of health, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-4, 31-3-5, 31-3-6. 

Sec. 11-30. - Adoption of board of health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the board of health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the board of health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 1) 
Sec. 11-31. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the building official, code enforcement officer and or the board of health code enforcement officers as necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 1) 
Sec. 11-32. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 1) 
Sec. 11-33. - Civil remedies. 
In the event a violation of this article is committed, or proposed to be committed, the county, the state or any property owner who would be damaged by such violation, may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct or abate such violation or threatened violation. 
(Ord. of 11-16-99, § 1) 
Secs. 11-34—11-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 1, 2007 amended the Code by repealing former art. IV, §§ 11-60—11-68, and adding a new art. IV, §§ 11-60—11-67. Former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of July 5, 1983; April 2, 1985; September 19, 2000; and June 15, 2004. 

Sec. 11-60. - Declaration of intent. 
The board of commissioners finds property not in compliance with applicable codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements is a nuisance and constitutes a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the people and natural environment of this state. Such properties are an endangerment to the public health or safety to those persons residing or working in the vicinity as a result of the unsanitary or unsafe conditions. Public necessity exists for cleaning and removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated that create a health or safety hazard on such properties. It is the intention of the county to provide for uniform prohibition throughout the county of all littering on public or private property and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the county and harm to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens caused by individuals who litter. It is the further purpose and intent of this article that the procedures established hereunder shall comply with the minimum provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-61. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Applicable codes means property maintenance or building standards or codes as adopted now or hereafter by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property. "Applicable codes" includes, but is not limited to the standards, prohibitions and provisions contained in this article. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle that cannot be moved by its own power or does not have an updated license plate. 
Litter includes, but is not limited to, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, dead trees, weeds, junk vehicles, junk vehicle parts and discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Owner means both the current owner of record and any current mortgagee holding legal title by virtue of a security instrument as shown by a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia. 
Property means any lot, tract or parcel of real estate whether improved or unimproved. "Property" includes the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof, any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area, any residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests; provided, however, for purposes of section 11-67, it shall not include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Public authority means any member of the board of commissioners, any housing authority officer or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning properties in the county. 
Public officer means the director of development services or his or her designee or the planning and zoning director or his or her designee. 
Repair means altering or improving a property so as to bring any dwelling, building, or structure into compliance with the applicable codes and/or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated that create unsanitary and unsafe conditions that are an endangerment to the public health or safety in or about any property. 
Resident means any person residing in the unincorporated county on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-62. - Duties of property owners, managers, residents, tenants and agents. 
(a)  Duties of property owners. It is the duty of the owner, manager, resident, tenant or agent of every property located within the unincorporated county: 
(1)  To construct and maintain such property in conformance with applicable codes in force within unincorporated the county or such ordinances that regulate and prohibit activities on property and that declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any property in violation of such codes or ordinances; and 
(2)  To keep such property reasonably clean and free of any materials or conditions that create a health or safety hazard either on such property or to surrounding persons or properties. 
(b)  Property appearance. It is the duty of the owner, manager, resident, tenant or agent of property to keep the property free from litter. Specific examples are: 
(1)  Sidewalks, driveways, yards and parking areas must be kept clean. 
(2)  Garbage container areas must be maintained in a clean condition. 
(3)  Construction sites must be kept clean. 
(c)  Litter receptacle requirements. It is the duty of the following establishments to provide adequate litter receptacles for the use of their customers, employees and visitors: 
(1)  Shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, fast food restaurants, service stations, commercial establishments, garages, schools and churches. 
(2)  Work areas and institutions that have loading and unloading operations and where packing and repacking are done. 
(3)  Contractors at construction projects for disposal of residue and employee lunch/coffee break discards. 
(d)  Duties of operators of vehicles. It shall be the duty of an operator of a motor vehicle to prevent litter from leaving the vehicle while being driven or moved about on public roads. 
(1)  All vehicles driven or moved about the unincorporated county must be so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter contained therein from being blown or deposited upon any road, street, alley or other public place. 
(2)  The loaded portion of any truck or vehicle entering or exiting any solid waste disposal facility or site owned or operated by the county must be covered by canvas or other material providing complete coverage, properly secured, so as to prevent any load, contents or litter from becoming loose, detached or blown from the vehicle, or from dropping or escaping from the vehicle during the movement thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-63. - Unlawful practices. 
The following practices are prohibited and in violation of this article. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, discard, scatter or allow to remain litter or materials of any kind on any public or private property in the county, including but not limited to streets, roads, sidewalks, parks, recreation areas, yards, driveways, parking lots, dumpster areas, etc. unless: 
a.  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
b.  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried and deposited by the elements upon any public or private property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to abandon any motor vehicle in the county. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to allow trash to fall from moving trucks. Loose loads must be covered by a tarpaulin or other device. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any private or county-owned or operated disposal facility, disposal site or processing operation to cause, suffer, allow or permit scavenging at such site. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any business, contractor or commercial establishment to dump any material from its place of business into any county-operated transfer station dumpster. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump household garbage into any dumpster located at any school, park, fire station or another person's place of business. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely or recklessly obstruct any highway, street, sidewalk or other public passage in such a way as to render it impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard and fail or refuse to remove the obstruction. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-64. - Prima facie evidence—Rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Whenever any litter is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings that display the name of a person thereon is such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-65. - Property placed on the right-of-way following eviction. 
Any personal property placed on the right-of-way following an eviction shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of physical eviction unless an extension of time is requested on behalf of the evicted tenant. For purposes of this section, such property is deemed abandoned property two (2) hours following eviction unless the landlord by contract specifies a shorter time. If the property is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours, the county may commence removal and cite the property owner. The penalty assessed shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost the county incurs in removing the property. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-66. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Every violation of the terms of this article by any person, firm or corporation shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued. Such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by this article and the laws of this state. 
(b)  Every violation of the terms of this article may be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than that prescribed in section 1-8 and/or sentenced to perform not more than forty (40) hours of community service. The guilty party shall pay all court costs as determined by the court. 
(c)  Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(d)  This article may be enforced by the public officer, zoning enforcement officer, sheriffs department, fire department, health department, building official, building inspector, landfill manager and weight master. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-67. - Nuisance abatement. 
Whenever a violation of this article exists on property in the unincorporated county that constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety, the county may abate the nuisance in conformance with this code section. 
(1)  Appointment and designation of public officer. The director of development services and the planning and zoning director are hereby appointed and designated as a public officer with the authority to carry out the powers and duties of this chapter. Such appointment and designation shall include the designees of such persons. 
(2)  Complaint. Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the unincorporated area of the county charging that any property constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer with whom the request is filed shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific property to determine if such conditions exist under applicable codes. 
(3)  Investigation. The public officer shall have the authority to enter upon property to conduct an inspection, provided such entry is made with the least possible inconvenience to the person(s) in possession. If such an inspection is necessary, the public officer shall endeavor to obtain the permission of the owner to conduct such inspection. If permission is withheld, the public officer may seek the assistance of the county attorney's office to obtain an inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  Determination by public officer that property is endangerment to the public health or safety. If the public officer finds that the property is in violation of the applicable codes and subject to this code section, then he or she shall make a determination that the property is an endangerment to the public health or safety. In making this determination, the public officer may consider the conditions on the property such as (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
a.  The property is dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the residents or to the occupants of the neighborhood or other residents of the county; 
b.  The property constitutes a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the people of this state; and/or 
c.  The property is an endangerment to the public health or safety of those persons residing or working in the vicinity as a result of the unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
(5)  Judicial complaint. If the public officer's investigation or inspection confirms that any property meets one or more of the three enumerated standards from subsection (d), the public officer may file a complaint in rem in magistrate court against the lot, tract or parcel of real property wherein the nuisance complained of exists. The complaint shall contain the following: 
a.  Identification of the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
b.  Identification of the interested parties, as defined in Code section 11-61(2); 
c.  A statement with particularity of the factual basis for the action; and 
d.  A statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(6)  Summons. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain in accordance with subsection (i). 
(7)  Service of complaint and summons. The public officer shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties. Copies of the complaint and summons shall be served in each of the following ways, as applicable: 
a.  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. For an interested party whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
b.  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any. 
c.  A copy of the complaint shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(8)  Lis pendens. A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(9)  Time of hearing. The hearing shall be held no sooner than fifteen (15) days and no later than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in magistrate court. 
(10)  Right to be heard. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(11)  Order. If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the property in question meets one (1) or more of the standards enumerated in subsection (d) so as to constitute a public nuisance, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing in the same manner as subsection (g) an order which does one (1) of the following: 
a.  Litter removal order. If the complaint requires only debris removal and no repairs to structures, then the order shall require the following: 
1.  That the owner, within a specified time, remove all litter, debris and other materials so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation. 
2.  That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to bring the property into compliance within the specified time, the public officer may cause the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated that create unsanitary and unsafe conditions that are an endangerment to the public health or safety in or about any property. 
3.  That the amount of all costs associated with any abatement action by the county shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
b.  Litter removal and repair order. If the complaint includes a dwelling, building or structure requiring repair and such repair can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to its present value, then the order shall require the following: 
1.  That the owner, within a specified time, shall make such repair and remove all litter, debris and other materials so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation. 
2.  That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to bring the property into compliance within the specified time, the public officer may cause the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated that create unsanitary and unsafe conditions that are an endangerment to the public health or safety in or about any property. 
3.  That the amount of all costs associated with any abatement action by the county shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
If the repairs to structures on the property cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value thereof, then the order shall require only that the debris and litter be removed and contain the same requirements as subsection (k)(1) above. 
For purposes of this subsection, in cases in which the nuisance complained of is a dwelling, building, or structure of any kind, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations. 
Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint and summons shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(12)  Appellate procedure. Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a property shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(13)  Remedies of public officer in the event of noncompliance with order. If the order entered under subsection (k) provides that, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, demolish, or close the property within the specified time, the public officer may cause such property to be repaired, demolished, or closed, then such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer is also authorized to file a motion for attachment for contempt against the owner with the court that issued the order as an alternate or additional remedy. 
(14)  Salvage. Reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the clean up and removal of debris. Proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. Neither the public officer nor the county shall have any liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(15)  Lien for costs. The order shall provide that the amount of all costs associated with the abatement action shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such costs shall include but not be limited to the cost of demolition, reasonable attorneys' fees and all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, restoration to grade of the real property should it be demolished and title examination costs. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition, in the office of the clerk of superior court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (h). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien for costs of abatement on the general execution docket. Such lien should cross-reference the order and include the original caption and case number from the nuisance abatement action. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid in full. 
(16)  Enforcement of lien. 
a.  Upon a final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer shall transmit to the tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 that requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the general fund of the county. 
b.  Enforcement of liens may be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax commissioner of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
c.  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined with interest, penalties and costs incurred by the county and the tax commissioner in the enforcement of the lien. Redemption of the property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(17)  Waiver of lien. The board of commissioners may waive and release any such lien imposed on property of the owner for costs incurred by the county up to the time of the entry of the order and any additional costs incurred subsequent thereto in attempting to bring the property into compliance by entering into a contract with the owner in which the owner agrees to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property and demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(18)  Alternate remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit or impair the authority of public officers or other county employees under existing and future ordinances to issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and to seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this code section. The issuance of a citation for a violation of any such codes shall not be required as a prerequisite to issuing a complaint in rem under this section. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11-68. - Time limit for containers at streetside. 
The owner, manager, resident, tenant or user of approved rubbish containers shall place such container at curb for pick-up no earlier than the night before pick-up and shall remove container from curb area no later than the same day as pick-up. 
(Ord. of 4-7-09) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of April 7, 2009, amended the Code by adding a new § 11-67.1. The provisions have been redesignated as § 11-68 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 11-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 11-70. - Policy. 
It is the public policy of the county to prevent excessive sound which may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of its citizens, degrade the quality of human life, or constitute a nuisance. 
Sec. 11-71. - Definitions. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article is as set forth in this section. 
General: All definitions in all applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) (S1.1-1976, Acoustical Terminology) or its successor body. 
A-weighted sound level (dBA): The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is designated "dBA." 
Construction: Any site, preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or of public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Daytime: That period of time covering the hours of 7:00 a.m. (0700) to 10:00 p.m. (2200). 
dBA: See "A-weighted sound level." 
Decibel (db): A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals (twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter). 
Emergency: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Impulsive sound: Any sound of short duration, usually less than one (1) second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay, e.g., explosions, blasting and discharge of firearms. 
Land use categories: For the purpose of this article the land use categories shown on Table 1 as "residential," "commercial" and "industrial" shall have their ordinary and customary meaning provided further that the Residential classifications shall include the following classification from the county zoning ordinance: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8, PUD (for all residential uses) and OS. The commercial classifications shall include the following classification from the county zoning ordinance: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, OD and PUD (for all commercial uses). The industrial classifications shall include the following classification from the county zoning ordinance: M1, M1R, M1-SR, M2 and AH (for all industrial uses). 
Level L(1): That noise (A-weighted sound level) exceeded one (1) percent of a measurement time equivalent to at least thirty (30) minutes. 
Level L(10): That noise (A-weighted sound level) exceeded ten (10) percent of a measurement time equivalent to at least thirty (30) minutes. 
Level L(50): That noise (A-weighted sound level) exceeded fifty (50) percent of a measurement time equivalent to at least thirty (30) minutes. 
Motor vehicles: All self-propelled vehicles as defined in the Georgia Motor Vehicle Code, specifically including but not limited to mini-bikes, recreational vehicles, trail bikes and go-carts. 
Nighttime: That period of time covering the hours from 10:00 p.m. (2200) to 7:00 a.m. (0700). 
Noise: Any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or endangers or damages real or personal property. 
Off-road vehicle: Any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrains and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. The term includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel-drive or low-pressure-tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles (including trail bikes and mini-bikes), amphibious machines, ground effect or air-cushion vehicles and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind. The term does not include any motor-boards; any military, fire or law enforcement vehicle; any vehicles used exclusively for airports; any farm machinery, farm tractors and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planning, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction or mining; or any self-propelled lawnmower, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors or golf carts while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
Private property: Any property owned by any private individual, business or corporation or any private utility corporation. 
Public property: Any property owned by the federal or state government, including any of their political subdivisions or agencies or any public utility company. 
Real property boundary. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one (1) person from that owned by another, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
Receiving land use category: That parcel of real property onto which noise travels or is received from any source on another parcel of real property. 
Sound: An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that me dium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including, but not limited to duration, intensity and frequency. 
(Ord. of 3-3-09) 
Sec. 11-72. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or excessive noise within the county. 
(Ord. of 5-2-17, § 1) 
Sec. 11-73. - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted herein, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which violates the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table 1 for the receiving land use category (zoning classification) as measured at any point along the real property boundary separating the real property from which the sound emanates from the receiving land use category. 
(c)  Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighting scale in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) for a Type 2 or better sound level instrument and with the measurement period being a minimum of thirty (30) minutes continuous duration. 
(d)  Impulsive sounds as herein defined shall be permitted provided such impulsive sounds do not create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table 1 for the receiving land use category as measured at the real property boundary when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use category from which the sound emanates. 
Sec. 11-74. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the sound level limits of Table 1: 
(1)  Domestic power tools, chain saws, lawn mowers, blowers, agricultural equipment and other domestic power-operated equipment when operated with a properly functioning muffler meeting manufacturer's standards, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency. 
(3)  Noises made by persons having obtained a parade, concert or construction permit from the county. 
(4)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon. 
(5)  Aircraft-related noises associated with aircraft while in flight and while under the jurisdiction of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Department of Defense. 
Sec. 11-75. - Specific prohibitions. 
In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle or any street or public place in the county continuously and/or incessantly for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds, except as a danger warning. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, loudspeakers, musical instruments and similar amplified devices. The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public rights-of-way or across a residential or commercial property line in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device. "Plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources mentioned here which can be heard from across a property line. For music and other noise emanating from the sound-producing sources mentioned here, words and phrases need not be discernable, bass reverberations are included. 
(3)  Street sales. The offering for sale by shouting or outcry within any residential, commercial or noise-sensitive area except by permit issued by the county. 
(4)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  Except in case of an emergency, the intentional sounding of any alarm between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
b.  The testing of any alarm for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds at any time. 
c.  The testing of a complete emergency signaling system, including the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, more than once in each calendar month, and the sounding of said emergency signaling system for a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes. 
(5)  Garbage collection shall not take place in any subdivision which has been approved by the county board of commissioners and duly recorded in the office of the county clerk of superior except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
a.  If any two (2) citizens of the county, not residing in the same household, shall sign and file with the magistrate court an affidavit stating that garbage collection has taken place in violation of this section, identifying the individual or company alleged to have violated the section including the time and date such violation allegedly occurred, the individual or owner shall be summoned into the magistrate court to answer the charge made by the affidavits and show cause why said individual or company should not be found in violation of this section. 
1.  After such an affidavit is filed in the magistrate court, the court shall notify county code enforcement. A code enforcement officer or other agent of the county authorized by the county governing authority will personally serve a summons to appear in magistrate court upon the individual, owner or registered agent of the company. 
2.  The summons shall state the offense alleged, the name of the accused individual or company, the time and place of the trial, the date of the offense, the date of service; shall bear an identifying number by which it is filed with the court and be signed by the county agent who completed and served it. 
b.  The owner of any company found by the court to be in violation of this section may be punished in accordance with section 1-8 of the county code of ordinances. 
(Ord. of 1-22-02; Ord. of 5-2-17, § 2) 
Sec. 11-76. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  Maximum sound levels. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle at any time on a public or private road in such a manner as to exceed the sound level limits for the category of motor vehicle shown in Table 2. The sound level shall be measured at a distance of at least fifty (50) feet from the centerline of the path of the vehicle being monitored and at a height of at least four (4) feet above the immediately surrounding surface. This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle. 
(b)  Adequate mufflers or sound-dissipative devices. 
(1)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public or private road which is not equipped with a muffler in proper working order and in constant operation. 
(2)  No person shall remove or render inoperative or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative any muffler or sound-dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement. 
(3)  The provisions of the subsections of this section apply to moving motor vehicles. Those motor vehicles operating in a stationary position or condition are governed by the provisions of section 11-73 and the levels specified in Table 1. 
Sec. 11-77. - All terrain vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road vehicle: 
(1)  Without operative brakes; 
(2)  Without operative mufflers or other silencing equipment; 
(3)  In such a manner as to make, continue to make or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than fifty (50) feet from the point of origin of such sound or noise; 
(4)  On any private property or public property without the owner of the property being present or without the express written permission of the owner; 
(5)  Upon any roadway, street, avenue, highway, public thruway and/or right-of-way of any street of highway of the state or county, including those rights-of-way regulated by the Georgia Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(b)  (1)  Any violation of this section shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 11-80. 
(2)  Each action or activity committed in violation of this section is deemed a separate offense. 
(3)  In addition to the above penalties, any violation of this section is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance, and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceedings by law in the appropriate court. 
(4)  Any off-road vehicle found to be operated in violation of this section, may at the discretion of the deputy marshal, deputy sheriff, or other duly authorized law enforcement office, be impounded at the vehicle owner's/operator's expense. 
(Ord. of 3-3-09, § 2; Ord. of 5-2-17, § 3) 
Sec. 11-78. - Special temporary permits. 
(a)  Any person desiring temporary relief from any provision of this article may apply for a special permit to cause or create a noise at sound levels which would otherwise be in violation of this article. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the business license office on forms provided for that purpose. The business license office shall conduct an investigation and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners concerning such permit. In this connection, the business license office may require the applicant for the special permit to submit reports and documents showing noise levels customarily generated by such activity, proposed means for regulating or controlling such sounds, and other such information and data as may be deemed appropriate by the building official. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany the application. 
(b)  The special permit herein provided may be granted to the applicant by the board of commissioners for a period of up to fifteen (15) days following a review of the report and information compiled by the building official and upon a showing of either of the following: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the sound-producing activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The activity operation or noise source shall be of a temporary duration, and repetitive and continuous, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(3)  No reasonable economic or technological alternative, as determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, is currently available to the applicant. 
(c)  Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which said permit shall have been granted, including but not limited to the effective date of the permit, the time of day when the noise-producing activities may be conducted by the applicant, the location in which said activities may be conducted, the duration of the permit, any sound level limits imposed by the permit, and any equipment limitations that may be imposed. 
(d)  Any special permit granted hereunder may be extended upon new application made for additional fifteen-day intervals by the board of commissioners provided good cause is shown. 
(Ord. of 3-3-09, § 3) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of an ordinance of March 3, 2009 renumbered former § 11-77 as a new § 11-78. 
Sec. 11-79. - Enforcement responsibility. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complaint brought by a citizen or property owner or upon their own motion following independent investigation of possible infractions of this article, the zoning enforcement officer and all county law enforcement personnel shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The expenses of sound level testing performed by the county in checking the sound levels produced by a particular land use or activity may, at the discretion of the county, be assessed against the producer of such sound or against the complaining party if the complaint is found to be wholly frivolous and without merit. 
(Ord. of 3-3-09, § 3) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of an ordinance of March 3, 2009 renumbered former § 11-78 as a new § 11-79. 
Sec. 11-80. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article may be assessed a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both, as provided in O.C.G.A. section 36-1-20(b). 
(b)  Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the county as provided by law or ordinance. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as new and separate offenses. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties and provisions for injunctive relief provided in this section, the business license of any person or entity operating under a county business license may be suspended or revoked by reason of the violation of this article. Such suspension or revocation may be initiated by the zoning enforcement officer, the chief building official of the county, or any other designated representative of the board of commissioners. The procedure for the suspension or revocation of the business license of such licensee shall be those procedures provided in the county business license chapter dealing with suspension or revocation of licenses. 
(Ord. of 3-3-09, § 3) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of an ordinance of March 3, 2009 renumbered former § 11-79 as a new § 11-80. 
Sec. 11-81. - Cooperation of all departments. 
All departments and agencies of the county shall, to the fullest extent consistent with their authority, carry out their programs in such a manner as to further the policy of this article. 
APPLICABLE NOISE LIMITS  TABLE 1 
Measurement period is one-half hour (continuous), as measured at the property boundary of the receiving parcel. 

 
ALTERNATIVE NOISE LIMITS  FOR SATURDAYS 
(1000-2200 hours-through December 31, 1987)  (1200-1800 hours-after December 31, 1987) 

 
TABLE 2 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles of a type subject to registration by the motor vehicle laws of the state of Georgia at any time or under any conditions of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicle within the speed limits specified below: 

 
(Ord. of 3-3-09, § 3) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of an ordinance of March 3, 2009 renumbered former § 11-80 as a new § 11-81. 
Secs. 11-82—11-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 11-90. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The board of commissioners hereby declares that it shall promote the health, safety and public welfare of the citizens of the county by adopting this solid waste ordinance which is consistent with the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management for local enforcement. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1) 
Sec. 11-91. - Definitions. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article is as set forth in this section. 
Auto salvage yard means any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise. 
Collector means the person or persons as defined herein who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid wastes, from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings, provided however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single family dwelling unit. 
Composting means the control of biological decomposition of yard trimmings into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Director means the director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
DNR means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value or, in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
EPD means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
Garbage means food waste including waste accumulations of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Generator means any person in Georgia or in any other state who creates solid waste. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. 
Household waste means any solid waste (including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks) derived from households (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas). 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor, or disposer approved by the Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
Materials recovery facility means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of "used", "retreadable casings", and "scrap tires". 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, and includes, but is not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Open burning means the combustion of solid waste without: 
(1)  Control of combustion air to maintain adequate temperature for efficient combustion; 
(2)  Containment of the combustion reaction in an enclosed device to provide sufficient residence time and mixing for complete combustion; and 
(3)  Control of the emission of the combustion products. 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one (1) or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment, except for those items allowed under the definition of composting. 
Operator means the person stationed on the site who is in responsible charge of and has direct supervision of daily field operations of a municipal solid waste disposal facility to ensure that the facility operates in compliance with the permit. 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
Recycling means any generally accepted process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. Retail tire dealers may also be, but are not limited to, manufacturers, wholesalers, and others who sell new replacement tires to the ultimate consumer. 
Retreadable casings means a tire which has the quality and soundness of the tire structure to accept a retread or repair and provide additional service and is destined for retreading. 
Scavenge means the unpermitted removal of solid waste from a solid waste handling facility. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in this article for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings, and other elements). Processing incudes, but is not limited to, shredding, baling, recycling, or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carrier for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plan, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Solid waste handling permit means written authorization granted to a person by the director to engage in solid waste handling. 
Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle and which is neither attached to the motor vehicle nor a part of the motor vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: 
(1)  An individual consumer; 
(2)  A leasing company purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; 
(3)  A private company purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; or 
(4)  A governmental agency purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of two thirty-seconds ( 2/32 ) inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the EPD that a market exists, and that the used tires are, in fact, being marketed. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, greenhouse nursery vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1) 
Sec. 11-92. - General. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided below, this article shall apply to all persons presently engaged in solid waste handling as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(b)  Exemptions. This article shall not apply to any individual, corporation, partnership, or cooperative disposing of livestock feeding facility waste from facilities with a total capacity of up to one thousand (1,000) cattle or five thousand (5,000) swine. Provided that if such individual, corporation, partnership, or cooperative shall provide an approved waste disposal system which is capable of properly disposing of the run-off from a "ten-year storm" such individual, corporation, partnership or cooperative shall be further exempt regardless of total per head capacity. Nothing in this article shall limit the rights of any person to use poultry or other animal manure for fertilizer. 
(c)  Prohibited acts: 
(1)  Burning: No solid waste may be burned at a solid waste handling facility, except by thermal treatment technology facility approved by the EPD. 
(2)  Scavenging: 
a.  No person owning or operating a solid waste handling facility shall cause, suffer, allow or permit scavenging at such site. 
b.  No person shall scavenge at any solid waste handling facility. 
(3)  Open dump: No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property, except for composting, as defined by this article, is allowed. 
(4)  No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will be: 
a.  Conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of at large animals; 
b.  Impair the air quality; 
c.  Impair the quality of the ground or surface waters; 
d.  Impair the quality of the environment; 
e.  Or likely create other hazards to the public health, safety, or well-being. 
(5)  Any generator who disposes of a prohibited waste shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(6)  Any person who knows he is accepting, or should know he is accepting, a prohibited waste for disposal shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(7)  No individual, business, contractor, commercial or industrial establishment may dispose any material from its place of business into any dumpster owned or operated by Douglas County. 
(8)  No individual, business, contractor, commercial, or industrial establishment may dispose any material into any dumpster located at any school, park, fire station, or another person's place of business. 
(d)  The owner or occupant of any premises, residence, office, business establishment, institution, industry, or similar facilities shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at the premises, residence, office, business establishment, institution, or similar facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with this article unless arrangements have been made for such service with a collector operating in compliance with this article. 
(1)  Collection operations. 
a.  Vehicle construction. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible wastes, or mixtures containing such wastes, shall be covered, substantially leakproof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. 
b.  Vehicle maintenance. Solid waste collection and transportation vehicles shall be cleaned frequently and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(2)  Littering and spillage. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such manner that the contents will not fall, leak or spill therefrom and shall be covered to prevent blowing of material from the vehicle. 
(3)  Cleaning waters. All wastewater from cleaning of vehicles must be handled in a manner which meets all applicable environmental laws and regulations. 
(e)  Prohibited wastes disposal. 
(1)  The following solid wastes are specifically prohibited from disposal at the Douglas County landfill and transfer station(s): 
a.  Hazardous waste; 
b.  Radioactive waste; 
c.  Liquid waste; and 
d.  Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) waste as defined in 40 CFR, Part 761. 
(2)  The following solid wastes are specifically prohibited from disposal at the Cedar Mountain landfill and transfer station(s) except when deemed for recycling: 
a.  Lead acid batteries; 
b.  Tires; 
c.  Freon-loaded goods; and 
d.  Yard trimmings. 
(f)  Solid waste disposal. All collected solid waste must be deposited only in a permitted solid waste handling facility authorized to receive the applicable waste types. 
(g)  Local solid waste only. Municipal solid waste may not be transported from a jurisdiction to a municipal solid waste disposal facility located in another county unless the jurisdiction generating the waste is actively involved in and has a strategy for meeting the state-wide goal of waste reduction by July 1, 1996. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1) 
Sec. 11-93. - Commencing or ceasing collection, transportation, processing, and disposal operations. 
All collection operations, transfer station operations, inert waste landfill operations, waste processing and thermal treatment operations, and wastewater treatment and pretreatment plant sludge disposal operations, or any other operations required to have a solid waste handling permit by DNR must have provided a copy of their permit-by-rule letter to the Douglas County solid waste manager within thirty (30) days. At least seven (7) days before ceasing solid waste handling activities which are covered under the DNR permit-by-rule, notification must be made of the proposed cessation to the Douglas County solid waste manager. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1) 
Sec. 11-94. - Scrap tire management. (DNR EPD Rule § 391-3-4-.19) 
(a)  Scrap tire storage. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (a)(2), no person may store more than one hundred (100) scrap tires anywhere in the unincorporated area of Douglas County. Any persons storing in excess of one hundred (100) scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(2)  Paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall not apply to: 
a.  A solid waste disposal site permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
b.  A retail tire dealer who stores not more than two thousand (2,000) scrap tires in a shipping container and not more than one thousand (1,000) scrap tires in storage, provided such a retail tire dealer complies with EPD Rule 391-3-4.19(3); 
c.  A tire retreader with not more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type the retreader is actively retreading; 
d.  An auto salvage yard with not more than five hundred (500) scrap tires in storage; and 
e.  A scrap tire processor approved by the EPD so long as the number of scrap tires in storage does not exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(b)  Staging and/or processing scrap tires. 
(1)  All scrap tire processing or disposal facilities which stage scrap tires or processed tires outdoors must comply with the following standards. 
a.  An outdoor scrap tire pile or processed tire pile will have no greater than the following maximum dimensions: 
Width:  50 feet 
Area:  10,000 square feet; and 
Height:  15 feet 
b.  A fifty-foot wide fire lane must be placed around the perimeter of each scrap tire pile and must have uninhibited access from a public road. Access to the fire lane for emergency vehicles must be unobstructed at all times. In the event of fire, the owner or operator shall, upon receipt of notification of a fire, immediately take all necessary steps to control and extinguish the fire, including all oil and other residue created by the fire. 
(2)  The owner or operator will control mosquitoes and rodents. 
(3)  Processors staging scrap tire indoors or outdoors must meet the following standards. 
a.  No operations involving the use of open flames will be conducted within twenty-five (25) feet of scrap tire pile. 
b.  A fifty-foot wide approach and access road to the scrap tire processing facility must be kept passable for any motor vehicle at all times. 
c.  The facility must be secured from public access during non-operating hours by the use of fences, gates, or other means. 
d.  An attendant must be present when the scrap tire processing is open for business if the facility receives tires from persons other than the operator of the facility. 
e.  The facility must be bermed or given other adequate protection to keep liquid runoff from a potential tire fire from entering the waters of the state. 
f.  Prior to origination of operation, fire protection services for the facility must be assured by notifying the Douglas County fire department. A fire safety survey must be conducted. 
g.  Communication equipment must be maintained in proper working order at the scrap tire processing facility to assure that the facility operator can contact local fire protection authorities in case of fire. 
h.  The scrap tire processing facility must be kept free of long grass, underbrush and other potentially flammable vegetation at all times. 
i.  The operator of the facility must prepare and keep at the facility an emergency preparedness manual. The manual must be updated at least once annually or within thirty (30) days upon changes in operations at the site. The manual must contain the following elements: 
1.  A list of names and numbers of persons to be contacted in the event of a fire, flood or other emergency; 
2.  A list of the emergency response equipment at the facility, its location, and how it should be used in the event of a fire or other emergency; and 
3.  A description of the procedures that should be followed in the event of a fire, including procedures to contain and dispose of the oily material generated by the combustion of large numbers of tires. 
(4)  Any residuals from scrap tire processing must be managed so as to be contained on-site and must be controlled and disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility or be properly recycled. 
(5)  A scrap tire processing facility may not accept any scrap tires for processing if it has reached its approved or permitted staging limit. At least seventy-five (75) percent of both the scrap and processed tires that are accumulated by the scrap tire processing facility each calendar quarter and seventy-five (75) percent by weight or volume of all scrap tires previously received and not recycled, reused or properly disposed during the preceding calendar quarter must be processed and removed from the facility for disposal or recycling during the quarter or disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility. 
(c)  Reuse and recycling of scrap tires. 
(1)  All scrap tires or processed scrap tires must be used, reused or recycled in accordance with this article. 
(2)  For purposes of this article, the following criteria will be used to determine if scrap tires are being used, reused or recycled: 
a.  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires have a known use, reuse, or recycling potential; 
b.  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires have been feasibly used, reused, or recycled; 
c.  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing; and 
d.  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires must either: 
1.  Be employed as an ingredient (including use as an intermediate) in a process to make a product (for example, utilizing crumb rubber to make rubber-asphalt); 
2.  Employed in a particular function or application as an effective substitute for a commercial product (for example, utilizing shredded tires as a substitute for fuel oil, natural gas, coal, or wood in a boiler or industrial furnace) as long as such substitution does not pose a threat to human health or the environment, and so long as the facility is not a solid waste thermal treatment technology facility or utilizing shredded tires as a soil amendment, aggregate, etc.; or 
3.  Reused for its original intended purpose as a used tire or reused for other purposes approved by the EPD, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, erosion control, etc. 
(3)  Scrap tires or processed scrap tires may not be "accumulated speculatively." Scrap tires or processed scrap tires are not "accumulated speculatively" if: 
a.  There is a known use, reuse, or recycling potential for them as shown by: 
1.  Proof of a known market or disposition of the scrap tires or processed scrap tires; and 
2.  By proof that the necessary equipment is available prior to receiving the scrap tires for processing. 
b.  They can be feasibly sold, used, reused, or recycled; and 
c.  During the preceding ninety (90) days, the amount of scrap tires or processed tires recycled, sold, used, or reused equals at least seventy-five (75) percent by weight or volume of the tires received during the ninety-day period. Proof of recycling, sale, use, or reuse shall be provided in the form of bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the scrap tires in question to a recognized recycling facility or for proper use or reuse from the accumulation point. 
(4)  A scrap tire is "sold" if the generator of the scrap tire or the person who processed the scrap tire received consideration or compensation for the material because of its inherent value. 
(d)  Scrap tire generators. 
(1)  Any person who generates scrap tires shall have a scrap tire generator identification number (ID#) issued by the environmental protection division. The ID number shall be used on scrap tire shipment manifests. Separate ID numbers shall be required for generators having multiple generation locations. 
(2)  Generators shall initiate a manifest to transport scrap tires from the point of generation to an end user of to a scrap tire processing or disposal facility approved by the environmental protection division. The manifest shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and ID# of the generator; 
b.  Number of total tons (accurate to within ten (10) percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
c.  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
d.  Date of transport; and 
e.  Destination of scrap tires. 
(3)  If a generator chooses to use tons of tires rather than actual numbers of tires on the manifest for passenger and truck tires, the following conversion factor must be used: 
Passenger: 2000 lbs. (one ton)=100 tires, at 20 lbs./tire. 
Truck tires: 2000 lbs. (one ton)=20 tires, at 100 lbs./tire. 
(4)  Unless otherwise approved in writing by the environmental protection division, generators shall assure that any person collecting and transporting their scrap tires hold a valid scrap tire carrier permit issued by the environmental protection division, provided, however, that a person who generates less than 100 tires per month and who transport only their own scrap tires to approved end users, processors, recyclers, or disposers are not required to have a scrap tire carrier permit, but must comply with all other provisions required of generators and scrap tire carriers. 
(5)  Generators shall maintain receipts (copies of completed manifests) for a period of three (3) years. 
(6)  A generator shall report to the environmental protection division any carrier who fails to return a properly completed manifest to the generator within 30 days of scrap tire pickup as provided for in paragraph (5) of this subsection. Such report shall be filed within thirty (30) days of failure of the carrier to comply. 
(7)  Generators may choose to determine whether a tire, because of wear, damage, or defect, is not suitable for classification as a "used tire," or "retreadable casing" as defined in this article. However, if a generator fails to sort or delineate which tires are "used," retreadable casings" or "scrap tires," then all tires transported shall be considered scrap tiers and must be thusly indicated on the shipment manifest. 
(e)  Scrap tires carriers. 
(1)  Unless otherwise exempted, any person collecting or transporting scrap tires shall have a scrap tire carrier permit issued by the environmental protection division. No permit shall be issued unless the financial assurance, as provided for in the rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management, paragraph (e)(4), has been submitted to the environmental protection division. 
(2)  A separate permit and financial assurance instrument shall be required for each scrap tire carrier business location. 
(3)  A carrier shall transport scrap tires, properly manifested, only to an end user, recycler, processor, sorter or disposer approved or permitted by the environmental protection division. 
(4)  The permitted carrier shall maintain financial assurance in the form of a performance bond or letter of credit, using forms provided by the environmental protection division, according to the following criteria: 
a.  Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for carriers transporting up to five hundred (500) scrap tires per month. 
b.  Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for carriers transporting more than 500 scrap tires per month. 
(5)  The permitted carrier shall report quarterly to the division the number of scrap tires transported and the manner of their disposition. Reports shall be filed by the first day of May, August, October, and February, covering the reporting period for the preceding quarter. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the carrier to return a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generator, no later than thirty (30) days from the date on which the carrier took possession of the scrap tires, which shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(7)  The following persons shall not be required to have a scrap tire carrier permit: 
a.  Generators who transport scrap tires only between their own branch office locations; 
b.  Persons carrying only used tires or retreadable casings; 
c.  A tire retailer or tire retreader transporting tires to or from a customer's place of operation or between branch offices of the tire retailer or tire retreader; 
d.  A municipal solid waste collector holding a valid solid waste collection permit under authority of this part whose primary business is the collection of municipal solid waste; 
e.  A private individual transporting the individual's own scrap tires to a processor, permitted disposal facility, or other facility approved by the division; 
f.  A company transporting the company's own tires to a processor or for proper disposal, which company is not in the tire handling business; for example, a soft drink bottler who transports scrap tires generated by bottler's own vehicle maintenance shop, or a company in the tire handling business who transports only their own scrap tires and which company generates less than one hundred (100) scrap tires per month. 
1.  For the purpose of this paragraph, "tire handling business" means persons whose income is at least partially derived from the sale, processing, transporting or disposal of tires. 
2.  Persons who generate less than one hundred (100) scrap tires per month and are exempt from having a carrier permit under this section are still required to comply with other applicable provisions of this article, except that the generator shall not be required to report quarterly as provided in paragraph (e)(5) of this ordinance. 
g.  Other persons, as approved by the environmental protection division, on a one-time or temporary basis, as needed to further the intent of the O.C.G.A. 12-8-20, et seq., that scrap tires be reused or recycled rather than disposed. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1; Res. of 5-20-97) 
Sec. 11-95. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the county's enforcement personnel, including the scrap tire officer and all county enforcement personnel who have such powers as are reasonably necessary to enforce and give effect to this article. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1) 
Sec. 11-96. - Violation. 
Any person violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and such violation shall be adjudicated as provided by in section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1) 
Sec. 11-97. - Enactment. 
This article shall take effect July 1, 1996, except for sections 11-94 through 11-96, which shall take effect upon this article's adoption [January 16, 1996]. 
(Res. of 1-16-96, § 1) 
Secs. 11-98, 11-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRODUCTS USED IN THE PREPARATION OF METHAMPHETAMINE 

Sec. 11-100. - Definitions. 
Product used in the preparation of methamphetamine: Any compound, mixture, preparation or drug product containing a dosage of eighteen (18) milligrams or more of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts, isomers or salts of isomers, alone or in a mixture. 
(Ord. of 10-19-04; Amd. of 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11-101. - Display of products prohibited. 
Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be openly displayed for sale in the unincorporated area of the county, but must be maintained behind the counter, maintained in a locked cabinet or maintained in a location from which it may be distributed for sale only by the pharmacist, pharmacy technician, sales clerk or other retail distributor employee. 
(Ord. of 10-19-04; Amd. of 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11-102. - Requirements for purchase of products. 
Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be dispensed, sold or distributed in the unincorporated area of the county without requiring the individual purchasing, receiving or otherwise acquiring such compound, mixture, preparation or drug product to produce a photo identification showing his or her date of birth and sign a written log or receipt showing his or her signature and printed name, the date of the transaction, the type and amount of product purchased. 
The log or receipt must be maintained by the retailer or other person dispensing, selling or distributing the drug used in preparation of methamphetamine for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 10-19-04; Amd. of 12-7-04) 
Sec. 11-103. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor punished in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 et seq. and 36-1-20 and County Code section 1-8. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the county sheriff's office. 
(c)  This article shall be become effective on January 1, 2005. 
(Ord. of 10-19-04) 
Sec. 11-104. - Validity and severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 10-19-04) 
Secs. 11-105—11-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 

Sec. 11-111. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Douglas County Clean Indoor Air Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-112. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners do hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Second-hand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the county board of commissioners finds and declares that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in certain indoor public places and in certain public and private places of employment; and 
(2)  To balance the need of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air with the desire of smokers to enjoy tobacco products in public places. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-113. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Bar" means an indoor area where alcoholic beverages are poured and served. 
(b)  "Children's daycare facility" means as a structure where care and supervision of children is provided, away from their place of residence, for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For purposes of this article, the term shall include, but not be limited to, nursery schools, early learning centers, pre-kindergartens, private kindergartens, play schools, pre-schools and tutoring services. 
(c)  "Designated bar area within a restaurant" means an area that has signage specifically informing patrons that smoking is allowed in the area; and the area shall include the bar itself and the immediately adjacent bar service area and shall not include the common areas of the enclosed restaurant. 
(d)  "Dining area" means the interior patron portion of a restaurant, containing a counter or tables, upon which food is served. 
(e)  "Employer" means any person who employs the services of an individual person. 
(f)  "Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
(g)  "Establishment" means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term includes, but is not limited to, the indoor building space of the following: 
(1)  Automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; 
(2)  Grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores that sell goods or merchandise; 
(3)  Service stations, stores or shops for the repair of maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items, or products; 
(4)  Barber shops, beauty shops, cleaners, Laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; 
(5)  Video arcades, pool halls, and other amusement centers; 
(6)  Offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, or architectural services; 
(7)  Banks savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; 
(8)  Restaurants and cafeterias; 
(9)  For hotels, motels and extended-stay residences rented for fourteen (14) days or less, all indoor areas except guest rooms for sleeping and the adjoining suite areas; and 
(10)  Health care facilities, intermediate care facilities, and personal care homes. 
(h)  "Health care facility" means any licensed general or specialized hospital institutional infirmary, public health center or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1 as amended. 
(i)  "Intermediate care (nursing) home" means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
(j)  "Personal care home' means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, non-related persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities that require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities that monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include old age residences that are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities that do not provide personal care. 
(k)  "Place of employment" means any enclosed area of a building under the control of a public or private employer that employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A motor vehicle is not a place of employment. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. 
(l)  "Private residence" means a privately-owned place of permanent residence. The term includes leased apartments and boarding houses, but does not include motel or hotel rooms, or extended stay residences for rent or lease for periods less than 14 days. The term does not include health care facilities, intermediate care facilities, or personal care homes. 
(m)  "Public place" means any enclosed area within a building or an establishment to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, elevators, indoor service lines, the building interior of service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, indoor theaters, meeting rooms, repair shops, indoor automobile dealerships, convention halls, bowling facilities, polling places, and indoor bingo parlors. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall not be considered public places. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a children's daycare facility, an adult daycare facility or a healthcare facility. 
(n)  "Restaurant" means an indoor eating and/or drinking establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, private clubs, sandwich shops, and private school cafeterias that give or offer for sale food or drink to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as restaurants under this article. 
(o)  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed or plant in any manner or in any form. 
(p)  "Veterans organization" means any organization or association chartered by the Congress of the United States which is exempt from federal income taxes but only if such organization is a post or organization of past or present members of the armed forces of the United States organized in the state with at least seventy-five (75) percent of the members of which are past or present members of the armed forces of the United States, and where no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-114. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places, and places of employment within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-115. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to county property. 
This article shall apply to, and smoking is prohibited in, all enclosed facilities including buildings and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the county. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-116. - Exceptions. 
The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  A designated bar area in a restaurant; 
(2)  A retail tobacco store; 
(3)  Any guest room for sleeping and the adjoining suite areas of any hotels, motels and extended-stay residences rented for 14 days or less; 
(4)  Any private residence, including a private residence that may serve as an office workplace (except if used as a children's daycare facility); 
(5)  Any property owned, operated or leased by another municipality, any county government, any authority, the state, or the federal government; 
(6)  Any outdoor area of any place of employment; and 
(7)  Any veterans organization. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-117. - Employers' responsibility. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees in public places and places of employment. 
(b)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-118. - Posting of signs and notification. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it), shall be clearly and conspicuously posted inside every building where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at the exterior of the main entrance door a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited, or that smoking is permitted only in designated areas. 
(c)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for an occupation tax certificate in unincorporated the county. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-119. - Interpretation and enforcement. 
(a)  The director of development services or his or her designee shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions or any other portion of this article. Interpretations of the director or his or her designee may be appealed to the board of commissioners by written request filed with the county clerk within thirty (30) days of any such interpretation. 
(b)  Any person smoking in violation of this article shall be subject to citation. 
(c)  The director of development services, his or her designee, building official, code enforcement officer or sheriff's deputy may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(d)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the county code enforcement. 
(e)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons therein witnessed to be smoking in violation of this article of the appropriate provisions, and shall request compliance. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-120. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for a second violation of this article within one (1) year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional violation of this article within one (1) year. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-121. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
Sec. 11-122. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 1-18-05) 
ARTICLE IX. - BODY ART 

Sec. 11-123. - Body art procedures; adoption of county board of health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for body art procedures as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the county board of health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the county board of health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-18-12) 
ARTICLE X. - HAND WATERING WITH GRAY WATER 

Sec. 11-124. - Hand watering with gray water; adoption of county board of health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for hand watering with gray water as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the county board of health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the county board of health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-18-12) 
Sec. 11-125. - Portable sanitation contractors procedures; adoption of Douglas County Board of Health rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for portable sanitation contractors procedures as adopted and as may be amended now or hereafter by the Douglas County Board of Health are hereby adopted by the board of commissioners. A copy of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be maintained at the Douglas County Board of Health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-21-16) 
Chapter 12 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Permits for animal establishment, § 5-60; license for passenger-carrying vehicles, § 15-3 et seq.; license for beer and wine sales, § 3-21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted November 7, 1995, amended the Code by repealing Art. I, §§ 12-1—12-21, and adding a new Art. I, §§ 12-1—12-40. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the editor has redesignated said new §§ 12-30—12-40 as §§ 12-29.1—12-29.10. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of November 19, 1982(1). 

Sec. 12-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the unincorporated area of Douglas County. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Douglas County, Georgia, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in Douglas County, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Douglas County, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the director of the occupational tax office or the directors duly authorized representative of said Douglas County, Georgia, upon request. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term county is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of Douglas County, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  a.  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
1.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
2.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
3.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
4.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
5.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
1.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
2.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
3.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
4.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
5.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
6.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the states. 
(3)  Location of office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
(4)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
(7)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization. 
(8)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(9)  Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-3. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00) shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses, as applicable subparagraph (c). A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee and is nonrefundable. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is set forth as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles for hire, $35.00 per registered operator. 
(2)  Private ambulance, $50.00 per provider. 
(3)  Dealers in precious metals, $35.00 per applicant. 
(4)  Pawnbrokers, $50.00 per applicant. 
(5)  Massage therapists, $50.00 per applicant who was engaged in massage therapy practice prior to July 1, 2005 and is not currently licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. 
(6)  Fortunetellers, $50.00 per applicant. 
(7)  Flea markets, $50.00 per location 
(8)  Amusement centers, $100.00 per location. 
(9)  Door-to-door solicitors, $25.00 per salesperson. 
(10)  Peddler, $35.00 per location. 
(11)  Adult entertainment, $5,000.00 per location. 
(12)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, roofers, siding, security and fire alarm installers, and workers; permits fees shall be as provided in a schedule adopted by the board of commissioners and on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. of 3-18-08, § 1) 
Sec. 12-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with offices in the unincorporated area of the county and/or no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  The occupation tax schedule is based upon profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. The tax rate for a business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the occupation tax office. 

 
(c)  Business classification. 
(1)  For the purpose of this article, every occupation, profession or business shall be classified according to the major group classification of the North American Industry Classification Manual. 
(2)  Occupations, professions, or businesses will be grouped into three (3) classes as follows: 
CLASS 1 
48  Transportation by air 
42  Wholesale trade—durable goods 
42  Wholesale non-durable goods 
44  Retail trade—Food stores 
44  Retail trade—Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations 
CLASS 2 
11  Agricultural services 
11  Forestry 
11  Fishing, hunting and trapping 
21  Anthracite mining 
21  Bituminous coal and lignite mining 
23  Building construction—General contractors 
23  Construction—Special trade contractors 
31  Manufacturing—Food and kindred products 
31  Manufacturing—Apparel and other finished textile products 
33  Manufacturing—Furniture and fixtures 
33  Manufacturing—Primary metal industries 
33  Manufacturing—Transportation equipment 
48  Railroad transportation 
48  Local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger transportation 
48  Motor freight transportation and warehousing 
48  Services incidental to transportation 
44  Retail trade—Building materials, hardware, garden supply and mobile home dealers 
45  Retail trade—General merchandise stores 
44  Retail trade—Apparel and accessory stores 
44  Retail trade—Home furniture, furnishings and equipment stores 
72  Retail trade—Eating and drinking places 
45  Retail trade—Miscellaneous, not elsewhere classified 
52  Insurance carriers (Underwriters) 
72  Services—Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places 
81  Services—Personal 
81  Services—Business 
81  Automotive repair, services, and parking 
81  Miscellaneous repair services 
51  Services—Motion pictures 
62  Health services 
61  Educational services and schools 
62  Social services 
81  Membership organizations 
81  Nonclassifiable establishments 
CLASS 3 
11  Agricultural production—Crops 
11  Agricultural production—Livestock 
21  Metal mining 
21  Oil and gas extraction 
21  Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic minerals, except fuels 
32  Manufacturing—Paper and allied products 
32  Manufacturing—Printing, publishing and allied industries 
32  Manufacturing—chemicals and allied products 
32  Manufacturing—Petroleum and related products 
32  Manufacturing—Stone, clay, glass and concrete products 
33  Manufacturing—Machinery, except electrical 
33  Manufacturing—Electronic and other electrical machinery, equipment and supplies, except computer equipment 
33  Manufacturing—Measuring, analyzing, and controlling instruments; photographic medical, and optical goods; watches and clocks 
33  Manufacturing—Misc. manufacturing industries 
51  Communication 
22  Electric, gas, and sanitary services (utilities) 
52  Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services 
52  Insurance agents, brokers, and services 
53  Real estate 
71  Services—Amusement and recreation, except motion pictures 
48  Pipe lines, except natural gas 
51  Communication 
52  Credit—Extending agencies other than banks 
55  Holding companies and other investment offices 
54  Legal services 
54  Professional services 
81  Services not elsewhere classified 
(d)  (1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one (1) occupation tax for each of its locations, nor shall that tax exceed seven thousand two hundred eighty dollars ($7,280.00). 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than one hundred (100) percent of a business's gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(5)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(6)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the state. 
(7)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. section 14-13-7 (see section 19-2(2)(a) and (b) of this article) which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95; Ord. of 11-20-01; Ord. of 3-15-16, § 1) 
Sec. 12-5. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the businesses largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-6. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the occupational tax office and that line of business being noted by the occupational tax office upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-7. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-8. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 12-4 of this article. 
(2)  A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by October 15 of each year. 
(4)  Should this election not be made by the aforesaid date, the occupational tax officer will apply the four hundred dollars ($400.00) per-practitioner rate. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-9. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-10. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-11. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of that same year and by that same date in each succeeding year, be subject to a ten (10) percent penalty for delinquency, in addition to a one and one half (1.5) percent for each succeeding month thereafter. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the county in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the occupational tax office and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day that the profession, trade or calling subject violates the aforesaid provision shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the officer charged with the collection of the tax or other official authorized pursuant to the law may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-12. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the county where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each county location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the county and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction shall provide to the county the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside of the county and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the county shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-13. - Exemptions. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax. However, upon proof shown to the satisfaction of the occupational tax office, and after completion of all required applications, the said registration or tax herein may be waived based on the following criteria: 
(1)  For tax exempt, nonprofit organizations, 
(2)  Blind person, 
(3)  War veteran of the United States armed services ten (10) percent or greater disabled, 
(4)  Peace-time veteran of the United States armed services twenty-five (25) percent or greater disabled. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95; Ord. of 1-21-97) 
Sec. 12-14. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-15. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(b)  All persons who obtain a registration for the occupation tax shall comply with all ordinances of the county, including but not limited to, all zoning ordinances, fire ordinances, building ordinances and regulations, and environmental ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-16. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-17. - Penalty of ordinance violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the county judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not exceeding sixty (60) days, either or both, in the discretion of the magistrate or superior court judge. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-18. - Occupational tax director; issuance of citations and summons. 
The occupational tax office and its duly designated officers are hereby authorized to issue citations and summons in conjunction with any violations pertaining to this occupational tax ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-19. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-20. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-21. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the county and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 12-4 hereof shall, on or before October 15 of each year, file with the occupational tax office the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager, or secretary or other executive officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before October 15 of the current calendar year, file with the occupational tax director of the county, on a form furnished by said officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-22. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  On or before March 15 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the occupational tax director of the county, on a form furnished by the occupational tax office, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 12-21 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the county on or before April 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 21-21 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the county to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to be conducted in said county during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the county on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the county by said business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the county. All refunds will be disbursed during the month of November of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-23. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the unincorporated area of the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. Where a taxpayer fails to make any such payment on or before the commencement of such business, a ten (10) percent penalty will be imposed. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-24. - More than one (1) place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) place or where the business includes more than one (1) line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-25. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the county, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the county using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the county shall be classed as "employees" for the purposes of this paragraph and section 12-26. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the county officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-26. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the occupational tax director of the county, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The occupational tax officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in Douglas County, Georgia, and upon demand of the occupational tax director such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within thirty (30) days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in Douglas County, Georgia, for examination by the occupational tax officer at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten (10) percent will be assessed to the amount of tax due for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-27. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the county under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the occupational tax officer in accordance with provisions found in section 12-22. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-28. - Effect of failure to comply with ordinance provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said county after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the county request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the occupational tax officer of Douglas County, Georgia, upon any tax of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the county of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances of said county and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate officer of said county upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances of said county and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the appropriate officer or official against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.1. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.2. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.3. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the occupational tax officer and other duly appointed persons to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the occupational tax office, sheriff, members of the sheriff's department, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the county, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.4. - Requirement of public hearing. 
After January 1, 1996, the board of commissioners shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the board of commissioners shall hold one (1) or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.5. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The board of commissioners may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority or a plan. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.6. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.7. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.8. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.9. - Taxes on alcoholic beverages additional. 
Nothing herein shall affect any ordinance providing for the regulation of the sale of any form of alcoholic beverages and taxes imposed thereon, such taxes being due and payable in addition to the occupational tax imposed hereby. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.10. - Pay lesser of taxes. 
At any time before January 1, 1996, registrar may choose to pay the lesser of the following for the tax year 1995 only: 
(a)  The registrar may pay occupational taxes and fees computed pursuant to this article as in effect on January 1, 1995; or 
(b)  The registrar may pay occupational taxes and fees computed pursuant to this article as in effect November 8, 1995 subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The registrars election must be made in writing; 
(2)  The occupation tax director must receive this written notice prior to January 1, 1996; and 
(3)  If the registrar has already submitted payment of 1995 occupational taxes and fees computed pursuant to this article as in effect on January 1, 1995 and this amount is greater than the amount computed pursuant to this article as adopted on November 7, 1995, the registrar will not be entitled to a cash refund, but instead will be given an occupational tax credit for the amount of the overpayment to be applied against occupational taxes owed in subsequent tax years. 
(Ord. of 11-17-95) 
Sec. 12-29.11. - Revocation and suspension of occupational tax license; imposition of civil penalty; hearing. 
(a)  The governing authority, on the basis of citations issued by the head of the occupational tax department, zoning officer, law enforcement officer, other authorized representative of the county, State of Georgia or federal government, shall have the right to suspend and/or revoke any license issued under this chapter whenever the licensee has used the occupational tax license to further criminal or illegal activity, violate any county code, rule, regulation, or ordinance or any state or federal code, rule, regulation, ordinance or statute, pertaining to such business. 
(b)  Any person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall be given written notice of such violation to the last known address on record with the occupational tax department by a representative of the county and shall be entitled to have a hearing on any proposed suspension, revocation or civil penalty in front of the board of commissioners. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to legal representation and shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the county. No hearing provided for herein shall be conducted sooner than ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of the said written notice. 
(c)  Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, the governing authority shall have sole discretion to suspend and/or revoke the occupational tax license and operation from any sales for the violation of any ordinance of Douglas County or law or rule or regulation of the State of Georgia or law or rule or regulation of the federal government; further, the governing authority may set such terms and conditions for suspension of the license or to place on a probationary period, the licensee for a period of time. During the period of such probation as established after hearing by the governing authority, in the event of any subsequent violation of any ordinance of Douglas County or law or rule or regulation of the State of Georgia or law or rule or regulation of the federal government the governing authority may thereafter either suspend, continue the period of probation or revoke the occupational tax license. 
(Ord. of 12-3-13, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 12-30. - Definition. 
The term "dealer in precious metals or gems" is defined as any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems, or goods made from precious metals or gems, from persons or sources other than manufacturers or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems or a person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems where the purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
(Ord. of 12-1-81, § a) 
Sec. 12-31. - License required; fees. 
No person may operate as a dealer in precious metals and gems without obtaining from and paying the required fee to the business license office. The fee for such license is as adopted by the board of commissioners and is on file in the business license office. An application fee for processing the application shall also be paid, and such fee is as adopted by the board of commissioners and on file in the business license office. 
Sec. 12-32. - Registration with sheriff. 
No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals or gems until such person has registered with the sheriff of this county and obtained a license from the business license office. 
(Ord. of 12-1-81, § b) 
Sec. 12-33. - Compliance with state law. 
Failure to comply with the state law as contained in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 43-37-1 et seq., and as amended, shall be grounds for revocation and termination of the business license. 
(Ord. of 12-1-81, § c) 
Sec. 12-34. - Revocation of license; petitioning for injunction. 
In addition to the revocation of the license for those reasons set forth in section 12-19, the county may petition any court of competent jurisdiction to temporarily and permanently enjoin any violation of this article and to require payment by the violator of all costs of court and attorney's fees incurred by the county. 
Sec. 12-35. - Additional miscellaneous provisions. 
In addition to the foregoing requirements of this article, and where not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, each applicant shall comply with the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
Secs. 12-36—12-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLEA MARKETS 

Sec. 12-40. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Indoor flea market: A market for the sale or exchange of articles and antiques which is inside a building having four (4) walls and a roof. No stalls shall be allowed outside of the building. 
Outdoor flea market: An open market for the sale or exchange of articles and antiques. 
Opaque fence: A fence through which one cannot see, constructed of uniform wood boards, plywood panels, chain link fence with vinyl slats or such other uniform material approved by the office of planning and zoning. 
Stall: A booth, stand or counter at which articles are displayed for sale. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, § a) 
Sec. 12-41. - License required; fees. 
No person may operate a flea market without obtaining from and paying the required fee to the business license office. The fee for such license is as adopted by the board of commissioners and is on file in the business license office. 
Sec. 12-42. - Fencing. 
Each outdoor flea market shall have placed on the portion of the property fronting on public roads an opaque fence at least eight (8) feet high, and on the remaining sides of the property a natural buffer area, hedge or shrubs, approved by the office of planning and zoning, or an opaque fence at least eight (8) feet high. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, §§ b, o) 
Sec. 12-43. - Sewage disposal system. 
Each flea market shall have at least one (1) permanent sewage disposal system approved by the health department. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, § c) 
Sec. 12-44. - One-way passageways. 
The way providing ingress and egress to an outdoor flea market sales area shall be one (1) way only, with a traffic island dividing the entrance from the exit. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, §§ d, o) 
Sec. 12-45. - Length of entrance from street; paving. 
The entrance way of an outdoor flea market shall extend at least forty (40) feet from the public road and each one-way directional street shall be paved to a width of at least ten (10) feet with triple surface treatment or better quality paving. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, §§ e, o) 
Sec. 12-46. - Acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
There shall be an acceleration and deceleration lane at the main entrance or at any other entrance or exit of the property of an outdoor flea market, which lanes shall be approved by the engineering department. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, §§ f, o) 
Sec. 12-47. - Directional signs. 
The owner of the outdoor flea market shall provide directional signs at both the entrance and exitway of the property. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, §§ g, h) 
Sec. 12-48. - Additional exits. 
If an outdoor flea market has more than forty (40) stalls, the owner shall provide one (1) additional exit from the stall area which shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet to the main entrance. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, §§ h, o) 
Sec. 12-49. - List of renters. 
The owner of an indoor flea market shall keep, on a monthly basis, a daily list of persons renting stall space and the home address and telephone number of the person. This list shall be available for viewing by the business license official and any law enforcement officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, § i) 
Sec. 12-50. - Posting theft and stolen property sign. 
The owner shall post in a conspicuous place near the entrance to the flea market the following sign: 
"The crime of theft by receiving stolen property is defined as: 
Receiving, disposing of or retaining stolen property which one knows or should have known was stolen, unless the property is received, disposed of or retained with intent to restore it to the owner. If the value of the article received is more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) the crime is a felony and is punishable by a sentence of one (1) to ten (10) years in the state prison." 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, § j) 
Sec. 12-51. - License classes. 
(a)  All flea markets shall be assigned by the business license office to a license class as follows: 

 
(b)  Business license fees shall be based on these classes and the board of commissioners shall adopt license fees applicable to each class. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, §§ h, 1) 
Sec. 12-52. - Compliance with article. 
All requirements of this article shall be complied with by all flea markets. All prior to the issuance of any license. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, § m) 
Sec. 12-53. - Exemptions. 
Individual residents of the county and tax exempt organizations located in the county shall be allowed to conduct a flea market twice yearly for not more than three (3) consecutive days each without having to comply with the requirements of this article. Exemptions granted shall be obtained from the business license office, which may impose reasonable registration requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-18-79, § n) 
Sec. 12-54. - Additional miscellaneous provisions. 
In addition to the requirements of this article and where not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, each applicant is subject to and shall comply with the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
Secs. 12-55—12-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 12-60. - License required. 
No person may operate a pawnbroker business without obtaining a business license and paying the required fees therefor. No such license shall be granted until a public hearing thereon is conducted by the board of commissioners, which shall grant or deny the license based on the evidence before it. 
(Ord. of 3-7-78, § 1) 
Sec. 12-61. - Affidavit as to reading of regulations. 
Each individual applying for a license shall be given a copy of this article and shall sign an affidavit stating that the applicant has read and understands the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 11) 
Sec. 12-62. - Advertisement of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses hereunder shall give notice in a form approved by the business license office of the purpose of making such application by advertisement for at least four (4) consecutive issues in the paper published in the county in which legal advertisements of the county are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners and if a corporation, the names of the officers and directors. The notice shall also state the date and time the board of commissioners shall hear the application. 
(b)  The applicant shall cause to be placed on the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the type of license applied for and the date of hearing, in the following form: "Pawnbroker license applied for. A hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Douglas County shall be held on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . All interested persons take notice." The sign or signs shall not be less than twenty-four (24) by eighteen (18) inches, and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoin or adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible by persons using such public area, and shall be posted for a two-week period of fourteen (14) days immediately preceding the date of the hearing. 
(c)  No license may be granted until all notice required herein is completed. 
(Ord. of 3-7-78(1), § 1A) 
Sec. 12-63. - Fee as established. 
The annual business license fee for each pawnbroker doing business in the county shall be as prescribed by the board of commissioners and on file in the business license office. The applicant shall also pay an application fee as set by the board of commissioners and on file in the business license office. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 2) 
Sec. 12-64. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be approved until the sheriff's department has reviewed such application and forwarded such office's finding thereon to the business license office. No license shall be granted by the county to the applicant if the findings render the applicant disqualified hereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 3) 
Sec. 12-65. - Limitation on issuance. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of any form of theft, robbery, burglary or deceptive practices as defined by the state criminal code or by the laws of any other state in which such act was committed. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 4) 
Sec. 12-66. - Records. 
Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall furnish to the sheriff each week a list of every article pledged to such licensee. The licensee shall also furnish to the sheriff a list of all property acquired during the previous week, and a complete description of the individuals selling said property by full name, date of birth, address, social security number and telephone number. Such reports shall give an accurate description of all such articles including any identifying numbers, and the date and time such articles were acquired. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 5) 
Sec. 12-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ord. of 10-15-13, § 1, repealed Code § 12-67, which pertained to weapons and derived from Ord. of 10-12-76, § 6. 
Sec. 12-68. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist in the business. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 7) 
Sec. 12-69. - Stolen or lost goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the sheriff any article pledged to such pawnbroker, or which is sought to be pledged to such pawnbroker, if such pawnbroker shall have any reason to believe that the article was stolen, or lost, and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 8) 
Sec. 12-70. - Violation—Constitutes a misdemeanor. 
Any person convicted for violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 9) 
Sec. 12-71. - Same—Revocation of license. 
The license of any pawnbroker may be revoked by the board of commissioners for those reasons set forth in section 12-19. The procedure required for such revocation shall be that established in section 12-19. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 10) 
Sec. 12-72. - Same—Civil remedy. 
In the case of any violation of this article, the appropriate county authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation of the article. 
(Ord. of 10-12-76, § 12) 
Sec. 12-73. - Additional miscellaneous provisions. 
In addition to the requirements of this article and where not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, each applicant shall, where deemed necessary by the business license office, comply with the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
Secs. 12-74—12-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MASSAGE THERAPISTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 18, 2008, § 3, amended the Code by renaming art. V. Formerly, art. V was entitled "massage, massage parlors." 

Sec. 12-80. - Definition. 
A person who applies manual or mechanical massage or similar treatment to human trunks or limbs shall be deemed, within the terms of this article, as a masseur or masseuse. 
Sec. 12-81. - License—Required; contents of application. 
(a)  Any person who was engaged in massage therapy practice prior to July 1, 2005 and is not currently licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. who is desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a masseuse or masseur, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, shall obtain a business license and pay all required fees. The application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant for a space of two (2) years or longer. 
(3)  If such applicant is a partnership or corporation, the address of the partnership or corporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of the partnership or corporation for a period of two (2) years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(4)  A certificate certifying as to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by three (3) currently qualified and registered voters of good moral character of the county. The letters shall not be required for annual renewals of licenses issued hereunder. 
(5)  Should the applicant be a partnership or corporation, the partnership or corporation shall also submit with the application a certificate on the good moral character of each employee and agent of the partnership or corporation who is actually engaged in such business for the partnership or corporation. 
(b)  The applicant must be fingerprinted by the sheriff's department and character references must be checked on all persons who will operate as masseuse or masseur and all employees. Finger-prints must be made at least ten (10) days prior to issuance of the license to allow for investigation of applicant and employees. The sheriff's department shall forward its findings to the business license office. No license shall be granted by the county to the applicant if the findings render the applicant disqualified hereunder or if the applicant has been convicted of any crimes involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. of 3-18-08, § 2) 
Sec. 12-82. - Same—Qualifications of applicant. 
An applicant hereunder, prior to making application for a license, must have the following qualifications: 
(1)  The applicant may be male or female and must be, in the opinion of the business license office, of good moral character. In the event the applicant is a partnership or corporation, such entity must be created in or domesticated under the laws of this state. 
(2)  The applicant must furnish a current health certificate from a medical doctor which shall accompany such application as an exhibit. Should the applicant be a partnership or corporation, it shall furnish the certificate to cover its agents or employees actually engaged and working under the license. 
(3)  The applicant must furnish a photostatic copy of a diploma of graduation from a school as an exhibit to the application. The diploma must be representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of study of not less than six (6) months, wherein such course of study consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, health service management and other such subjects. If the applicant should be a partnership or corporation, then the employee or agent of the partnership or corporation who is to be the manager of the establishment must furnish a photostatic copy of the diploma of graduation as set forth above. 
(4)  In the event the applicant should not have a diploma, then the applicant must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two (2) years in a regularly licensed massage or physical culture studio in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, health service management and other such subjects. The applicant, or the manager in the event the applicant is a partnership or corporation, must furnish with the application an affidavit of previous employment, together with an affidavit of the persons under whom such apprenticeship or practical experience was obtained, specifying that the applicant has satisfied the above requirements. 
Sec. 12-83. - Same—Fee as established. 
The annual business license fee for each licensee hereunder shall be as prescribed by the board of commissioners and on file in the business license office. The applicant shall also pay an application fee as set by the board of commissioners and on file in the business license office. 
Sec. 12-84. - Same—Issuance. 
If the application is submitted in proper form and all qualifications met, the same shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for review at a public meeting and for approval or disapproval. 
Sec. 12-85. - Same—Revocation. 
The license granted in this article may be revoked by the board of commissioners for those reasons set forth in section 12-29.11. The procedure required for such revocation shall be that established in section 12-29.11. 
Sec. 12-86. - Affidavit as to reading of regulations. 
Each individual applying for a license shall be given a copy of this article and shall sign an affidavit stating that the applicant has read and understands the provisions hereof. 
Sec. 12-87. - Training authority of licensee. 
Any applicant granted a license hereunder shall have the authority to train masseurs and masseuses under such licensee's supervision, in such licensee's studio or establishment, provided that the licensee shall furnish to the business license office a list of all such trainees. 
Sec. 12-88. - List of employees. 
It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this article to file with the business license office the names of all employees, their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the business license office within three (3) days from the date of any such change. 
Sec. 12-89. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such an establishment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any representative of the business license office. 
Sec. 12-90. - Treating person of opposite sex. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license as a masseur or masseuse to treat a person of the opposite sex, except upon the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the number of treatments, not to exceed ten (10). The date and hour of each treatment given and the name of the operator shall be entered on such order by the establishment where the treatments are given and shall be subject to inspection by the business license office. The requirements of this section shall not apply to treatments given in the residence of the patient, the office of a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, or in a regularly established and licensed hospital or sanitarium. A violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such individual masseuse and/or masseur and/or massage parlor. 
Sec. 12-91. - Minor patrons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to patronize any massage parlor, unless such person carries at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage parlor to determine the age of the person patronizing such massage parlor. A violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such individual masseuse and/or masseur and/or massage parlor. 
Sec. 12-92. - Massages by unlicensed persons. 
Massages may be given by persons not holding a license as masseur or masseuse provided such massages are given under the direct supervision of a person having a license as a masseur or masseuse and further provided a person having a license as a masseur or masseuse shall be in the same room where the massage is being administered during the entire time of the giving of the massage. 
Sec. 12-93. - Procedure. 
In addition to the requirements of this article, and where not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, each applicant shall comply with the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
Secs. 12-94—12-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 21, 1992, amended Art. VI to read as herein set out in §§ 12-100—12-107. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VI, §§ 12-100—12-102 pertained to similar subject matter and carried no history note. 

Sec. 12-100. - Purpose. 
The intent of the Douglas County Board of Commissioners in enacting this article is to regulate the sale of goods and services by canvassing or soliciting at residences in the county, to the end that criminal activity in the county and abusive techniques utilized by any such canvassers or solicitors which adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare in the county will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of door to door solicitation, nor is it an attempt to adversely affect interstate commerce. Instead, this article is intended to balance competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of county citizens from abuse sales techniques versus the conduct of proper commercial sales activity. This article is not intended to allow any business activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Sec. 12-101. - License required. 
Any person, partnership, corporation, firm, or business engaging in, or offering to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor at residences in the county for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, or conducting business of any kind, shall obtain a license from the business license and permit office, shall pay all fees required therefor, and shall secure or create identification cards or badges pursuant to this article; except that nonprofit organizations and their canvassers or solicitors which are exempt from payment of taxes by the United States Internal Revenue Service are exempt from payment of these fees. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Sec. 12-102. - Procedure. 
(a)  All nonexempt persons or entities who seek a license for door to door solicitation must file an application with the business license office. The application shall contain a complete identification and signature of each person so canvassing or soliciting, the name and address of the employer, and the proposed method of operation in the county, including the time and area of the operation. 
(b)  Upon application, each person who is proposed to be a door to door canvasser or solicitor in the county shall present to the permit office their name, date of birth, social security number, and state of birth, and shall sign a waiver allowing the county law enforcement agency to conduct a criminal history check in the United States, and such county law enforcement agency shall report its recommendation to the permit office, who shall consider any such report in its decision to accept or deny the application in question. 
(c)  License applications pursuant to this article shall be granted or refused to any applicant or canvasser after consideration by the county of all matters deemed relevant to the application in question, including the application itself and criminal history check by the county law enforcement agency, all of which matters shall be disclosed to the applicant upon request. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements of this article and where not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, each applicant shall comply with the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
(e)  Nonprofit organizations and their canvassers or solicitors are exempt from the payment of any fees under this article. In order to obtain such exemption from fees under this article, any such nonprofit organization must register with the business license and permits office of the county, and must provide the county with proper documentation from the Internal Revenue Service showing its nonprofit status. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Sec. 12-103. - Fees. 
The annual door to door sales license fee for each corporation, partnership, or business licensed hereunder shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). In addition, each individual salesperson who is proposed to conduct door to door sales or solicitation in the county shall pay an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The amounts required for both the license fee and the application fee may be changed at any time by the board of commissioners pursuant to filing notice of the change in the business license office. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Sec. 12-104. - Identification. 
Every corporation which engages in residential door to door solicitation or sales of any kind whatsoever in the county must obtain or create for each individual salesperson an identification card or badge on which is clearly shown the name and social security number of the individual salesperson, a clear photograph of the salesperson, and the name and address of the corporation or business under which the license was issued. Each such badge must be worn by the individual salesperson at all times while conducting door to door sales or solicitation in the county. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Sec. 12-105. - License duration. 
Each license issued under this article shall last for the duration of one (1) calendar year, after which it shall be necessary to renew any such license. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Sec. 12-106. - Revocation. 
On the basis of one (1) complaint by a resident of Douglas County, the board of commissioners, upon petition by the business license office, shall have the power to revoke any door to door solicitation license as to any one (1) particular salesperson. On the basis of three (3) complaints centering on one (1) particular business or corporation which is licensed under this article, the board of commissioners, upon petition by the business license office, shall have the power to revoke any door to door solicitation license issued to such corporation. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Sec. 12-107. - Hours. 
Any person, business, or entity conducting door to door solicitation pursuant to this article must conduct all such activity between the hours of sunrise and sunset. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92) 
Secs. 12-108, 12-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AUCTIONEERS 

Sec. 12-110. - License required. 
Each auctioneer defined in section 43-6-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated who does business within the county must have a current state license and a license issued by the county business license office. All remaining provisions of O.C.G.A. Chapter 43-6 are incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
Sec. 12-111. - Procedure. 
In addition to the foregoing, and where not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, each applicant shall comply with the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
Sec. 12-112. - Fee as established. 
The applicant shall pay the business license fee established by the board of commissioners and on file in the business license office. 
Secs. 12-113—12-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FORTUNETELLING 

Sec. 12-120. - License required. 
Any person desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other kindred practice where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services within the unincorporated area of the county, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, shall obtain a license therefor and pay all required fees. Such applicant shall be accompanied by a certificate certifying to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by three (3) currently qualified and registered voters of good moral character in the county. The letters shall not be required for annual renewals of licenses issued hereunder. 
Sec. 12-121. - Investigation. 
Applicant must be fingerprinted by the county sheriff's department and a character reference check obtained on the applicant and all persons who operate the business. Fingerprints must be made at least ten (10) days prior to issuance of license to allow for investigation of applicant and employees. No fortunetelling license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of any form of theft, robbery, burglary, deceptive practices or a crime involving moral turpitude. 
Sec. 12-122. - Fee as established. 
The applicant shall pay the business license fee and application fee established by the board of commissioners and on file in the business license office. 
Sec. 12-123. - Procedure. 
In addition to the foregoing, and where not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, each applicant shall comply with the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
Secs. 12-124—12-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CARPORT SALES 

Sec. 12-130. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the already established surrounding residential development and insure orderly growth that will be in harmony with the county comprehensive development plan. 
Sec. 12-131. - Application procedure. 
(a)  No person may conduct a carport, garage or yard sale in the unincorporated limits of the county without first obtaining a permit from the business license office. 
(b)  Applications shall be on forms provided by the business license office and permits, if issued, will be issued to the owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted. 
Sec. 12-132. - Number per year; duration. 
Only two (2) carport sales may be permitted in any calendar year for any tract of land. No carport sale shall last more than three (3) days. 
Sec. 12-133. - Signs. 
No signs advertising carport sales may be placed in public rights-of-way. Signs may be placed on private property with permission of the owner thereof. 
Sec. 12-134. - Remedies and penalties. 
(a)  Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of this article is subject to the penalties and remedies of section 1-8. 
(b)  These regulations may be enforced by the zoning enforcement officer, planning and zoning director, sheriff's department or building official. 
Secs. 12-135—12-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SALE OF PHOSPHATE LAUNDRY DETERGENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—6 of an ordinance adopted July 6, 1989, have been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. X, §§ 12-150—12-155. 

Sec. 12-150. - Declaration of policy. 
O.C.G.A. section 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local governmental entity is required by the Environmental Protection Division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local governmental entity shall pass an ordinance and/or resolution mandating the retail sale of low phosphorus household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the authority, the city, and the county to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight. The authority, the city and the county find that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect Georgia's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety, and welfare, and to prevent injury to human health, plant, and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the city and the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. of 7-6-89, § 1) 
Sec. 12-151. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Authority means the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority. 
City means the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
County means Douglas County, Georgia. 
A household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for non-laundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
(3)  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner. 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the State of Georgia; 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory; or 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry service for hospitals, health care facilities, or veterinary hospitals. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(Ord. of 7-6-89, § 2) 
Sec. 12-152. - Retail sale prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-6-89, § 3) 
Sec. 12-153. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such violation. 
(Ord. of 7-6-89, § 4) 
Sec. 12-154. - Additional remedies for violation of article. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 12-153, the authority, the city, and the county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-89, § 5) 
Sec. 12-155. - Rights to damage or relief. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Ord. of 7-6-89, § 6) 
Secs. 12-156—12-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MOTEL EXCISE TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 11, 1989, amended the Code by the addition of provisions designated as Ch. 16, §§ 16-1—16-18, and at the discretion of the editor, with the concurrence of the county, said provisions have been redesignated and included herein as Art. XI, §§ 12-160—12-177. 

Sec. 12-160. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
Clerk. The clerk of the board of commissioners of Douglas County or such other person designated by the chairman of the board of commissioners to administer this article. 
County. That portion of Douglas County, Georgia which has been designated by the Georgia Legislature as a special district pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 48-13-57. 
Due date. The twentieth day after the end of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Monthly period. A calendar month. 
Motel. Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any motel, lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, hotel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, bed and breakfast inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designated for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a motel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant or guest. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator. Any person operating a motel in Douglas County, Georgia, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such motel. 
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax. The tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-161. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, and there shall be paid a tax of eight (8) percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a motel in the county, provided that levy and collection of that portion of such tax amounting to two (2) percent of the rent which is required to be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows, or for other purposes provided in O.C.G.A. section 48-13-51, shall be superseded during periods of time during which the county has no contract for the expenditure of such funds with the state, a department of the state government, a state authority, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or a contract or contracts with some combination of such entities. Written notice of the dates of the beginning and end of such periods of suspension shall be given to each operator of a motel in the county on or before the date immediately preceding the date each period begins and ends by the clerk of the board of commissioners or such other person as may be designated by him to give such notice. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient if delivered to any person authorized to collect rent for the operator or the motel to whom notice is required to be given. 
Such tax shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after December 1, 1989, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on either a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any portion of the month of ____________ , 1989, and any portion of any monthly period thereafter. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89; Ord. of 5-20-14, § 1) 
Sec. 12-162. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a motel located within Douglas County, Georgia to collect from the occupants the tax levied and imposed upon the occupancy of guest rooms by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-163. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be levied as provided in this article upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for use by Georgia state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official businesses. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-164. - Registration of operator. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in this county shall immediately register with the clerk of the board of commissioners on a form provided by said clerk. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than fifteen (15) days after the date this article becomes effective, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; and by an executive officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of any operator. 
Should the clerk of the board of commissioners deem it necessary, in order to facilitate registration, he may prescribe administrative provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Such provisions shall be made to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-165. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as hereinbefore provided, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax from the occupants, stating the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and shall be returned immediately to the secretary upon the cessation of business by the registered operator at the location named, or upon sale or transfer of such business at said location. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-166. - Due date of taxes. 
All taxes levied and imposed by this article shall be due and payable to Douglas County monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period in which such taxes are collected. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-167. - Returns and time of filing; remittance of tax. 
On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners in such form as the clerk may prescribe, by every operator liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
All returns shall show the gross rent, exempt rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the monthly period for which filed, and such other information as may be required by the clerk, and shall be accompanied when filed by remittance of the net amount of the tax due. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-168. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under section 48-8-50 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-169. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the clerk of the board of commissioners is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information in his possession or which may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month from and after the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax and interest. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination the clerk may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on such unpaid tax. 
(d)  Notice of determination; service. The clerk, or his designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the clerk. 
(e)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-170. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rental in the county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate the clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made of the amount due for one or for more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination the clerk may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against interest on unpaid tax found to be due. The interest on such unpaid tax shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 12-169(b). 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month from and after the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax, penalties and interest. 
(d)  Notice of determination; service. Promptly after making his determination, the clerk shall give to the operator written notice of his determination, which notice may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-171. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. When it is determined by a return filed, or by the clerk having made a determination under the provisions of section 12-169 or 12-170 of this article, that tax is due and payable to Douglas County under the provisions of this article, the chairman of the board of commissioners may at any time within three (3) years after determination that such tax is due and payable bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States in the name of the county to collect the amount of tax payable to the county together with interest thereon and penalties, court costs, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
The bringing of such an action shall not be prerequisite for the issuance of a fi. fa. under the provisions of paragraph (d) hereof. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this article sells or transfers his business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price of the business to cover such amount of tax, interest thereon, and penalties, and pay such sum over to the county unless the operator liable for such tax delivers to such purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, at the time of such sale or transfer, a certificate from the clerk showing that all tax returns required of such operator have been filed and all taxes shown as being payable on said returns have been paid in full. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser or transferee of a business fails to withhold the required amount of the purchase price, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells or transfers his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(d)  Issuance of fi. fa. The clerk is hereby authorized to issue a fi. fa. for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty or interest due but not paid under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of. 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-172. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of the clerk. The clerk of the board of commissioners, under supervision of the chairman of the board of commissioners, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances of Douglas County, or the laws of the State of Georgia, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration of enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk of the board of commissioners may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The clerk, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(f)  Limitation on disclosure of business of operators, etc. The clerk or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, of any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article, except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-173. - Agents for receiving notices. 
When registering pursuant to section 12-164 hereof, each operator shall appoint, in writing, an agent to receive for the operator any notice required to be given to the operator under the provisions of this article, stating the full name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of such agent. Such agent shall be either an individual resident of the county or an employee of the operator who regularly works at the operator's place of business on a daily basis, and the appointment of the agent must be accompanied by the written consent of such agent to serve as agent for the operator. Such agent may be changed from time to time by written appointment of, and consent of a successor agent. The operator is required to have such an agent at all times and should an agent cease to be a resident of the county or an employee regularly working at the operator's place of business in Douglas County, as the case may be, the operator shall immediately file a written appointment of a new agent and such agent's consent to serve as such with the clerk. Any agent so appointed by an operator shall be authorized to receive for and on behalf of the operator any notice required to be given to the operator by the provisions of this article. Delivery of any such notice to such agent, in person or by mail, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this article and such notice shall be binding on the operator. This method of giving notice to operators is supplementary and cumulative of the other methods of giving notice set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-174. - Violations; fines and punishment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-8 of the Code of Douglas County. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-175. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective and be in force from and after the twenty-first day of November, 1989. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-176. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or a portion of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent of the board of commissioners that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 12-177. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89) 
ARTICLE XII. - ADULT BOOKSTORES AND MOVIE HOUSES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Pornographic devices on amusement premises, § 4-14; amusement place restrictions, § 4-15; massaging persons of the opposite sex, § 12-90. 

Sec. 12-178. - Purpose. 
The intent of the Douglas County Board of Commissioners in enacting this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values, on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. Instead, this article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-179. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Adult bookstore: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, printed material, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or in any way relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section of the store, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material, or an establishment with five (5) percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business: Any establishment which is either expressly specified in this article, or which is other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or which offers its patrons a service or entertainment of any type which is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment: Any business or establishment where employees or dancers display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, or any establishment which features live performances by entertainers or employees where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment: Any adult theater, adult bookstore, or adult dancing establishment operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of profit or loss, and whether licensed or unlicensed. An establishment with an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. An establishment possessed of an occupational business license is presumed to be operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
Adult material: Any one (1) or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel: Any motel, hotel, or other place of temporary lodging which advertises the presentation of, or presents films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult motel" is included within the term "adult theater." 
Adult theater: Any establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part of an enclosed building, or an open-air area used by persons for the viewing of films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult motels and establishments which have adult booths are both considered to be adult theaters. 
Adult video store: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies, or other reproductions, whether for sale or for rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or any establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent or more of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Alcoholic beverage: Any beverage containing more than one (1) percent of alcohol by weight. 
Bathhouse: An establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or on specified anatomical areas. 
Board: The Douglas County license review board, or any other board or committee set up by the board of commissioners of Douglas County to oversee the application for, and the issuance of adult entertainment licenses. 
Board of commissioners: The board of commissioners of Douglas County, Georgia. 
Church: Any place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Conviction: Any adjudication or determination of guilt resulting from a plea, trial, or forfeiture of bond when charged with a crime, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether the imposition of a sentence was suspended. This definition shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Department: The Douglas County business license department, or any other section of the Douglas County government set aside for the issuance of business licenses and permits. 
Display: Any exposing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion revealing to any person in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision by view from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any portion of the person's store or property when items and material other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
Disseminate: To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
Distance and measurement: The measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any adult entertainment establishment or adult business (or if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point at ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry which is perpendicular to ground level) to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital, as required by this article. 
Distribute: Any transfer of possession, whether with or without consideration. 
Educational institution: A premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or courses of study. Included in the definition of the term "educational institution" are nursery schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools, or any special institution of learning. The term does not include a premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution, professional institution, or institution or higher education, including community colleges, junior colleges, four-year colleges, or universities. 
Employee: A person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wage. 
Escort bureau: Any business, person, or agency who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit furnishes or offers to furnish the names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Establishment: A site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are conducted for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of actual profit or loss. A site or premises shall be presumed to be an establishment where it is in possession of an occupational business license. 
Furnish: To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or otherwise provide. 
Good moral character: A person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of any felony or any nonfelony involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. For the purposes of this definition, conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with either a felony, or a nonfelony involving moral turpitude. 
Inspector: An employee or officer of the health department, building department, zoning department, sheriff, or fire and rescue division who inspects premises licensed under this chapter and takes or requires the actions authorized by this article in case of violations being found on licensed premises, or who inspects premises seeking to be licensed under this article or who takes or requires corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on the premises. 
Minor: Any person who has not attained the age of twenty-one (21) years of age. 
Nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Obscene: Any material or performance which, after applying contemporary community standards, is found to predominantly appeal to prurient interest in sex; to be, as a whole, a depiction or description of sexual conduct which is patently offensive to the average person in the community; and when taken as a whole is found to lack serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Park: Any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled, or managed by any county, city, or federal government, or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities occur, or upon which places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public, or which is kept or maintained for ornament and/or recreation. 
Performance: Any play, motion picture, film, videotape, dance, or exhibition performed before an audience. 
Religious institution: A premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Residence: A house, apartment, mobile home, boarding or rooming house, duplex, or other multifamily housing for human dwelling or any property zoned therefor. 
School: Any state, county, city, church, or other school, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers, kindergartens, and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Sadomasochistic abuse: Any flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Sexual conduct: Any actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female in any act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, or any sadomasochistic abuse, or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Specified sexual activities: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship including sadomasochistic abuse, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: Anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, lesbianism, zooerastia; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Specified anatomical areas: shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-180. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of this article shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The county is hereby authorized to punish violations of this article under the provisions of the Douglas County Code of Ordinances, section 1-8. 
(c)  Any adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties or remedies, the county may commence an action or actions to enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered due cause for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued by the county to the offending party. Such revocation or suspension shall occur by way of a hearing before the board of commissioners as provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-181. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity to engage in, operate, conduct, or carry on in or upon any premises an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store without first having complied with the provisions of this article, or without a currently valid Douglas County license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued hereunder shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States or under any other ordinance, rule, or regulation of Douglas County. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-182. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, licensee, or other adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store to admit or permit the admission of minors into the premises of their adult business or adult establishment, or to allow a minor to remain within a licensed or unlicensed premises of such a business or establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-183. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, trade, give, or offer to sell, barter, exchange, trade, or give to any minor any entertainment, service, material, device, or thing offered, for sale or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-184. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall conduct any illegal activity in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
(b)  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or seminude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
(c)  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this article. 
(d)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or out of necessity. 
(e)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
(f)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(g)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
(h)  No employee or person, while on the premises of any adult entertainment licensee, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view with less than a full opaque covering his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, in a lewd or obscene fashion or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
(i)  No employee or person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee shall dance or perform nude or seminude in such a manner as to simulate sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee, or other person, or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
(j)  No person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee, shall, while nude or semi-nude, sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap, or body of any patron, spectator, employee, or other person therein, or engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by said patron, spectator, or other person. 
(k)  No licensee shall suffer or permit the use of any areas on the premises of such establishment for sexual contact or private dancing performance or entertainment. 
(l)  No licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces, or promotes conduct or activities proscribed by this article. 
(m)  No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, possessed, or consumed on the premises except in full compliance with the Douglas County Wine and Malt Beverage Ordinance and any applicable state or federal laws. 
(n)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed, or sold upon the premises and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-185. - Location business requirements. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store shall be located within the distance measurements as defined and stated in article VIII, section 80.010 of the county zoning ordinance. 
Each application for a license hereunder for which there is no existing county license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment or business then in effect shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches in size, with a scale of one (1) inch per three hundred (300) feet, showing the proposed location and the location of all customer entries in relation and distance, measured as provided in this article, to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the above distance requirements, together wit the zoning classification and present uses of all real property and the proposed location. 
Each application for a location which has not previously been occupied for other than residential purposes or on which there is or is to be new construction shall also include a copy of a site plan approved by the county department of planning and zoning. 
After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building on the premises or customer entry locations shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirements of this article or the county zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91; Ord. of 9-18-01) 
Sec. 12-186. - Existing establishments. 
All existing adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall obtain a license and comply with all the terms of this ordinance within thirty (30) days of its adoption. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-187. - Employees. 
(a)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age, and shall be of good moral character. 
(b)  No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, and musicians, who has been convicted anywhere in the United States, or in federal court within five (5) years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture, sale, or distribution of intoxicating liquors, or any other felony or crime involving moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. "Be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the licensed premises, for compensation or otherwise. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouses, escort bureaus, or adult video store to file with the Douglas County Police Department the names of all employees with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the Douglas County Police Department within seven (7) days from the date of any such changes. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-188. - Licensing and licenses. 
(a)  All licenses awarded under this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, and shall be subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the county which may relate to such businesses. 
(b)  All licenses awarded under this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the ordinances of Douglas County, Georgia." 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(d)  License for the operation of adult entertainment establishments, adult bookstores and movie houses as described herein shall be issued for the then calendar year. In case of a revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to any refund of the license fee. 
(e)  The license hereunder granted shall be valid as to each business location and licensee from the first day of January to the last day of December of the then calendar year. This provision applies to new licenses as well as renewals of existing licenses. 
(f)  No license shall be issued to any person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(g)  Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by Douglas County at the county's business license office. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and shareholders; if other business entity, then the names of all holding any ownership or managerial interest therein; and such other reasonable information as may be required by the supervisor of the inspections and permits division of Douglas County, or by the Douglas County Police Department, and must be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(h)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information, and records which the county may request of them, and failure to furnish such data within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the applicant's application. By the filing of an application, applicants agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the county or the county attorney, and who may be considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts to such license. The failure to reduce such persons within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(i)  For the purposes of this article, the term "applicant" shall include a person or persons, and shall also include all partners, officers, directors, principals, and shareholders of any partnership or corporation. 
(j)  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(k)  All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated, and, when needed, refurbished so as to be aesthetically pleasing, rather than dilapidated. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, steel, stone, or wood, but shall not be constructed of concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all zoning, building, health, and similar county codes. All applicants shall obtain and file with their application a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant plans to operate the business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-189. - License fees, penalty for late payment. 
(a)  The annual license fee shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time by resolution. Licenses shall be issued for a period of twelve (12) months only and not for any partial year. No license shall be issued or renewed until unless all fees and penalties due to the county are first paid. 
(b)  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided herein, any licensee, person, or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax, or other payment due to the county of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax, or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the required fee, tax, or other charge, for each period of thirty (30) days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-190. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No license hereunder shall be granted where the application or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  That the applicant is not of good moral character, or has a poor reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)  That the applicant has previously had revoked or suspended any license issued under the police powers of any county or governmental entity. 
(3)  That the applicant, as a previous holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, any business license issued by Douglas County for any special purpose, or any adult entertainment license, has violated any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  That any applicant, or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner, or managing agent is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to Douglas County or the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-191. - Investigation of applications. 
All applications required by this article shall be investigated by the county law enforcement agency, which shall report its findings and recommendations to the county business license office, or any committee or board created by the board of commissioners to make recommendations as to any application. No further action shall be taken by Douglas County or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion of the subject investigation. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-192. - Citizenship and residence requirements. 
(a)  Where the applicant is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: (1) The majority shareholder thereof; or (2) a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the corporation. Each of the said persons must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one (1) year prior to application. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: (1) The managing general partner thereof; or (2) a person employed fulltime by the partnership in a managing capacity. Each of the said persons must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one (1) year prior to application. 
(c)  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working fulltime in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed fulltime by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity. Each of the said persons must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one (1) year prior to application. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the words "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or the managing or general partner of a partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a fulltime employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership entity. 
(e)  The licensee shall notify the county in writing, and shall keep said notification current, of the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee and the agent of the licensee or any other person under whose name the license is issued, for the purpose of receiving communications and notices required under this article. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-193. - Initial consideration of application. 
All applications shall be acted upon by the Douglas County business license department, or by any special license review board created for such a purpose by the board of commissioners or by the business license department of the county. Said department or board shall act on any application after a hearing at a date, time, and place established by the department or board upon notice to the applicant. The applicant shall be required to personally appear before the department or board at the time of hearing. Any decision of the department or board shall be final unless appeal is filed to the board of commissioners by any aggrieved party on or before ten (10) days from the date of decision by the board or department. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-194. - Restrictions on transferability and addition of additional partners or shareholders. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be sold, given, transferred, or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer, or assignment or attempted sale, gift, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one (1) or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license, and who wish to carry on the business by their service in a managing capacity, may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the new licensee shall immediately notify the business license department of the county. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of such a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the name or location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-195. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an absolute interest or a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the establishment either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, or his spouse, shall have been convicted within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application of any felony or misdemeanor of any state, of any law of the United States, or of any municipal ordinance, with the exception of traffic offenses, or for whom an outstanding warrant exists on which no service has been perfected. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a county or municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the business license department or the license review board, or the board of commissioners if appeal is filed, after hearing, may after investigation of the charges involved, waive the same as a disqualification. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-196. - Additional standards for issuance or renewal. 
With respect to the issuance, renewal, or retention of licenses issued hereunder, any right to retain or have approved an application for a license or renewal, the following standards shall apply in addition to standards stated elsewhere herein: 
(1)  Where there is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance requirements set forth herein, the type and number of schools or number of churches or other facilities in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)  Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure would create difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)  Where there is evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or where there is evidence that the proposed area is already adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(d) Where there is evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(5)  Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles. In addition to compliance with any other parking space requirements of Douglas County and the State of Georgia, a licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(6)  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
(7)  Where there is evidence that the conduct of the business by the licensee or potential licensee would violate the law or this Code, create a disturbance, create a congregation of intoxicated or unruly persons or minors, allow minors to be on the premises or to purchase, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises, or where there is evidence that illegal activities have occurred on or in connection with the premises or establishment, or where the police have been caused to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises or area. 
(8)  In addition to the above and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.  If the applicant is a previous holder of any special license under the Douglas County business license ordinance, or is a holder of an alcoholic beverage license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
d.  If the applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or "dummy" to obtain a license. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-197. - Prohibition from interest in license. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or appointed official, employee of the county, or employee of an elected official of the county who receives all or part of his salary from Douglas County, or his or her spouse or minor child to have any whole, partial, or beneficial interest in any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-198. - Issuance. 
When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the department the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-199. - Causes of mandatory denial. 
No license shall be issued to an applicant if within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of an application one or more of the following shall have occurred. 
(1)  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection related to the location itself. 
(2)  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
(3)  The applicant has withdrawn, without permission of the board or the department, an application at any time within seven (7) days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the board or department unless at least one (1) year shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
(4)  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the board of commissioners. 
The one-year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding twelve (12) months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding twelve (12) months because of a lack of qualifications on the part of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-200. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
If the building where the adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bath house, or escort bureau is to operate is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly a compliance with all provisions of this article. No business shall be conducted therein until the premises have been completed in accordance with the plans, and the building is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article; the Douglas County Code of Ordinances, and all laws and regulations of the state or federal government. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-201. - Forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized by the licensee, but who shall for a period of three (3) consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized by the license, shall, upon completion of said three-month period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action on the part of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-202. - Annual renewal required. 
(a)  All licenses hereunder shall be issued for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance. All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms provided by the county. 
(b)  Any license holder upon the date of adoption of this article or any application for renewal of license on an existing licensed location shall not be required to meet the distance requirements herein set forth. An application for renewal shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this article for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-203. - Revocation and suspension of license; hearing. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, on the basis of citations by, or charges brought on behalf of, the head of the business license department, the license review board, the code enforcement officer, the zoning officer, a law enforcement official, the county attorney, or any other authorized representative of the county, shall have the right to suspend and/or revoke any license issued under this article whenever the licensee shall violate any county code, rule, regulation, or ordinance or any state or federal code, rule, regulation, ordinance, or statute pertaining to such business. 
(b)  Upon notice to the county that an alleged violation has occurred which may require the suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment license, a hearing shall be scheduled before the board of commissioners to consider the proposed suspension or revocation of said license. The licensee whose license is the subject of the aforesaid hearing shall be given adequate written notice by the county of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to legal representation, and shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the county. No hearing provided for herein shall be conducted sooner than ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of the citation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, the board of commissioners shall have the sole discretion as to whether to suspend or revoke the license of a licensee, thereby halting the operation of that licensee's adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau for the violation of the provisions of any ordinance of Douglas County, or for the violation of any law, rule, or regulation of the State of Georgia. Further, the board of commissioners may, at their discretion, set terms and conditions upon suspension of a license which must be followed by the licensee in order to have the license removed from suspension, or may place the license on probation for a period of time during which time the licensee may continue to operate his business. During the period of such probation as established after hearing by the board of commissioners, in the event of any subsequent violation of the laws and regulations of Douglas County or the State of Georgia, the board of commissioners may thereafter either suspend the license, continue the period of probation, or revoke the violator's adult entertainment license. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may choose to revoke such a license at the first hearing following any alleged violation. Neither probation nor suspension is a procedural precondition to revocation of a license issued under this article. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-204. - Removal of signs upon revocation or suspension. 
When any license issued under this article is revoked, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises, both outside and inside the building, during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-205. - Falsified license applications. 
Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for a license under this article shall be unlawful, shall be cause for a denial thereof, and shall be punishable as a violation of a county ordinance. If any such license has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of same. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-206. - Adult dancing establishments—Special provisions. 
The following provisions shall apply to adult dancing establishments in addition to all other provisions of this article: 
(1)  Licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers or entertainers. 
(2)  All dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two (2) feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(3)  No dancing or entertaining shall occur closer than ten (10) feet from any patron. 
(4)  No dancer or entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(5)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-207. - Zones where establishment permitted. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall be located on any premises unless the location has been zoned M-1, M-1R or M-2 and granted a special use permit in accordance with article VIII, section 80.010 of the county zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91; Ord. of 9-18-01) 
Sec. 12-208. - Premises. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment [shall be] conducted, operated, or licensed if the adult entertainment activity on the interior is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(b)  No booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except to separate offices, kitchens, restrooms, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(c)  All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. Each premises shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment, and supplies on the premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or more frequently if necessary to prevent accumulation. 
(d)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall have any interior connections or doors with any other place of business or with any place where gambling or other illegal activity is conducted, or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery, or dealing in of alcoholic beverages or illegal substances such as narcotics or marijuana. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-209. - Display of license and number. 
Each licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription, "Douglas County License No. ____________ , ____________ , Licensee" in uniform letters not less than three (3) inches in height. 
The license itself shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-210. - Lighting. 
All premises shall be fully lighted, both inside and outside, except during hours when the establishment is not open for business. Interior lighting shall be at least 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-211. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by this article, any applicable state statute, or any applicable local ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-212. - Regulation of obscenity. 
It is not the intent of the board of county commissioners that this article legislate or regulate with respect to matters of obscenity. The regulation of obscenity is a matter of state law, and is accomplished by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated Sections 16-12-80 to 16-12-83. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-213. - Severability and conflict. 
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Should any section or provision of this article be in conflict with any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or law, then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Sec. 12-214. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. of 11-19-91) 
Secs. 12-215—12-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ASSESSMENTS ON STANDING TIMBER[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 21, 1992, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. XIII, §§ 12-220—12-230 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 12-220. - Purpose. 
The intent of the county board of commissioners in enacting this article is to enable Douglas County to assess standing timber for ad valorem purposes pursuant to Chapter 5 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-221. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Prohibition: No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in timber harvesting or cutting in the unincorporated areas of Douglas County except in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Timber cutters: Any individual, partnership or corporation harvesting timber or wood products for commercial or profit making purposes. 
Timber cutting process or operation: Includes the act of timber cutting, the loading of the timber on to the vehicles involved, and the transport of the timber onto the applicable county street or roadway. 
Timber harvesting or cutting: Selective cutting or clear cutting for pulpwood or sawtimber. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-222. - Permit required; hearings required for revocations and suspensions. 
No timber harvesting or cutting shall be performed until a permit for same has been obtained from the county permit office. No such permit shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing before the board of commissioners after notice to the permit holder of the date, time and place of hearing, along with a statement of the charges upon which the hearing is to be had. The violation of any laws or ordinances regulating timber harvesting or cutting as set forth hereinabove shall constitute due cause for suspending or revoking such permit. Ten (10) days notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. At such hearing, the permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney, to cross-examine all witnesses who may appear against him, and to present evidence in his own behalf. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-223. - Required permit application information. 
Any individual, partnership or corporation desiring to engage in timber harvesting or cutting shall submit an application for permit to the county permit office and shall include in that application the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the individual, partnership or corporation who will be engaged in the timber harvesting or cutting operation. 
(2)  The specific location of the timber harvesting or cutting operation. 
(3)  The identity of any points of egress onto any public street which may be employed by the timber harvesting or cutting operation. 
(4)  The name and address of the applicable property owner or owners. 
(5)  The estimated time of completion of the timber harvesting or cutting operation. 
Sec. 12-224. - Validity of permit area to be mapped out. 
The issued permit shall be valid for an area continuous to the timber harvesting or cutting operation and shall include all identified point or points of egress onto any public road or roads. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-225. - Permit fees; duration of permit. 
The issued permit fee shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time by resolution. The permit shall be valid for a period to be determined by the permit office; such period shall not exceed the estimated time of completion of the specific timber harvest or cutting operation, except that upon a showing of good cause, the permit office may grant an extension. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-226. - General duties of permit holder. 
(a)  No equipment, trucks or trailers which are part of the timber cutting operation shall be allowed to park on any applicable public road or right-of-way. 
(b)  The timber cutting operation shall display a minimum of four (4) warning signs, two (2) in each direction of the road entrance to the timber cutting operation. Two (2) signs, one (1) in each direction, shall be located five hundred (500) feet in each direction from the operation entrance and shall contain the following information: "Slow Truck Entering Highway". Two (2) signs, one (1) in each direction, shall be located one thousand (1,000) feet in each direction from the operation entrance and shall contain the following information: "Warning: Logging Operation Ahead". Each sign shall be thirty-six (36) inches times thirty-six (36) inches, orange in color and shall be posted at least three (3) feet from the travel surface of the applicable roadway. Each timber cutting operation may furnish their own signs or, in the alternative, Douglas County will furnish the applicable signs in exchange for a fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit fee. This fee will be refunded upon proper return of these signs. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-227. - Compliance with Tree Protection Ordinance. 
All timber harvesting shall comply with the tree protection regulations as set forth in Article XIV, Chapter Six of the Douglas County Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-228. - Compliance with Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance. 
All timber harvesting shall comply with the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control regulations as set forth in Article XI of Chapter Six of the Douglas County Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-229. - Performance bond or letter of credit required. 
The Douglas County Permit Office, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, shall require a performance bond or a letter of credit to be executed by the individual, partnership or corporation desiring such timber cutting permit in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such bond is subject to approval by the county attorney. The bond or letter of credit shall indemnify Douglas County against any and all damage caused, as a result of the timber harvesting or cutting process, to any public property including county roads, right-of-ways, points of egress and any other public property which may be affected by the timber harvesting or cutting process. Such bond or letter of credit shall further indemnify Douglas County for costs incurred in the cleanup of waste or debris left on public property as a result of the timber harvesting or cutting operation. Upon completion or removal of all waste and debris and/or completion of necessary repairs concerning public property involved in the timber harvesting or cutting process, and upon damage approval of such affected public property by the permit office, Douglas County agrees to release said permit holder from the applicable performance bond or letter of credit. Said permit holder shall be allowed a maximum of thirty (30) days to remove any debris or to make any necessary repairs. After this thirty-day period, any applicable performance bond or letter of credit will be subject to forfeiture. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Sec. 12-230. - Penalties. 
(a)  Upon notice from the issuing authority, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the permit holder, the person or persons in charge of the activity and the owner of the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. All stop work orders shall remain in effect until the permit holder is in compliance with this article. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of this article, including the above stop work order shall be punished as for a misdemeanor under the provisions of the Douglas County Code of Ordinances, section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 7-21-92) 
Secs. 12-231—12-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - AMUSEMENTS 

Sec. 12-240. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Amusement center: Any establishment that allows or provides three (3) or more coin-operated amusement machines for use within one (1) enclosure. 
Coin-operated amusement machine: Any amusement machine operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines which do not incorporate gaming amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical machines. 
Operator: Any person who provides for operation by another or leases or distributes for the purposes of operation by another, any machine as herein defined, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such machine, or otherwise. 
Poolroom: Any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of pool or billiards. The terms "pool" or "billiards" shall include any game played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue. 
Proprietor: Any person who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor, has under such person's control any establishment, place or premises in or at which such machine is provided for use or play. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-241. - Registration—Required; constitutes a privilege; nontransferable. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of amusement center or poolroom as herein defined without first having obtained the proper registration therefor, after payment of proper regulatory and administrative fees and occupational taxes as hereinafter defined and after having complied with the other provisions hereof. 
(b)  Any registration required under this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property. 
(c)  The registration is not transferable in any manner. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-242. - Same—Application. 
Application for amusement center or poolroom registration shall be made to the occupational Tax office with the payment of the annual occupational taxes prescribed therefor. The application must be signed and sworn to by the applicant in the case of a sole proprietorship. In case the applicant is a partnership, all partners must sign and verify the application. In case the applicant is a corporation, any authorized officer and the secretary must sign and verify the application and indicate their official position. The information required in the application form must be furnished as to each person signing the application. Each application shall be accompanied by the required administrative fees and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name. 
(2)  The applicant's residence address. 
(3)  The applicant's business address. 
(4)  The address of the proposed amusement center. 
(5)  The name and address of every person who has any interest in the amusement center, and the nature of that interest. 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, or of pandering, gambling, operation of a gambling device, operating of a gaming house or being a keeper of a house of ill fame or any other misdemeanor. 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant is at the time of making the application keeping or in any way connected with a gaming house or a house of ill fame. 
(8)  Whether or not the applicant or the applicant's spouse or any member of the applicant's household is a member or employee of the sheriff's department of the county; whether or not any member or employee of the sheriff's department of the county is interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the registration applied for, the devices or the operation of the same; and whether or not the applicant has received or borrowed money ore anything else of value or accepted credit from any member or employee of the department or the spouse or any member of the household of any member or employee. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant permits a record of such applicant's fingerprints to be made by the sheriff's department for the purpose of additional investigation to determine whether or not the application should be granted. 
(10)  Written approval of the sheriff's or the sheriff's authorized representative who shall issue such approval when such officer or representative finds that the applicant is not guilty of any of the violations or facts listed in subsections (6), (7) or (8) above. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-243. - Same—Investigation and inspection to determine compliance, conditions of issuance; issuance; display. 
(a)  Investigation and inspection; conditions. Before any registration under this chapter shall be issued, investigation of the application and inspection of the premises shall be made by the county building inspector, fire marshal, sheriff's department, and such other county departments and agencies as may be deemed necessary to determine whether the applicant, the devices or machines and the premises fully comply with all pertinent ordinances and regulations. For standards for such determination the following shall be considered: 
(1)  No registration shall be issued where the location of the premises or any device or machine located therein shall constitute a nuisance or danger so as to impede safe ingress or egress from the premises. 
(2)  All wiring and connections to each machine or device shall comply with the electrical code and fire code of the county. 
(3)  No machine or device shall be placed or located so as to constitute a nuisance to others through sound or otherwise. The placement and control by registrar of each machine shall at all times, not be such that the sound is disturbing to the public in the street or in any other portion of the building. 
(4)  There shall be sufficient parking on or about the premises so as to provide parking for the registrar's customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. Minimum off-street parking facilities provided shall be not less than one (1) space for each two (2) devices or machines. 
(5)  Amusement centers and poolrooms shall only be permitted in areas zoned under the county zoning ordinances. No registration shall be granted in an area zoned for other than General-Commercial or Neighborhood Shopping use under the present or any future zoning ordinance of the county. 
(6)  No registration shall be granted to any applicant who makes any false or misleading statement in the application or who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or for the sale or use of any drug, alcohol or other intoxicant. 
(7)  No registration shall be granted to any applicant at any location unless every provision of this chapter is complied with and completed; later noncompliance shall be grounds for revocation of registration. 
(8)  No registration shall be granted for any location unless lighting outside the proposed location is adequate to deter illegal or illicit activity immediately surrounding the premises. 
(b)  Issuance authorized; continued compliance. Upon receipt of the proper application and the administrative and regulatory fees and approval, the occupational tax office may then issue a registration for the amusement center or poolroom. The standards set forth in this section shall be complied with in full throughout the operation of the amusement center or poolroom. 
(c)  One location. No registration shall be valid except for the location shown in the application. Not more than one (1) location shall be operated under one (1) registration. 
(d)  Display. Each registration shall display on the amusement center or poolroom premises an approved registration provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-244. - Same—Annual taxes. 
(a)  All registrations must be renewed annually, at which time the occupational tax office may request reverification of all requirements under this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the applicant has conformed to the rules and regulations of this chapter in determining whether such registration shall be renewed. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application for the registration, the applicant shall pay an administrative fee, the amount to be set from time to time by the governing body. A schedule of the fee may be maintained in the office of the board of commissioners and the occupational tax office for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-245. - Same—Suspension or revocation. 
The right to suspend or revoke every registration issued under this chapter is hereby expressly reserved, should the location, the registrar or the operation of any coin-operated amusement machine or pool or billiard table be contrary to any provision of this chapter. Registration shall be given five (5) days' notice at the registered location of time, date and place of hearing to show cause why such registration should not be suspended or revoked, together with the violations of this chapter or law charged. The registration may appear at such hearing, with or without counsel, and submit evidence in such registrar's defense. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-246. - Opening premises for inspection. 
Each operator or registrar shall, at all times, open every portion of the registrar's premises for inspection by the sheriff's department and other county departments for the purpose of enforcing any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-247. - Security guard or supervisor. 
Each operator or registrar shall have present on the premises or on such portion of the premises where any coin-operated amusement machines, pool or billiard tables are located and where any bowling alley facility or skating rink facility is operated, and in the parking lot provided for patrons of such facilities at least one (1) security guard or supervisor at all times that the facilities or premises are open to the public and which guard or supervisor shall be a person who has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or drug or alcohol abuse. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-248. - Sound control. 
The registrar shall, at all times, control the sound so as not to cause a disturbance or nuisance to others in the vicinity of the machines. The registrar shall, at all times, place the machine so that the part of the machine from which the sound emits shall not be within five (5) feet of the front entrance of the place of business, and the registrar shall not, at any time, place a music machine so that the sound is disturbing to the public in the street or to other persons occupying the building in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-249. - Hours of operation. 
Amusement centers, including but not limited to facilities where coin-operated amusement machines, pool or billiard tables are located, bowling alleys and skating rink facilities are permitted to operate only during the hours from 9:00 a.m. through midnight on Mondays through Thursdays and from 9:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays through—2:00 a.m. on the next succeeding day and from 1:00 p.m. until midnight on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-250. - Overcrowding of premises. 
It shall be the responsibility of the registrar to see that the registered premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-251. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of April 15, 1997 amended the Code by repealing former § 12-251 in its entirety. Former § 12-251 pertained to alcoholic beverages in amusement centers, and derived from an ordinance adopted April 15, 1997. 
Sec. 12-252. - Intoxicated persons. 
No operator or registrar shall permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-253. - Pornographic devices not permitted. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, register or permit any machine or device which exhibits or allows viewing of photographs or moving pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature or in any manner prohibited by law or by the ordinances of the county. The machines of any operator or proprietor or other person who shall permit in any way, either directly or indirectly, any such use of any device or machine, shall be subject to immediate confiscation by the sheriff's department as contraband and such person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-254. - Indecent, etc., acts prohibited; maintaining order. 
(a)  No operator or registrar, personally, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee, shall permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct such as would constitute criminal activity under the laws of the state. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the registrar to maintain order on the registered premises at all times. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-255. - Gambling and gambling devices not permitted. 
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, register or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism which has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law or that may be contrary to any future law of the state. Gambling shall be prohibited. Gambling shall not be permitted, nor shall the use possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia in the premises be permitted. The winning of anything of value as a result of the operation or a machine, as well as other acts, shall constitute gambling. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Sec. 12-256. - Use of drugs. 
No operator or registration shall permit the possession or use of any unlawful drug or narcotic, including marijuana, on the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-15-97) 
Secs. 12-257—12-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - EXCISE TAX ON THE SALE, USE, STORAGE, OR CONSUMPTION OF ENERGY 

Sec. 12-261. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms "dealer," "energy," "local sales and use tax," and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 1) 
Sec. 12-262. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 2) 
Sec. 12-263. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Douglas County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to seventy-five (75) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 (c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)  (1)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Douglas County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two (2) percent (except in the case where the municipal option water and sewer tax is levied where that rate will be three (3) percent). 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two (2) percent to one (1) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one (1) percent to two (2) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 3) 
Sec. 12-264. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of the county by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 4) 
Sec. 12-265. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county, or the collecting officer appointed under section 12-268 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the state department of revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. An energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article if the purchaser has failed to submit such uniform exemption certificate to the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 5) 
Sec. 12-266. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on March 1, 2013 and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of the county monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 6) 
Sec. 12-267. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of the county at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one (1) percent of such proceeds collected by the county shall be paid into the general fund of the county to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two (2) local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half (½) of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half (½) of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one (1) such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of the county may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 7) 
Sec. 12-268. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-22-13, § 8) 
Secs. 12-269—12-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - DONATION DROP BOXES 

Sec. 12-281. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the placement of unattended donation drop boxes within unincorporated areas of the county. The procedures and requirements of this article are intended to: promote the community's health, safety, and welfare by regulating unattended donation boxes for clothing or other salvageable personal property; ensure that unattended donation boxes do not pose a hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic; ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the unattended donation boxes where it can be scattered by adverse weather conditions, animal contacts and human activities; and establish criteria that avoid attracting vermin, unsightliness, and public health hazards. Donation drop boxes shall be subject to the following [regulations]. 
(Ord. of 8-2-16) 
Sec. 12-282. - Registration required. 
(a)  All existing donation drop boxes erected on land within unincorporated areas of the county shall, within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this article, be registered with the development services department. New donation drop boxes erected in unincorporated Douglas County or donation drop boxes existing prior to August 2, 2016, which are relocated on any lot within unincorporated Douglas County, shall register with the development services department. Registration of the donation drop boxes shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Written and notarized approval from the property owner consenting to the placement of the donation drop box(es) on their property as well as acknowledgement that the property owner has received a copy of these regulations and is aware of the requirements and the penalties and/or fines associated with non-compliance. This approval must include the name, physical address and phone number of the property owner as well as the physical address and parcel ID number of the site where the donation drop box(es) will be located; 
(2)  A site plan or drawing depicting the size (height, width, and length) and location of any and all donation drop boxes located on the property; and 
(3)  Information identifying the organization(s) responsible for maintenance and monetary proceeds of the donation drop box(es), including a physical address, contact name, phone number, and website (if applicable) for the organization(s). 
(b)  Donation drop boxes not registered with the development services department within the prescribed timeframe shall be removed at the expense of the property owner, and may be subject to enforcement and fines pursuant to this article. For the first year of this program, staff will hold in abeyance any removal of donation drop boxes until August 2, 2017 to provide additional time to educate donation drop box operators and property owners of the requirements of this Code. 
(c)  The registration of the donation drop box shall be valid for a period of five (5) years after which the owner or operator of the donation drop box shall be required to reregister with the county. The registration fee per donation drop box is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(d)  Owners of donation drop boxes shall be required to obtain a county business license or occupational tax certificate annually as required under this chapter. Allowable exemptions of fee payment is enumerated in section 12-13, however no organization is exempt from the requirement to obtain the business license or occupational tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 8-2-16) 
Sec. 12-283. - Design, location safety and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Donation drop boxes shall not be allowed in any residential zoning district, except on properties of places of worship which will be allowed as a special exemption in this article. 
(b)  Donation drop boxes are permitted only on properties where there is an active primary use. 
(c)  Donation drop boxes shall not be permitted on vacant lots or abandoned property. 
(d)  Donation drop boxes must be placed on a paved or concrete surface and be located to the side or rear of the lot (behind the front line of the principle building on site). The location of the donation drop boxes must meet the minimum setback requirements for the lot and the boxes may not be placed in any required buffer, landscape strip, parking space, fire lane, loading zone, drive aisles or circulation area identified as required under the Douglas County Unified Development Code. 
(e)  The donation drop boxes are not permitted to be located in a manner that obstructs visibility at intersections per the Douglas County Unified Development Code or at any other location that may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to public safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding land uses. 
(f)  The maximum size for any donation drop box shall be five (5) feet in width by five (5) feet in depth and seven (7) feet in height. 
(g)  When multiple donation drop boxes are located on an individual property, they must be adjacent to one another. When it is not feasible to place donation drop boxes adjacent to one another, then they must not be located within the same view shed. 
(h)  The total allowable number of donation drop boxes depends on the size of the parcel on which the donation drop box is located with the following limitations: 
(1)  Property equal to or less than one (1) acre shall have a maximum of one (1) donation drop box. 
(2)  Property greater than one (1)acre shall allow one (1) donation drop box per one (1) full acre. 
(3)  All donation drop boxes must be designed so that they are secured from unauthorized access. 
(i)  All donation drop boxes shall have the following clearly identified, in writing on the face of the box: 
(1)  Specific items and materials requested for donation. 
(2)  Information identifying the organization(s) responsible for the maintenance and monetary proceeds of the donation drop box including a contact name, phone number, physical address and website for the organization(s). 
(3)  Statement that no items or materials may be left outside of the box. 
(4)  Statement that the box is not intended for refuse disposal and liquids are prohibited (i.e. "Do not use for garbage, candy or food wrappers, drink bottles etc.") 
(5)  In addition to the requirements above, the county issued registration sticker shall be affixed to the front face of the donation drop box. 
(j)  Each donation drop box must be regularly emptied of its contents so that it does not overflow. 
(k)  All donated items must fit and be contained in the donation drop box. Donated items or materials shall not remain or be allowed outside of donation drop boxes and the areas around each box. 
(l)  The owner or operator of the donation drop box, as well as the property owner of the parcel, shall be responsible for maintaining the area around each donation drop box so that it is free of litter, garbage, and any other undesirable material. 
(m)  Failure to maintain the donation drop box or the area surrounding the donation drop box may result in removal of the donation drop box, at the expense of the property owner and/or owner or operator of the donation drop box, and the property owner and/or owner or operator of the donation drop box shall be prohibited from future donation drop boxes being allowed on this site for a period of five (5) years. 
(n)  The property owner may remove the donation drop box from their property at any time regardless of a valid registration by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-2-16) 
Sec. 12-284. - Waivers. 
A waiver of the total allowable size and number of donation drop boxes and/or the registration fee per donation drop box may be requested by submitting a letter to the development services director, or his/her designee, that demonstrates compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The site is solely occupied by a public, educational, not?for?profit, or religious use or facility with adequate written proof of such organizational status. 
(2)  The location, design, and maintenance of the donation drop box(es) is otherwise in conformance with this article and the Unified Development Code. 
(Ord. of 8-2-16) 
Sec. 12-285. - Notice to violation. 
(a)  If a violation of this article is documented, the property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the regulations of this section. 
(b)  With the first violation of this article, the property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box shall be required provide a written plan to the development services department director, or his or her designee, to ensure full compliance with the regulations contained in this section within five (5) days. The property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box shall be subject to a fine of one-hunderd ($100.00). 
(c)  With the second violation of this article, the property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box shall be required to show records and logs for compliance with this article and will be required to hire a private company to assist them in ongoing compliance with this Article. The property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  With the third or any additional violation of this article, the property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box shall be required to remove the donation drop box from the property at the expense of the property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box within thirty (30) days of the notice of violation. The property owner shall be suspended from having a donation drop box at this location for a period of five (5) years and shall be suspended from operating any new donation drop boxes in unincorporated Douglas County for a period of five (5) years. The property owner and/or operator of the donation drop box shall be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. of 8-2-16) 
Chapter 12.5 - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 12.5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the county parks and recreation department, a department under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
Parks means all parks and all facilities located thereon, owned and/or controlled by the county and operated under the jurisdiction of the county parks and recreation department. 
Person means any individual, citizen, group, association, firm, corporation or other legal entity who is authorized to use and enjoy the county's parks and any structure or facility located therein. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be ejected, barred or suspended by the department from using any or all parks, if in the department's sole discretion, such action is necessary to protect a park, the facilities located therein, or the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-3. - Authority to issue citations for violations. 
For the purpose of issuing citations for violations of this chapter or any rule or regulation as may be hereafter promulgated by the department, the director of the department, his designee or a law enforcement officer shall be authorized to prepare, issue and serve citations on any person that in the opinion of the department director has committed a violation. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-4. - Use of grounds and facilities generally. 
Every person using the parks shall clean up all debris, extinguish all permitted fires, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities located thereon in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-5. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person using the parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mar, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables and benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to a park or tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, or remove or have in one's possession the eggs, nest, or young of any wild animal. 
(5)  Bring in, dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash or debris in a park or waters in or contiguous to a park other than in designated containers. 
(6)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane, obscene or inflammatory language. 
(7)  Commit any assault or battery, engage in fighting, or commit any other offense in violation of federal, state or county law. 
(8)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(9)  Prevent any person from using a park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in contravention of the provisions of this chapter and rules applicable thereto. 
(10)  Dress or undress in a park, or in any vehicle, toilet, or other place located within a park, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for such purpose. 
(11)  Apply any chemical or fertilizer to any lawn, athletic field, soil, structure or facility of a park. 
(12)  Introduce any plant material, seed, sod, tree, shrub to any lawn, athletic field, forest or soil of a park. 
(13)  Violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the department relative to the use of a park. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-6. - Hours of operation. 
Unless otherwise posted by the director, all parks shall be open daily to the general public between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person other than county personnel conducting county business therein to come onto or be present in a park during any other hours. A park or section of a park may be closed to the public by the department at any time and for any length of time, either temporarily or at regular or state intervals. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-7. - Group activity. 
Whenever more than fifteen (15) members of any group desire to use a park for a particular purpose, such as a picnic, party, sports event or theatrical or other entertainment performance, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from the department for such purpose, unless the group is sponsored by the department as one (1) of its scheduled programs. The department shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond and/or on site security to protect the county from liability of any kind or character and to protect county property from damage. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-8. - Picnic areas and use. 
Unless otherwise permitted pursuant to section 12.5-7, no person shall use any picnic area or any facility located in a park for the purpose of holding picnics or other activities to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area or facility for an unreasonable length of time if the area is crowded. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-9. - Games. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to endanger the general public in a park by taking part in or abetting the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. Park areas other than those designated as golf clubs or driving ranges may not be used for golf practice, driving ranges, or putting greens. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-10. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up a tent, shack, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight stay, or to leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or vehicle to be used or that could be used for overnight stay, such as a use trailer, camp trailer, wagon, or the like, unless authorized by the department. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-11. - Swimming. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to a park except in such waters and at such locations as are designated therefor. Such swimming activity shall be in compliance with regulations pertaining thereto as set forth in this chapter or hereafter adopted. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-12. - Boats and rafts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a boat or raft or other flotation device on any waterway, stream, lake or pond in a park unless written authorization allowing such activity is received by the department. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-13. - Fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as determined by the department; to drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes, or cigars, tobacco paper, or other inflammable material within a park or on any highway, road, or street abutting, contiguous or adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-14. - Animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dangerous animal into a park; to permit a dog to be in a park unless such dog is on a leash of not more than six (6) feet in length; to bring any animal onto an athletic or sports field or enclosed playground area within a park; to ride, graze or walk a horse or other type of hoofed animal within a park without obtaining written authorization from the department, unless the park is specifically designated for such use; to fail to immediately remove from the park and dispose in a sanitary manner excrement deposited by an animal in the person's possession and control while in a park; to fail to have in such person's possession, having possession and control of an animal, a device or equipment for the collection and removal of animal excrement. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person having possession or control of an animal aiding the handicapped (i.e., guide dog) or to police or rescue personnel. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-15. - Automobiles and off-road vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park any automobile or off-road vehicle except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in a park; or to leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(b)  The speed limit for all vehicles shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour within all parks. 
(c)  The parking of automobiles shall be permitted in areas designated by the appropriate signs in the public parks of the county as long as such parking is in accordance with the traffic laws, rules and regulations of the parks and the occupants of automobiles do not create a disturbance or violate any law or ordinance of the county or the state. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any automobiles or trucks to be parked on any of the drives, avenues or parking lots in any public park between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon any of the drives, avenues or parking lots or at any other place within any park when such person is not a user of the park or any of its related facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-16. - Sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within a park, unless such activity is authorized in writing by the department. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-17. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess or consume alcoholic beverages within a park unless a special permit for alcoholic consumption of beer and/or wine has been issued by the department. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-18. - Signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, glue, tack, post, erect or cause to be erected any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever within a park or highway or street adjacent to a park. This provision shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of his official duty or by a person having received written authorization from the department. Any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription authorized to be erected shall be in compliance with the county's sign ordinance and other applicable county regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-19. - Firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm on or about Douglas County recreation facilities, sports fields, parks, or nature trails in accordance with the authority vested in Douglas County by the General Assembly in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173. Provided however, it shall not be unlawful to discharge any firearm to defend oneself or another person pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-3-21. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07; Ord. of 8-20-13) 
Sec. 12.5-20. - Fees. 
A user fee shall be charged for any special or sports event, or other extraordinary program or activity as may be hereafter established by the department. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12.5-21. - Smoking. 
There shall be no smoking in parks except in designated areas. 
(Ord. of 5-1-07) 
Chapter 13 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Human resources director—Office created; appointment; term. 
There is hereby created the office of human resources director, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners for an indefinite period, until such person is removed or until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. of 1-10-78(2), § A; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-2. - Same—Duties. 
Unless otherwise instructed, the human resources director shall perform in the following duties: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the board of commissioners and other elected officials as to classification, compensation, examinations and recruitment of personnel. 
(2)  Confer with department heads and employees as to personnel matters. 
(3)  Interpret rules and regulations to employees and the general public. 
(4)  Review requisitions for personnel and classify positions. 
(5)  Review personnel forms related to employment, pay increases, classification changes, leaves, promotions, separations and related matters. 
(6)  Prepare necessary reports, forms and other material related to the personnel program. 
(7)  Prepare statistical reports as may be required as to personnel matters. 
(8)  Human resources director is to notify all department heads and elected officials of any proposed reductions of employee benefits, at least, thirty (30) days prior to the proposed implementation date of said proposed change of benefit. 
(Ord. of 1-10-78(2), § B; Ord. of 6-21-11; Ord. of 6-21-16, § 1) 
Sec. 13-3. - Same—Disciplinary action. 
The human resources director shall be notified by the department head of any disciplinary action by the department within two (2) working days of the time the action is completed. 
(Ord. of 1-10-78(2), § D; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-4. - Same—Hiring of employees. 
All employees of the county shall be hired by the human resources director after the director has been notified by the department head or elected official. No employee shall be put on the county payroll until the employee has been notified of this employment by the department head, or their designee. 
(Ord. of 1-10-78(2), § E; Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-5. - Risk and safety director. 
There is hereby created the office of risk and safety director, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners for an indefinite period until removed or until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. of 1-10-78(2), § A; Ord. of 3-17-09; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-6. - Same—Duties. 
The risk and safety director shall perform the duties delegated to such director by the board of commissioners. The risk and safety director shall perform the following duties unless otherwise instructed by the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Recommend rules and regulations for adopting by the board of commissioners as to safety procedures for county employees. 
(2)  Give citations to county employees for violation of the safety rules and regulations and report the violation to the employee's supervisor. 
(3)  Review reports of violations of safety rules and regulations as reported by supervisors and file a report of such director's findings in the employee's file. 
(4)  Review periodically employee work areas and advise both employees and supervisors of both the actual and potential unsafe conditions. 
(5)  Present safety lectures and seminars to employees. 
(6)  Send to every elected official, department head and supervisor a copy of the safety rules and regulations as adopted. 
(Ord. of 1-10-78(2), § B; Ord. of 3-17-09; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-7. - Safety board—Created; composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board to be known as the safety board. This board shall be composed of three (3) individuals selected in the following manner; One (1) member shall be elected by the elected officials who shall have one (1) vote each, except the board of commissioners, which shall have only one (1) vote among them and it shall be cast by a majority of the board. The person selected shall be an elected official eligible to vote and the person so selected shall be appointed to the safety board by the county governing authority. The second and third members of the safety board shall be full-time employees of the county and shall be elected by the full-time employees of the county (other than the aforesaid elected officials) by a majority vote with each department having one vote. The full-time employee members must be employed by separate departments. The election shall be held under the direction and control of the chairman of the board of commissioners and the person so selected shall be appointed to the board by the county governing authority. 
(b)  Each member of the safety board shall be selected and appointed for a term of four (4) years each and shall serve until their successors are named. No member of said board may be removed from office prior to the expiration of such member's term, except for cause after having been granted ten (10) days written notice by certified mail and afforded a hearing before the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-27-79(1), § A; Ord. of 6-15-10, § 1; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-8. - Same—Compensation. 
Members of the safety board shall be paid the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per diem for time actually devoted to business of the Board, not exceeding twenty-five (25) days in any calendar year. 
(Ord. of 3-27-79(1), § B; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-9. - Same—Meetings. 
All meetings of the safety board shall be held in offices provided by the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 3-27-79(1), § C; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-10. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  If payments for salary in lieu of worker's compensation are to be paid by the county, within five (5) days of the time the claim for payment is filed with the human resources department, and prior to payments, the board shall: 
(1)  Review the claim. 
(2)  Make a written finding that the injury sustained was incurred in the performance of duty and not due to the negligence of the employee; and 
(3)  In writing shall recommend or not recommend payment by the governing authority. 
(b)  The board shall review each safety violation report filed by the risk and safety director during the first year of the creation of this board. Thereafter, the board shall review safety violations requested by the risk and safety director or elected official or any safety violation the board members desire to review. 
(c)  Upon written request by the risk and safety director or at any other time upon motion made and passed, the board shall review the procedures and operations of any department of the work habit of any employee for possible safety violations. The board shall then, upon a finding that there are potential safety violations, recommend changes in the procedures and operations of the department or the work habit of any employee to the elected official. 
(d)  The board shall keep and maintain an accurate typed record of minutes which shall be done with the aid of furnished clerical assistance provided by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-27-79(1), § D; Ord. of 3-17-09; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-11. - Safety policy statement. 
(a)  The county has a concern for the welfare and safety of its employees and the public it serves. It acknowledges its obligation, as an employer, to provide the safest possible working conditions for employees and as a government service organization, to provide a safe environment for the public that uses its services. When unnecessary accidents occur, they are an indication of wasteful and inefficient operation. The county believes that most accidents can be prevented. In accordance with that conviction, it has created the office of a full-time risk and safety director to develop and administer an aggressive occupational safety program for the county work force. 
(b)  The risk and safety director will analyze accident causes, costs and other pertinent factors for use in accident prevention. Such director will also consult with and advise administrative officials and department heads on accident prevention; identify hazardous work locations and practices and recommend corrective action as it relates to the operation and maintenance of motorized equipment; develop and conduct safety training courses; review and evaluate safety suggestions; plan and administer the job training courses required to meet these needs; organize special classes to train supervisors and other personnel in technical aspects of vehicle operation and maintenance aid for conducting on-the-job training courses, and maintain current information programs available in local educational institutions; maintain records of training courses completed, and prepare suitable certificates or other forms of recognition for employees who satisfactorily complete courses; develop training manuals; coordinate all safety and training programs; assist in developing and redesigning certification standards for licensing motorized equipment operators; issue safety citations when sufficient cause is noted. Such director will also prepare and maintain all records pertaining to accidents, cause, costs and corrective actions taken, and issue a report monthly and yearly. 
(c)  However, the risk and safety director is not expected to exceed staff administrative responsibility to perform line functions that are properly a responsibility of management and supervision. The appointment of a full-time risk and safety director does not relieve department heads and supervisors of a basic responsibility; that of expanding their management and supervisory practices to incorporate safety engineering principles in all supervisory efforts. 
(d)  Department heads and supervisors at all levels of the county work force are directed to make safety a matter of continuing concern, equal in importance to all other operational considerations. They are expected to cooperate with and assist the appointed risk and safety director to implement the policies of this office; and to develop and administer an effective department safety program. Their responsibility encompasses the adoption of work standards designed to attain the only goal acceptable to management and work force alike - a work environment free of potential hazards, or work procedures that may produce injuries and property damage. To reach that goal, management and supervisory personnel must: 
(1)  Provide informed leadership and adequate supervision of the county work force. 
(2)  Provide adequate job training and continuing safety instruction to all employees. 
(3)  Develop reasonable, practical safe job procedures for county operations and enforce them. 
(4)  Secure prompt and adequate medical care to minimize the severity of injuries and safe guard the physical and mental welfare of employees. 
(5)  Continuously review work practices and conditions of the work environment to seek improvement. 
(e)  All employees are charged with responsibility for cooperation with, and support of, safety program objectives. All employees are expected, as a condition of employment, to adopt the concept that the safe way to perform a task is the most efficient and the only acceptable way to perform it. 
(f)  Safety records shall be measured along with all other phases of supervisor and employee performance. Therefore, it is absolutely essential that such records be complete and accurate and that all accidents be fully reported. 
(Ord. of 7-10-79; Ord. of 3-17-09; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-12, 13-13. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-14. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Applicant: Any person who has filed an application in accordance with the provisions of division 4. 
Civil service system: The merit system. 
Class: A group of positions (or one (1) position) that has similar duties and responsibilities, requires like qualification and can be equitably compensated by the same range of pay. 
Department head : An individual designated by the county administrator and approved by the board of commissioners to be in charge of and responsible for a county department. In some departments, for the purpose of the merit system only, the department head may be an elected official (a constitutional officer elected by the citizens of the county). This does not include the board of commissioners. 
Director: An individual designated by the county administrator and approved by the board of commissioners to be in charge of and responsible for a county department or multiple departments. 
Elected officials: The officers of the county elected by the public. For the purpose of this civil service system, this definition is limited to the board of commissioners, clerk of the superior court, probate judge, sheriff, tax commissioner, magistrate judge, district attorney, superior court judges, and coroner. 
Employee: An occupant of a "position." 
Full-time employee: A permanent, non-temporary employee who works forty (40) hours per week and has completed the probationary period. 
Part-time employee: An employee who, on a continuing basis, works fewer than thirty (30) hours per week. A part-time employee shall not be entitled to employee benefits, such as insurance, retirement, vacation or sick leave, nor shall that person be covered by these rules and regulations. 
Permanent employee: A full-time, non-temporary employee who has completed the probationary period. 
Position: A group of current duties and responsibilities assigned or delegated by the elected official in charge of a department requiring the full-time employment of one (1) person. 
Probationary period: An employee who has worked for the county less than six (6) consecutive months from the date of hire, or greater time as set forth in section 13-66. A probationary employee shall not be entitled to employee benefits, such as retirement, vacation or sick leave, nor shall that person be regulated by these rules and regulations, except as provided in section 13-66. Probationary employees may not apply for another job position until they have successfully completed this probationary period. An employee on an extended probationary period is not eligible to apply for another job position. 
Supervisor: The person immediately in charge of an employee or group of employees. 
Temporary employee: An employee hired for a specific job that has a duration of six (6) months or less. A temporary employee shall not be entitled to employee benefits, such as insurance, retirement, vacation or sick leave, nor shall such person be under these rules and regulations. 
(Amd. of 11-7-06; Ord. of 6-21-11; Ord. of 6-21-16, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 13-15. - Purpose; merit principles. 
(a)  It is the purpose of these rules to establish procedures which will serve as a guide to administrative action concerning the various personnel activities and operations. These rules are intended to indicate the usual and most reasonable methods for carrying out the work of the personnel system. 
(b)  As further developed throughout this article, the system shall be consistent with the following merit principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability; fidelity to the county, knowledge and skills. 
(2)  Establishing pay rates so that there is equal pay for equal work; 
(3)  Keeping and retaining employees on the basis of how well they do their work, correcting their work when it is not adequate, and dismissing employees whose inadequate work cannot be corrected. 
(4)  Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap, age, sex or religion. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-16. - Equal employment opportunity. 
It is the policy of the county to provide equal employment to all persons and to prohibit discrimination in employment, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, creed, ancestry, political affiliation, physical handicap or age. This policy applies to and is a basic part of every aspect of the county's personnel policy and practices in the employment, development, advancement and treatment of employees. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-17. - Positions covered. 
(a)  All full-time permanent employees of the county are under the merit system, with the exception of the county administrator, elected officials, clerk of the board of commissioners, members of appointed boards, commissions and authorities, the county attorney, the county public defender, contract employees and other independent contractors are likewise excluded from the merit system. 
(b)  These rules and regulations shall apply to those employees covered by the merit system. 
(Ord. of 5-21-91, § 1; Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-18. - Administration. 
The board of commissioners shall have the responsibility and authority for the enforcement and administration of these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-19. - Personnel review board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a civil service board to be known as the personnel review board. This board shall be composed of three (3) citizens of the county who are landowners, who are not employees of the county, who have paid their taxes to date or have appealed the same, and who have been residents of the county for at least two (2) years immediately prior to their selection. 
(b)  Members of the personnel review board shall be elected and appointed for a term of four (4) years each, and shall serve until their successors are named and qualified. Said members of the personnel review board shall be selected and appointed in the following manner: one (1) member shall be selected by decision of the clerk of superior court, the tax commissioner, the sheriff and the probate judge, each of whom shall have one (1) vote, and the board of commissioners, which shall have only one (1) vote which may be cast by a majority of said board, and the person so selected by said county officials shall be appointed to the personnel review board by the county governing authority. The second member shall be selected by majority vote of the permanent employees of the county (other than the aforesaid elected officials) who are covered by the merit system, with such election being under the direction and control of the chairman of the board of commissioners, and the person so selected shall be appointed by the county governing authority after being advised of the selection. The third member of the personnel review board shall be selected by the two (2) members selected by the elected officials and the permanent county employees, and the person so selected shall be appointed to the board by the county governing authority. No member of the personnel review board shall have held political office or have been a salaried employee of the county during the three (3) months preceding such member's appointment. No member of the personnel review board may be removed from the office prior to the expiration of such members' term except for cause after having been granted a notice and afforded a hearing before the board of commissioners. Prior to said hearing said member shall be served by registered or certified mail addressed to such member's residence as shown in the files of said governing authority at least ten (10) days before the date set for said hearing, with written specifications of the charges against such member. The three (3) members shall designate one (1) of their number as chairman and one (1) as vice-chairman. Vacancies on the personnel review board shall be filled in the same manner in which the positions were originally filled. 
(c)  Members of the personnel review board shall be paid the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per diem for time actually devoted to the business of the board, not exceeding twenty-five (25) days in any calendar year. 
(d)  It shall be the duty, function and responsibility of the personnel review board to represent the interest of the public in the improvement of personnel administration and the selection of qualified personnel. All meetings of the personnel review board shall be held in offices provided therefor by the governing authority of the county or in a courtroom of the superior court of the county. 
(e)  The duties of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To hold public hearings regarding rules and regulations of the merit system and thereafter to recommend to the board of commissioners the adoption of these rules and regulations. These rules and regulations shall include provisions for the establishment and maintenance of job classifications and compensation plans, the conduct of examinations for appointment under the merit system, the certification of eligible persons, appointments, promotions, transfers, demotions, separations, tenure, service ratings, reinstatements, appeals, and such additional regulations as may be deemed to be in the best interest of impartial selection of efficient personnel and improvement of public administration. It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to adopt such rules and regulations submitted by the personnel review board as deemed necessary by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may accept or reject any part or all of a proposed amendment, as submitted. The board of commissioners may initiate an amendment by forwarding the same to the personnel review board. If the personnel review board does not approve or reject the proposed amendment within forty-five (45) days of submission, the personnel review board will be deemed to have approved the same and it shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners for its review. 
It shall be the policy of the county board of commissioners to respond in writing within sixty (60) days of receiving any proposed changes to the personnel review board. 
(2)  To hear appeals as set forth in section 13-113(4). 
(3)  To hold such meetings as may be required for the proper discharge of its duties. 
(4)  To keep and maintain an accurate typed record of minutes which shall be done with the aid of furnished clerical assistance provided by the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Changes in the county merit system will be on an annual basis with the annual public meeting being held in the month of February. The board of commissioners shall consider all changes approved by the personnel review board and within sixty (60) days after receipt of such changes 
(g)  The personnel review board shall have no authority to review or make recommendations regarding employee salaries or the pay plan outlined in division 3. 
(Ord. of 3-29-93; Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 3-7-00; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-20—13-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 

Sec. 13-26. - Definitions. 
The classification plan is the systematic grouping of positions into appropriate classes. 
(1)  A position is a group of currently assigned duties and responsibilities requiring the full or part-time employment of one (1) person. A position may be occupied or vacant. 
(2)  A class is a group of positions (or one (1) position) that: 
a.  Has similar duties and responsibilities. 
b.  Requires like qualifications. 
c.  Can be equitably compensated by the same range of pay. 
(3)  The class title is the official designation or name of the class, and it shall be used on all personnel records and transactions. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-27. - Use of class specifications. 
Specifications are to be interpreted in their entirety and in relation to others in the classification plan. Particular phrases or examples are not to be isolated and treated as a full definition of a class. Specifications are descriptive and explanatory of the kind of work performed and not necessarily inclusive of all duties performed. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-28. - Maintenance of the classification plan. 
The board of commissioners shall adopt a classification plan, and, periodically, the board of commissioners shall provide for a review of the classification plan so that it will reflect the duties performed by each employee in the classified service. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-29. - Position control. 
New positions may be created in the following manner: 
(1)  When in the opinion of a department head a new position within the department is required, a request, on forms supplied by the human resources department shall be submitted to the human resources director. The request shall include a description of the duties and responsibilities of the proposed position. 
(2)  The human resources director shall receive the request, make determination of need, classify the position as to salary range and job class, and forward the request, with such information to the head of the accounting department. 
(3)  The head of the accounting department shall determine the availability of funds from the budget of the department requesting the position and forward the request back to the human resources director for delivery to the board of commissioners. 
(4)  The board of commissioners shall review the request, the determination of the human resources director as to need and all additional relevant data, and make a determination whether the new position shall be created. 
(Ord. of 9-21-99; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-30. - Classification appeal. 
An employee who considers such employee's position improperly classified shall submit a written request for reclassification to such employee's supervisor, who shall review the request as to its justification. The department head shall, with the information provided by the supervisor, make a recommendation to the board of commissioners within five (5) workdays of receipt of the reclassification request, and the board of commissioners shall then proceed as outlined in section 13-29. Upon completion of the procedures in section 13-29, a final decision shall be made by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-31. - Classification plan in effect. 
The classification plan, when adopted, shall be considered a part of this article and shall have the same force and effect as these personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-32. - Promotions. 
(a)  Promotions to another classification. 
(1)  Each department head, based on the requirements of each department, shall establish a promotion plan for the promotion of employees to higher and different job classifications. All such plans shall be approved by the county administrator, shall provide equal opportunities for promotion to all employees without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, creed, ancestry, physical handicap, age or political affiliation, and give due consideration to each employee's qualifications, demonstration of skill, experience and fitness for promotion under consideration. 
(2)  The promotion of employees to higher positions out of their current classification shall be done in compliance with the recruitment and selection provisions of division 4 hereof. 
(b)  Re-classification of existing position. 
(1)  Each department head shall establish a plan for the re-classification of their employees to a higher graded position within the same classification. Qualifications such as experience, education, and/or certifications should be established and published by the department head as requirements for consideration for a re-classification. Within department re-classification must be covered by the department's approved salary budget and therefore, will attach a statement from the Finance Department that the re-classification will not require additional salary finances. Examples of re-classifications are as follows, but not limited to: appraiser trainee to appraiser; maintenance worker to maintenance technician I; operator trainee to operator I; accounting trainee to accountant; firefighter II to firefighter II/EMT; jailer I to jailer II; equipment operator I to equipment operator II; secretary to senior secretary; mechanic I to mechanic II, etc. 
Employees will not be recommended for a re-classification during their initial probationary period and re-classifications will normally be restricted to one within a two-year period. Department heads will submit the requested re-classification with complete justification, documentation, and a statement from finance, to the human resources director. The HR director will verify all information within the packet and will submit the request to the county administrator for approval. These re-classification promotions will not create a vacancy within the department but will move the employee and the position they occupy to a higher rated position within the department. 
(2)  All re-classifications will be considered using the equal opportunity requirements. 
(Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-33. - Demotion. 
Employees are subject to demotion in their classification as provided in division 8 hereof, subject to their rights of grievance and appeal as provided in division 9 hereof. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-34—13-36. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PAY PLAN 

Sec. 13-37. - Composition. 
The pay plan includes pay grades for each position in the classification plan and the pay steps within each such grade. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-38. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The pay plan shall be adopted by the board of commissioners and is intended to provide fair compensation for all classes in the classification plan, considering range of pay of other classes, rates of pay for comparable services in private and public employment in the area, cost of living data, other benefits received by employees, the county's financial condition and policy, and other factors. The board of commissioners shall periodically make or cause to be made comparative studies of all ranges, and on the basis of conclusions reached through such studies, it shall make such changes in salary ranges as are appropriate. 
(b)  A notice of this study shall be posted in all county departments and the written results of the study made available to any county employee through the personnel department upon request. 
(Ord. of 6-16-92; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-39. - Entrance salary. 
The minimum rate established for the class is the normal hiring rate. Appointments, under special conditions and subject to the prior approval of the board of commissioners, may be made above the minimum rate when such action is determined to be necessary in the best interest of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-40. - Promotion. 
When an employee is promoted to a new class, such employee shall have their salary raised to at least the entry level step of the class to which the employee has been promoted and the raise in salary shall be at least as great as a one-step increase in that employee's previous salary class. 
(Ord. of 3-7-00; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-41. - Demotion. 
When an employee is demoted, such employee shall be paid at a rate which is within the pay scale of the position to which such employee is demoted and which salary shall be no greater than that paid to the employee prior to such employee's most recent promotion. Subject to the guidelines of this section, the rate of pay shall be set by the department head with the approval of the human resources director, taking into consideration the circumstances and reasons for demotion. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-42. - Salary reviews. 
On the anniversary date of employment with the county each permanent employee may receive a salary increase not to exceed one (1) step. The salary increase can be denied if the employee's performance rating is marginal or below satisfactory. 
Any across-the-board or cost-of-living increase given to full-time permanent employees shall not affect the annual increases for each employee. 
(Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-43. - Pay plan in force. 
The pay plan, when adopted, shall be considered a part of this article and shall have the same force and effect as these personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-44—13-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION 

Sec. 13-50. - Employment opportunities. 
The recruitment, selection, appointment and promotion of employees shall be in such a manner as to promote equal employment for all persons without regard to race, age, color, creed, religion, ancestry, sex, national origin, physical handicap or political affiliation. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-51. - Vacancy positions. 
(a)  Department heads shall be responsible for notifying the human resources director of positions that are or soon shall be vacant. The notification shall include the class title and salary range. 
(b)  As far as practicable, but giving consideration to the qualifications of an applicant for any position, vacancies shall be filled by promotion of employees in the county. 
(c)  Whenever a vacancy occurs within a department, the department head will first attempt to fill the vacancy by promotion from within the department (see subsection 13-32(a)(1), subsection 13-40), or re-organization, or a combination of both. After this action has occurred, any position left vacant will be filled according to section 13-52, recruitment for vacant positions. 
(Ord. of 4-15-08; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-52. - Recruitment for vacant positions. 
(a)  All vacancies for full-time positions, with the exception of entry level positions for each department, and departmental promotions (see subsection 13-51(c) above), shall be advertised in-house for a period not to exceed three (3) days. After the three-day period, if the positions remain unfilled, the human resources director may cause the vacancy to be publicized by a notice of such vacancy in the legal organ of the county or on the county web site, such announcement to remain active until such time as the position is filled or officially announced as closed. If the web site announcement fails to produce qualified and/or acceptable candidates, the director may advertise the employment opening using any other medium which is appropriate. The announcements shall specify the title, the minimum salary of the vacant position, any minimum qualification requirements, the manner of taking applications, and other information deemed pertinent by the human resources director. 
(b)  Every reasonable effort shall be made to publicize vacancies so that all interested persons are informed of the position and so that all qualified persons are attracted to compete. 
(c)  Applications will be accepted until the position is filled, or the deadline for applications is reached. 
(Ord. of 3-7-95; Res. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 4-18-97; Amd. of 11-7-06; Ord. of 4-15-08; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-53. - Application forms. 
Applications shall be made on county application forms provided by the human resources department. Such applications shall be signed by the person applying. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-54. - Procedures. 
The following procedures shall be used in filling vacant positions: 
(1)  Applications must be submitted to the human resources director at the personnel department within the time limitations noted in the advertisements for the position. 
(2)  The human resources director shall make a preliminary determination as to the qualification of the applicant for the position, and the human resources director may, in this connection, administer preliminary tests to determine if the applicant is qualified to apply. All such testing shall be administered by the human resources director or his delegated representative and shall be uniform as to all applicants for the same position. 
(3)  The name of each applicant found to be qualified by the human resources director shall be submitted to the appropriate department head for an interview and further testing as deemed appropriate by the department head. The elected official over each department head, in conjunction with each such department head (if the elected official is not also serving as the department head) shall determine the method of examination of applicants for each position. All such tests and examinations shall be uniform as to all applicants for the same position. The tests conducted by department heads may be written, oral, demonstration of skill and evaluation of experience and education, or a combination of these, which shall fairly appraise and determine the merit, qualifications, fitness and ability of applicants. Such tests shall relate to the duties and responsibilities of the position for which the applicant is being examined. 
(4)  After completing the application and testing procedure, the appropriate department head shall select and notify the applicant to be hired; a department director/manager applicant shall be notified by the board of commissioners, or their designee. 
(5)  As a condition of obtaining employment, each applicant selected for employment shall be required first to take, at county expense, and successfully complete, a medical examination, which shall include a drug screening for substance abuse, by a physician selected by the county. Failure to successfully take and pass the medical examination shall result in the disqualification of the applicant for employment. 
(6)  A psychological or psychiatric examination may likewise be required prior to employment or during a probationary period if the department head is of the opinion that such examination is required. The expense of such examination shall be paid by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-7-90; Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-55. - Emergency appointments. 
When in the opinion of the human resources director an emergency involving the serious impairment of the public business makes it impossible to fill a position in the county by the procedure established in section 13-52, the department head, subject to the approval of the elected official, may appoint any qualified person to such position in order to prevent stoppage of public business, financial loss or serious inconvenience to the public. Any such person shall be employed only during such emergency and for a period not to exceed thirty-one (31) days. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-56. - Employment of relatives. 
It is the policy of the county not to employ in the same department of the county government any member of an employee's immediate family. For purposes of definition, "immediate family" includes husband, wife, father, mother, daughter, son, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grand-mother, grandfather, stepfather, stepmother and stepchildren, spouses' grandparents, grandchildren, formal legal guardian (with proof). 
The term "department" includes the permit and inspection department, road department, fire and EMS department, planning and zoning department, sheriff's department, jail department, library department, appraisal department, accounting and purchasing department, magistrates department, engineering department, extension service department, landfill department, development department, printing department, district attorney department, clerk of superior court department, vehicle maintenance department, board of commissioners department, safety department, human resources department, custodial department, probate court department, tax commissioner's department, parks and recreation department, voters registration department, data processing department and all other departments recognized in the organizational structure of the county. 
If two (2) employees marry while working in the same department, the party with the least seniority in the department must transfer to another department if both are to continue in the employment of the county. 
This section shall not apply to any county employee who is employed as of the date of the enactment of this provision. 
Notwithstanding all of the forgoing terms and conditions, a department head may authorize related persons to work provided they work under the following specified conditions: 
(1)  No employee shall work directly for another relative. 
(2)  No employee shall be under the supervision of a relative. 
(3)  Persons who are related as heretofore described shall not work together in the same shift, unless requirements of the department are such that the department head feels that it is absolutely necessary for the protection of the county and citizens of the county, in which case those relatives who are certified to be required to work on the same shift shall not be working together in the same vehicle, office, or on the same project or work. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89; Ord. of 3-7-00; Ord. of 6-15-10, § 2; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-57. - Number of positions with the county. 
No employee shall have more than one (1) position with the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-58. - Employee rehire policy. 
(a)  If an employee voluntarily resigns their position with the county (see section 13-88, resignations) or is laid off from the county (see section 13-90, lay offs), and has correctly completed all necessary exit interview information with his/her supervisor or department head, the county may consider this previous employee eligible for rehire with all benefits reinstated if the subject employee reapplies for employment with the county within no more than sixty (60) days from the date last worked with the county. No benefits will be accrued during the period of unemployment with the county. The only authorized benefit not immediately restored is insurance which takes effect on the first day of the next month after rehire. 
(b)  This rehire provision is available to each employee covered under the merit system for one (1) time only. Employees who resign or are laid off from their county employment and remain unemployed with the county for sixty-one (61) or more days will not be eligible for reinstatement of previous benefits if the employee is again employed by the county. 
(Ord. of 3-31-93; Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-15-10, § 6; Ord. of 6-21-11; Ord. of 4-2-13) 
Secs. 13-59—13-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PROBATION 

Sec. 13-65. - Objective. 
All full-time, non-temporary employees shall serve a probationary period at the outset of their employment with the county, or the county may impose a period of probation for disciplinary reasons, as is hereinafter provided. The probationary period shall be regarded as part of the employee selection process and shall be used for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee in the position, and for rejecting any employee whose performance is not satisfactory. Employees serving their probationary period have no appeal rights provided herein unless there is alleged discrimination because of race, age, color, creed, ancestry, political affiliation, physical handicap, religion, sex or national origin, and are not considered classified employees under the provision of the merit system. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-66. - Duration. 
The probationary period shall be for a period of six (6) months; however, any employee required by state law to receive mandatory training prior to full-time employment shall have such employee's probationary period begin on the date all mandatory training is completed. If a department head requests in writing from the human resources director an extension of an established probationary period at any time more than fifteen (15) days prior to its expiration, the human resources director may extend the probationary period of a particular employee up to three (3) months beyond the end of the established period and so notify the employee in writing. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-67. - Evaluation of performance. 
On such occasions during the probationary period as the employee's supervisor shall determine to be appropriate, the supervisor shall provide the employee with an assessment of such employee's job performance. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration of an employee's probationary period, the department head shall notify the human resources director in writing, whether or not an employee has satisfactorily completed his or her probationary period to date and if it is likely that the department head will recommend permanent employment. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-68. - Dismissal. 
During the probationary period, the department head may remove an employee who is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily, whose habits and dependability do not merit such employee's continued employment, or who fails to meet the requirements of a probationary period imposed for disciplinary reasons. The department head shall immediately report such removal to the employee stating the reasons for such removal, in writing, with a copy to the human resources director. Employees serving their probationary period do not have appeal rights provided herein unless there is alleged discrimination because of race, color, sex, political affiliation, physical handicap, religion, age, ancestry or national origin. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-69. - Promotional appointments. 
The probationary period for a permanent employee being promoted or transferred to a different classified position will be for a period of three (3) months from the promotion/transfer date. (Example: An equipment operator applying for and being selected for a deputy sheriff position.) this employee will not be eligible for a merit increase during this probationary period. If the employee's annual merit increase consideration date is within this probationary period, the merit increase will be delayed until the probationary period is completed and the department head makes the decision that the employee is qualified and eligible for a merit increase in the new position. The next merit increase consideration will be one (1) year from this merit increase. If an employee is removed from such employee's promoted position, such employee shall be entitled to general re-employment rights in such employee's former classification, if there is a vacancy. Permanent employees being promoted within their assigned classified positions will not be required to serve a probationary period. 
(Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-70—13-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE RATING 

Sec. 13-75. - Objective. 
The board of commissioners shall cause to be prepared a system for evaluating the work performance of all employees in the classified service. The purpose of the employee performance rating shall be primarily to inform employees how well they are performing their work and how they can improve their work performance. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-76. - Period of evaluation. 
All employees shall be evaluated during and at the completion of the entrance probationary period and at least annually from the date of completing their probation period. Performance ratings may be delayed if the employee is performing in a marginal or unsatisfactory manner and the supervisor wishes to establish an additional period of time for the employee to improve their performance. Requests for extension of the performance rating period must be placed in writing and forwarded to the human resources director giving the reasons for the requested extension, time period of the requested delay, and what the employee needs to improve or correct in order to receive a satisfactory performance evaluation. 
(Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-77. - Performance rating. 
Performance ratings shall be prepared by the immediate supervisor of each employee, reviewed by intermediate supervisors and the appropriate department head and delivered to the human resources director for placement in that employee's personnel file. An employee in a supervisory position who is leaving the position may be required to submit performance ratings on all the employees under such employee's supervision who have not been evaluated within the previous six-month period. The department head shall furnish the employee an official copy of the employee performance rating form. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-78. - Review with employee. 
The evaluator shall discuss each performance rating, including comments from the department head, with the employee being evaluated. If an employee disagrees with any statement in an evaluation, such employee may submit to the department head within ten (10) days following the conference with the supervisor a written statement setting forth such employee's objections. Such objections shall be forwarded by the department head to the human resources director for placement in that employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-79. - Ratings confidential. 
Performance ratings shall be confidential and shall be made available only in accordance with the Georgia Open Records Act and to the employee's supervisor. 
(Amd. of 5-18-04; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-80—13-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SEPARATIONS 

Sec. 13-85. - Types of separation. 
Separations of employees from positions in the classified service shall be designated as one (1) of the following and shall be accomplished in the manner indicated in this division: resignation, termination, layoff, disability, death and retirement. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-86. - County equipment. 
At the time of separation and prior to final salary payment, all records, assets and other items of county property in the employee's custody shall be transferred to such employee's department head, and a statement indicating that all equipment has been returned shall be signed by the employee. The human resources director is authorized to withhold from the employee's final salary payment an amount equal to the full value of all equipment not accounted for by the employee. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-87. - Rights of employees. 
Employees who separate shall receive payment for all earned salary and vacation leave accumulated as provided in this chapter, subject to deductions as outlined in section 13-86. No payment for accumulated sick leave shall be made upon separation, except as provided in section 13-125(f). 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-88. - Resignation. 
To resign in good standing, an employee shall give notice, in writing, to such employee's department head at least two (2) calendar weeks prior to the effective date of such resignation. Failure to comply with this rule shall be entered on the service records of the employee. Less than ten (10) days notice shall be allowed on a case-by-case basis as approved by the department head and the director of human resources if the employee presents special conditions to them which warrant a shorter notice period, and, if a shorter notice period is approved, the employee's service record shall not reflect a negative connotation. 
(Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 4-16-02; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-89. - Termination. 
(a)  An employee who, without valid reason, fails to report to work for three (3) consecutive working days without authorized leave shall be separated from the payroll and reported as terminated. 
(b)  A department head may also terminate an employee for cause as outlined in section 13-101. The employee shall be furnished a notice of termination in writing which states the reasons for the termination and the employee's right to appeal the decision. 
(c)  If the employee wishes to appeal the decision of the department head, such employee may do so by following the procedures outlined in section 13-113. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-90. - Layoff. 
Employees may be laid off by the board of commissioners for fiscal reasons found to exist by the board which requires budgetary cutbacks. Job performance and length of service are the primary factors considered in determining which employees will be laid off. The following method will be used in determining layoffs: 
(1)  The immediate past evaluation will be the first consideration. 
(2)  Years of continuous employment with the county to be determined by the date of employment is the second consideration. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-91. - Disability. 
Action for separation for disability may be initiated by the employee or the county, but in all cases the action shall be initiated within six (6) months from the date the employee can no longer perform the required duties or when continuance on the job becomes a danger to such employee or others. The action taken must be supported by medical evidence acceptable to the human resources director. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-92. - Death. 
When a full-time employee on current active payroll dies while in the service of the county; the estate of the employee shall be paid the salary for the balance of the month in which the employee expires; or a minimum of two (2) weeks salary, whichever is greater, together with all sums due under sections 13-124(e) and 13-125(f) and all earned but unpaid salary. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-93. - Pregnancy. 
Pregnancy shall not be a cause for termination. However, when in the opinion of and written instructions from the employee's physician, the employee is not able to perform her duties at an acceptable level of performance, then the human resources director may reclassify the employee to a class which pays a similar or higher salary. If the human resources director is unable to so reclassify the employee as set forth above, then the provisions of section 13-131 shall apply. 
(Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-94—13-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION 

Sec. 13-100. - Types of disciplinary action. 
The following provisions shall govern disciplinary actions affecting employees in the classified service. A department head, subject to the appeal rights of the employee, shall have the following alternatives for disciplinary actions, either of which may be exercised singularly or together with others. All such action taken shall be noted in writing in the employee's permanent personnel file and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the employee: 
(1)  Reprimand. A department head may submit a written reprimand to an employee when an oral warning has not resulted in the expected improvements or when a more severe initial action is warranted. 
(2)  Probation. A department head may place an employee on probation for a period not to exceed six (6) months. The department head shall give written notice of such probation and shall state such conditions, if any, that are imposed. 
(3)  Suspension. 
a.  A department head may, for cause, suspend without pay any employee in such department head's department for up to thirty (30) days. A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for suspension shall be furnished to the employee and to the Human Resources Director. If, in the opinion of the department head, the conditions which gave rise to the suspension continue to exist at the end of the thirty-day period of suspension, such suspension may be continued by the department head for an additional period of thirty (30) days, and for additional periods of thirty (30) days thereafter as such conditions continue to exist. 
b.  The county has the right to request that a suspended employee take a drug test prior to returning to work. Refusal to take the drug test shall result in the employee being denied reinstatement. 
(4)  Demotion or reduction in salary. With the prior notice to the human resources director and county administrator, a department head may reduce the salary of an employee within the range provided in the pay plan or demote the employee for cause to a lower class. A written statement of the reasons for such action shall be given to the employee with copies to the human resources director and county administrator. 
(5)  Termination. An employee may be terminated by the department head for those reasons noted in section 13-89, and as outlined in section 13-101 below, with prior notice to the human resources director and the county administrator. A written statement of the reasons for such action shall be given to the employee with copies to the human resources director, the county administrator, and the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-21-98; Amd. of 11-7-06; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-101. - Reasons for disciplinary action. 
Actions of an employee which may result in the disciplinary action referred to in section 13-100 include, but are not limited to, the following offenses: 
(1)  Being convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Excessive time not working when on the job. Idleness, dereliction, or failure to work on assigned duties; 
(3)  Being absent without leave; 
(4)  Excessive tardiness; 
(5)  Abuse of sick leave; 
(6)  Carelessness, inefficiency, negligence or incompetence in the performance of assigned duties; 
(7)  Willfully giving false statements to supervisors, officials or the public; 
(8)  Violation of written county ordinances; administrative regulations or departmental rules; 
(9)  a.  Being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs when reporting for or during work, or drinking of alcoholic beverages or use of illegal drugs during working hours; 
b.  Possession of an illegal drug or controlled substance during working hours; 
c.  Any employee involved in an accident while on county duty operating a county vehicle shall be required to submit to a drug screening test; 
(10)  Instigation of, participation in or leadership of a strike, work stoppage, slowdown, or artificial restriction of productive work; 
(11)  The promotion of dissension, ill-will and/or insubordination within the employee's department; 
a.  Creating a disturbance resulting in an adverse effect on morale, production, or safety; 
b.  Threatening or attempting to inflict bodily harm; 
c.  Hitting, or other acts against another causing injury; 
(12)  Lack of personal hygiene or personal cleanliness; 
(13)  Violation of the provisions of division 11, ethics and conduct; 
(14)  Failure to follow county policies or safety rules; 
a.  Violations where safety to persons or property is not involved and/or one (1) safety violation by a county employee within a one-year period shall be sufficient cause for disciplinary action as outlined in section 13-100(1)—(3); 
b.  Violation where safety to persons or property is involved and/or three (3) safety violations by a county employee within a one-year period shall be sufficient cause for disciplinary actions as outlined in section 13-100(1)—(5); 
(15)  Discourtesy; use of insulting, abusive, or obscene language or gestures to fellow employees, customers, the public, or supervisors; 
(16)  Insubordination or refusal of a lawful or proper direct order by a supervisor or department head; 
(17)  Sexual harassment involving an employee, customer, or public; 
(18)  Immoral, indecent, or disgraceful conduct during work hours; 
(19)  The loss of job requirements, such as the loss of a necessary license or certificate, which prevents the adequate performance of assigned duties; 
(20)  Intentionally giving a false statement or information furnished in an employment application; 
(21)  Use of any county property, services, personnel, labor or other thing of value for personal gain or for any purpose other than the official business of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-7-90; Ord. of 4-18-97; Amd. of 3-20-01; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-102. - Emergency relief from duty. 
If it is determined to be in the best interest of the county, a supervisor who is not the department head who supervises an employee may temporarily relieve that employee from duty for disciplinary purposes. Relief from duty shall be only from the time the action is initiated by the supervisor until the beginning of the employee's next scheduled work period. The supervisor shall report the action and circumstances to the department head who shall review the action and initiate any further disciplinary actions which may be warranted. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-103. - Notice of pending disciplinary action. 
All employees, prior to imposition of any disciplinary action, shall be notified of the proposed action. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-104. - Employee liability for loss. 
Any employee who causes damage to or loss of county property may be required to repay the county government for any cost of repairs to or replacement of such property. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-105—13-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 13-110. - Policy. 
The policy of the county is to give prompt consideration and equitable adjustment to employee grievances. The county desires to adjust grievances informally, and both supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort to solve problems as they arise. However, it is recognized that there may be grievances which will be resolved only after a formal appeal and review, and no employee shall be disciplined or discriminated against in any way because of his or her use of the grievance procedure. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-111. - Definition. 
A grievance is a complaint made by an employee concerning: 
(1)  The interpretation of these and other personnel-related rules and regulations; 
(2)  Departmental work rules; or 
(3)  Disciplinary action affecting such employee's employment with the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-112. - Direct appeal of certain disciplinary action. 
Any permanent employee who is suspended, demoted or terminated shall have the right to appeal such action to the personnel review board. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-113. - Procedures. 
Any permanent classified employee shall have a grievance heard in the following manner: 
(1)  An employee shall first present such employee's grievance to such employee's supervisor, who shall make careful inquiry into the facts and circumstances of the complaint. The supervisor shall attempt to resolve the problem promptly and fairly. 
(2)  An employee who is dissatisfied with the decision of the supervisor may submit the grievance in writing to such person's department head within five (5) working days following the receipt of the decision of such employee's supervisor. The department head shall make a separate investigation into this matter and inform the employee in writing of such department head's decision and the reason for it within ten (10) working days after receipt of the employee's grievance. 
(3)  If the employee is dissatisfied with the decision of the department head and seeks review by the personnel review board, or if the employee has been the subject of disciplinary action and had elected to appeal directly to the personnel review board pursuant to section 13-112, then the following procedure shall be followed: 
a.  The employee must submit a request in writing to the human resources director within five (5) working days following the receipt of the decision of the department head or within ten (10) days of disciplinary action if such employee has been disciplined and has appealed directly to the board. 
b.  The human resources director shall notify the personnel review board of the employee's request for appeal, and it shall make such investigation and conduct such hearing as it deems necessary. Within forty-five (45) working days of the receipt of the employee's request for review, the board shall inform the employee in writing of its findings and decision. 
c.  If the personnel review board finds that the grievance of the employee is without merit, the action of the county shall be sustained. If the board finds that the grievance of the employee is meritorious, then the board has full authority to take such action, including restoration of lost salary, as it considers appropriate, which action is binding upon the county. If the board directs that changes be made in disciplinary action taken by the county, the board may reverse the action taken altogether or it may impose such adjustments in the disciplinary action as it considers appropriate. 
In determining whether or not the disciplinary action taken by the county shall be sustained, the board shall thoroughly review oral and written statements of the employee, of the employee's supervisor and of the department head, as well as the employee's personnel file, the employee's performance ratings, the reasons for the disciplinary action taken in light of the circumstances under which the discipline was made, and all other factors deemed relevant by the board. 
(4)  The employee shall have the right, at all levels, to a hearing and may be represented by counsel of such employee's choice. 
(5)  The provisions of this division are not available to persons dismissed from any department due to curtailment in funds, reduction in staff or abolishment of the position held by such employee. 
(Ord. of 3-7-00; Amd. of 11-7-06; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-114. - Records. 
All records of the proceedings contemplated in this division shall be placed in the employee's permanent personnel file. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-115—13-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE 

Sec. 13-120. - Scheduling; computation. 
(a)  The work schedule for each department shall be established by the department head with the approval of the elected official. 
(b)  Completed years of service are measured from the anniversary date of each employee in section 13-124 and 13-125. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-121. - Overtime. 
(a)  Any overtime worked by a non-exempt employee must have the prior approval of the department head, and if approved, shall be compensated as set forth in the Fair Labor Standard Act (FLSA). Overtime on an extended basis must also have the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No overtime shall be paid to employees and other parties exempt from, or not covered by, the Fair Labor Standard Act. Employees not eligible for paid overtime shall receive one and one-half (1½) hours of compensatory time for each hour worked overtime. These employees may accrue up to two hundred forty (240) hours compensatory time per the Fair Labor Standard Act and hours may be carried forward to future years. Compensatory time accrued will not be paid to any exempt employee except upon termination or retirement of an employee. 
(c)  All non-exempt employees may receive, in accordance with this paragraph and in lieu of overtime explained in paragraph (a) above, compensatory time off at a rate not less than one and one-half (1½) hours for each hour of employment for which overtime has been approved. Policy and standards for compensatory time are as follows: 
(1)  Non-exempt employees who work in the public safety activities, emergency response activities, or seasonal employees, may accrue no more the four hundred eighty (480) hours of compensatory time for hours worked or to be carried over to future years. All other non-exempt employees may accrue no more than two hundred forty (240) hours of compensatory time for hours worked or to be carried over to future years. Managers and directors are responsible for monitoring this policy for all of their non-exempt employees. 
(2)  Compensatory time accrued will not be paid to any non-exempt employee except upon termination or retirement of an employee. A non-exempt employee who has accrued compensatory time off shall upon termination or retirement, be paid for the unused compensatory time at a rate of compensation not less than: 
a.  The average regular rate received by such employee during the last three (3) years of the employee's employment, or: 
b.  The final regular rate received by such employee, whichever is higher. 
(3)  Non-exempt employees who have accrued compensatory time off and who have requested the use of such compensatory time off in lieu of time worked, shall be permitted by the department manager or director to use such time within a reasonable period after making a request to use the compensatory time if the use of such time does not unduly disrupt the operations of the department or the county work force. 
(Ord. of 8-7-90; Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-122. - Holidays. 
(a)  The following are designated as county holidays; New Years Day, Good Friday, National Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, National Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and National Martin Luther King's Birthday. 
(b)  All county employees shall be allowed three (3) personal leave days within the calendar year. The personal leave days will be credited to the employee during the first pay period of the calendar year. Personal leave days must be used on or before the last day of the calendar year or the employee will lose all remaining. Personal leave days will not accrue from year to year. Personal leave may be taken at the employee's discretion, subject to the approval of the department head. 
(c)  Other days may be declared holidays by the board of commissioners at its discretion. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as the holiday. When a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as a holiday. 
(Res. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 7-20-99; Ord. of 3-7-00; Ord. of 6-15-10, § 4; Ord. of 6-21-11; Ord. of 6-19-18) 
Sec. 13-123. - Holidays for part-time employees. 
Part-time employees shall not be paid for observed holidays not worked. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-124. - Vacation leave. 
(a)  Rate of leave accrual. Permanent, full-time employees begin to accrue vacation leave immediately upon employment, although vacation leave may not be used until the employee has successfully completed one (1) year of service. Employees are entitled to the paid vacation according to the schedule below: 
Completed: 
1 year = 10 days 
5 years = 12 days 
10 years = 18 days 
15 years = 20 days 
21 years = 24 days 
24 years = 25 days 
(b)  Emergency pay. In the event of emergency, an employee may receive up to two (2) weeks pay, in lieu of vacation, per calendar year provided such payment is recommended by the department head, human resources director and approved by the county administrator. 
(c)  Request for vacation leave . A request for vacation leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor and leave may be taken only after approval of the employee's department head. The vacation schedule shall be arranged in each department so that, insofar as practicable, the department can function without the hiring of additional temporary help. 
(d)  Maximum accumulation. Unused vacation leave may be accumulated by the employee from year to year, but such accumulation may never exceed a total of thirty-five (35) days (280 hrs./40-hr. employees; 420 hrs./56-hr. employees). Any hours above this amount at year's end will be added to your sick leave hours. 
(e)  Payment for unused leave. When an employee is separated from the county service such employee shall be paid for all unused vacation leave such employee has accrued, not to exceed thirty-five (35) days. 
(Ord. of 8-7-90; Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 3-7-00; Ord. of 4-16-02; Amd. of 5-18-04; Ord. of 4-15-08; Ord. of 3-17-09; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-125. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Sick leave provisions. Sick leave with pay shall be granted to permanent full-time employees only in the case of actual sickness or disability of the employee, the employee's children, the employee's spouse, and the employee's parents resulting from causes beyond the employee's control or medical or dental examination or treatments for which arrangements cannot be made outside of working hours. 
(b)  Reporting sick leave. The employee shall report to such employee's supervisor the reason for such employee's use of sick leave prior to such employee's scheduled work time, if possible. If not possible, such employee shall see that such absence is reported within thirty (30) minutes after the time the employee is scheduled to report for work. Failure to do so may be cause for denial of sick leave with pay. 
(c)  Doctor's certificate. For the following reasons a medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by the department head to substantiate leave requests for sick leave: 
(1)  Any period of absence consisting of three (3) or more consecutive days; 
(2)  A request for sick leave while on holiday or vacation leave; 
(3)  Sick leave for any duration, if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually, provided that an employee has been notified that a certificate will be required. 
(d)  Rate of leave accrual. Permanent, full-time employees begin to accrue sick leave immediately upon employment at the rate of ten and one-half (10½) days per year. Credit to the employee at the end of each month at the rate of seven (7) hours per month for employees who work forty (40) hours per week, and ten and one-half (10½) hours per month for employees who work fifty-six (56) hours per week. No employee may take sick leave until such employee has completed such employee's probationary period. 
(e)  Accumulation. Sick leave accumulation is unlimited, although there shall be no payment for such accumulation, except as is provided in section 13-125(f). 
(f)  Sick leave retirement/resignation. Any employee leaving employment after fifteen (15) years of service, having completed five (5) years of service by December 31, 2005, will receive one (1) week's pay for every year of service, provided the employee has accumulated a minimum of eight hundred (800) sick hours or one thousand two hundred (1,200) hours if on a fifty-six-hour pay week. All other employees hired on or after January 1, 2001 will only be able to have their accumulated sick leave credited towards time of service for their defined benefit pension calculation. 
(Ord. of 6-16-92, § 2; Ord. of 3-29-93; Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 9-21-99; Ord. of 3-20-01; Amd. of 5-2-03; Amd. of 11-1-05; Ord. of 3-17-09; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-126. - Workers' compensation. 
Employees are covered under the provisions of the Worker's Compensation Act. If any employee is injured while on the job, the employee must immediately report the injury to the department head, specifying the date and time of injury, details of the accident or injury, the name and address of attending physician and the name of hospital in the event of hospitalization. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-127. - Temporary disabilities not covered by worker's compensation. 
Any employee who becomes temporarily disabled who is not covered by worker's compensation shall be allowed to exhaust sick leave and vacation leave which has accumulated to the date of disability. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-128. - Funeral leave. 
Funeral leave with pay up to a maximum of three (3) working days for each loss shall be granted for absence from duty of the employees in the event of death in the immediate family. "Immediate family" for purpose of this section means husband, wife, father, mother, daughter, son, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,* grandmother, grand-father, stepfather, stepmother and stepchildren, spouses' grandparents, grand-children, formal legal guardian (with proof). 
(Ord. of 3-29-93; Ord. of 4-16-02; Amd. of 9-20-05; Amd. of 4-17-07; Ord. of 6-15-10, § 3; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-129. - Military leave. 
(a)  Any permanent employee who is inducted or enlists in the military forces of the United States shall be placed on military leave without pay, such leave to extend through a date ninety (90) days after such person is relieved from service. If within such period such person applies for reinstatement and reports for duty accordingly, such person shall be reinstated with like seniority, status and pay to such person's former position or to a comparable position for which such person is qualified, unless the employer's circumstances have so changed, in the opinion of the human resources director, as to make it impossible or unreasonable to do so. 
(b)  The rights of public officers and employees away from work on military duty are regulated by the terms and provisions of O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279, the terms of which are expressly incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-130. - Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). 
(a)  Definition. A family and/or medical leave of absence shall be defined as an approved absence available to eligible employees for up to twelve (12) weeks of unpaid leave per year under particular circumstances that are critical to the life of a family. Leave may be taken: upon the birth of the employee's child; upon the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster care; when the employee is needed to care for a child, spouse, or parent who has a serious health condition; or when the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of his or her position because of a serious health condition. 
(b)  Scope. An employee may take a total of twelve (12) workweeks of unpaid leave for the reasons specified above during the twelve-month period measured forward from the date any employee's first FMLA leave begins. 
If an employee is entitled to paid leave under another benefit plan or policy, which includes but is not limited to short-term disability, unused paid vacation, sick, family or personal leave, the county may require or the employee may elect to take the paid leave first. Such available paid leave will be counted against the FMLA twelve-week unpaid leave entitlement. Unless otherwise required, no employee will be entitled to more than a total of twelve (12) weeks, paid and/or unpaid, for leave which qualifies under the FMLA. 
(c)  Eligibility. To be eligible for leave under this policy an employee must have been employed for at least twelve (12) months in total, and must have worked at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) hours during the twelve-month period preceding the commencement of the leave. To be eligible the employee must also work at a facility with fifty (50) or more employees within a seventy-five-mile radius. 
(d)  Regulation and condition of leave. 
(1)  An employee is entitled to take FMLA leave for the birth of a child, the adoption of a child, or placement of a child in foster care. For the birth, adoption, or placement of a child in foster care, the FMLA leave expires twelve (12) months after the birth or placement. 
(2)  An employee is entitled to take FMLA leave to care for a parent, spouse or child with a serious health condition or if the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of the job because of a serious health condition. A serious health condition is an injury, illness or impairment that involves incapacity due to inpatient care or continuing treatment. 
(3)  For an employee to be entitled to take FMLA for his own serious health condition, he must have a serious health condition as described above and be unable to perform the essential functions of the job because of the condition. The essential functions of a job are the fundamental job duties of the employment position. The county may submit a statement of the essential functions of the job to a medical provider for review. 
(4)  Notice. 
a.  When the need for leave is foreseeable, such as the birth or adoption of a child, or planned medical treatment, the employee must provide thirty (30) days' prior notice, and make efforts to schedule leave so as not to disrupt county operations. In cases of illness, the employee will be required to report periodically on his or her leave status and intention to return to work. 
b.  In cases of a medical emergency or other unforeseeable event, the employee must give the employer notice of the need for FMLA leave within two (2) days of when the need for FMLA leave becomes known to the employee. 
(5)  Certification. 
a.  The county will require that an employee provide certification of a serious health condition of a family member or his or her own serious health condition. 
b.  The county will require medical certification from the health care provider to support a claim for leave to care for a seriously ill child, spouse or parent or for an employee's own serious health condition. 
c.  All requests for family and medical leaves of absence due to illness require a certificate from a health care provider with the following information: Sufficient medical certification stating: 1) the date of which the serious health condition commenced; 2) the probable duration of the condition; 3) the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the health care provider regarding the condition. In addition, for purposes of leave to care for a child, spouse, or parent, the certificate should give an estimate of the amount of time that the employee is needed to provide such care. For purposes of leave for an employee's illness, the certificate must state that the employee is unable to perform the function of his or her position. 
d.  The employee has at least fifteen (15) days to provide the certification of the form provided by the employer. 
e.  In its discretion, the county may require a second medical opinion from a physician it chooses. If the first and second opinions differ, the county at its own expense, may require the binding opinion of a third health care provider, approved jointly by the county and the employee. The county may require subsequent recertification of a reasonable basis. 
(6)  Intermittent or reduced leave. If medically necessary for a serious health condition of the employee or his or her spouse, child, or parent, leave may be taken on an intermittent or reduced-leave schedule. The employee must attempt to schedule the leave so as not to disrupt the county's operations. Intermittent or reduced leave for the birth, adoption or placement in foster care of a child can be taken only by prior arrangement and approval of the county. 
For the case of the care for a parent, spouse or child or for the employee's own serious health condition, the employee will be required to provide certification that the intermittent or reduced leave for the planned medical treatment is medically necessary, the dates for such treatment, and the duration. 
If leave is requested on the intermittent or reduced-leave basis, the county may require the employee to transfer temporarily to an alternative position which better accommodates recurring periods of absence or a part time schedule, provided that the position has the equivalent rate of pay and benefits. 
(7)  The employee may be required to periodically report on his or her status, which includes the employee's intention to return to work. Once it is clear the employee will not be returning to work, he or she is no longer entitled to any FMLA leave or benefits. 
(8)  Spouses who are both employed by the county are entitled to a total of twelve (12) weeks of leave (rather than twelve (12) weeks each for the birth, adoption, or placement of a child or for the care of a sick parent. 
(e)  Status of employee benefits during leave of absence. 
(1)  The county will continue health care coverage during the FMLA leave on the same terms and conditions as prior to the leave. 
(2)  An employee who is granted an approved leave of absence under this policy is responsible for any contribution to the premium rate for his or her health insurance coverage at the same rate the employee was paying prior to the leave, if any. The employee is responsible for arranging to pay the premium contributions during the period of unpaid absence. The employee's monthly contributions to the premium must be delivered no later than the last day of each month as payment for the next month. Failure of the employee to pay the premium portion within thirty (30) days is considered a debt of the employee to the county and the county is entitled to recoup the premium payment from the employee. 
(3)  In the event that an employee elects not to return to work upon completion of an approved unpaid leave of absence, the county may recover from the employee the cost of any payments made to maintain the employee's coverage, unless the failure to return to work was due to the continuation, recurrence, or onset of a serious medical condition or for reasons beyond the employee's control. 
(4)  With respect to all other employee benefits, other than health benefits, upon returning to work the employee is entitled to all accrued benefits as of the date the leave commenced. The employee is not entitled to any accrual of seniority or other employee benefits during the leave period. Benefit entitlement based upon length of service will be calculated as of the last paid workday prior to the start of the unpaid leave of absence. 
Where it is necessary for the employer to continue any premium or other contribution to ensure the equivalent level of benefits upon the employee's return (for benefits other than health benefits), the employer may recoup those premiums or other contributions from the employee whether or not he or she returns to work. 
(f)  Reinstatement. 
(1)  After a period of FMLA leave, an employee is entitled to return to his or her previous position or an equivalent position with no loss of benefits. There is no obligation of the employer to return the employee to the same position he or she held before the leave. 
(2)  A restored employee is not entitled to any right, benefit, or position of employment other than any right, benefit, or position to which the employee would have been entitled had the employee not taken leave. 
(3)  Key employees. A key employee is an employee who is among the highest-paid ten (10) percent of the county's employees within seventy-five (75) miles. If reinstatement of a key employee at the conclusion of the leave period would result in substantial and grievous economic injury to the county, reinstatement to the key employee can be denied. 
If it is a possibility that reinstatement will be denied to a key employee, that employee will be provided notice that he or she is a key employee and that rights to reinstatement and continued health benefits could be denied if the reinstatement poses a grievous economic injury to the employer. 
Once it is determined that reinstatement would cause grievous economic injury to the county, the employee will be notified in person or by way of certified mail that reinstatement will be denied. At this time the employee will be provided a reasonable time within which to return to work. 
FMLA leave and continued health care benefits to a key employee denied reinstatement will be continued for the balance of the leave period unless the employee gives notice that he will not return to work. 
(4)  Fitness-for-duty. When an employee has taken FMLA leave for his or her own serious medical condition, an employer may require the employee to provide a fitness-for-duty certificate before returning the employee to work. 
(g)  Procedures. Completion of request for family and medical leave of absence form. 
A request for family and medical leave of absence form must be originated in duplicate by the employee. This form should be completed in detail, signed by the employee, submitted to the immediate supervisor for proper approvals, to be forwarded to the Human Resources/ Personnel Department. The form must be submitted thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date of the leave when the need for FMLA leave is foreseeable. 
When the need for FMLA leave is not foreseeable, this form should be submitted within two (2) days of when the need for FMLA leave becomes known to the employee. 
In all cases where certification is required, the certification form provided by the county must be provided with the request for family and medical leave of absence form. 
Copies of all forms can be obtained from the employee's supervisor or the Personnel Department. 
(Ord. of 10-5-93, §§ I—VII; Ord. of 3-7-00; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 5, 1993, §§ I—VII, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 13-130 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 13-131. - Leave of absence without pay. 
Leave of absence without pay may be granted by the human resources director to an employee upon the recommendation of such employee's department head for a period not to exceed six (6) consecutive months. No accrual of privileges or benefits is allowed for an employee who is on leave of absence. However, upon return to full-time employment the employee may be eligible for the annual merit increase subject to the provisions of division 6. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 13-132, which pertained to payment in lieu of worker's compensation, and derived from an Ordinance of April 21, 1998, and an Amendment of November 1, 2005, was discontinued January 20, 2006. 
Sec. 13-133. - Benefits while off the job. 
If an employee is on military leave, disability leave, sick leave, or leave of absence and does not receive such employee's regular bi-weekly compensation from county funds, such employee shall not be entitled to accumulate and receive the benefits set forth in this division, during leave time. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-134. - Retirement benefits. 
Retirement will be in accordance with the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA). Anyone wishing to retire must choose one of the following retirement options: 
(1)  In the event an employee wishes to retire and is 
a.  At least sixty-two (62) years of age; and 
b.  Has fifteen (15) years of consecutive service as a Douglas County employee; 
The county will provide an insurance package that includes life insurance in the amount of half their annual salary, medical and dental coverage cost-free to the employee. This option is only available to those hired as full-time employees on or before January 1, 2001, and had continuous full-time employment through December 31, 2005. 
(2)  In the event an employee reaches fifty-five (55) years of age and has twenty-five (25) years of consecutive service as a county employee, the county will provide an insurance package that includes life insurance in the amount of half their annual salary and medical/dental coverage according to the progression schedule listed below: 

 
This option is only available to those hired as full-time employees on or before January 1, 2001, and having continuous full-time employment through December 31, 2005. The percentage paid by the retiree shall be reduced according to the incremental age progression shown above, until the retiree has reached the age of sixty-two (62), at which time the employee will no longer be required to pay for their retirement insurance coverage. It will be the sole responsibility of the retired employee to notify the county human resources department when they reach each age milestone (see waiver letter in the human resources department). 
(3)  In the event an employee reaches fifty-five (55) years of age and has thirty (30) years or greater of consecutive service as a county employee, the county will provide an insurance package that includes life insurance in the amount of half their annual salary and medical/dental coverage according to the progression schedule listed below: 

 
This option is only available to those hired as full-time employees on or before January 1, 2001, and having continuous full-time employment through December 31, 2005. The percentage paid by the retiree shall be reduced according to the incremental age progression shown above, until the retiree has reached the age of 59 ½, at which time the employee will no longer be required to pay for their retirement insurance coverage. It will be the sole responsibility of the retired employee to notify the county human resources department when they reach each age milestone (see waiver letter in the human resources department). 
(4)  Using the Rule of 80 (which is a combination of age and years of service), employees will be allowed to purchase pre-Medicare and lifetime medical coverage for themselves and their families at reasonable group rates. This rate will be adjusted annually depending upon the negotiated county group rate. 
Life Insurance - Those employees hired prior to January 1, 2001, and having continuous full-time employment through December 31, 2005, the county will provide an insurance package that includes life insurance in the amount of half their annual salary at the time of retirement. Those employees hired after January 1, 2001, will have the option to purchase up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) of life insurance at the county's voluntary group rate. 
All previous policies, procedures, and agreements are null and void and superseded by paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and (4) above, with the exception of previously retired employees authorized to pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month for retired health insurance, which will be "grandfathered". 
(Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 4-18-97; Ord. of 9-21-99; Ord. of 3-7-00; Amd. of 11-1-05; Ord. of 6-15-10, § 5; Ord. of 6-21-11; Ord. of 8-21-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 13-135. - Civil leave. 
(a)  An employee called for jury duty shall be given time off with pay to appear in court and allowed to keep any pay received for such jury duty. 
(b)  An employee who initiates civil proceeding shall not be authorized to charge such employee's time away from work as civil leave, but such time must be deducted from other available leave. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11; Ord. of 9-18-12, § 1) 
Sec. 13-136. - Group insurance information. 
Information on county employee group insurance benefits such as medical, dental, life, vision, etc., is available in the human resources department. 
(Ord. of 4-15-08; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Secs. 13-137—13-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - ETHICS AND CONDUCT 

Sec. 13-140. - Outside employment. 
No employee may engage in any paid employment in addition to such employee's employment with the county unless it is approved by such employee's department head. The standards used for approval or disapproval of outside employment shall be based on whether the outside employment will or can cause a conflict of interest with the employee's employment with the county and whether it will cause interference with the efficient performance of an employee's duty with the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-141. - Confidential information. 
An employee may not directly or indirectly make use of or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, confidential non-public information acquired by virtue of employment with the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-142. - Gifts and gratuities. 
(a)  An employee shall not accept gifts, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns or individuals with whom such employee has official relationships on business of the county government. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally, not to prohibit employees from accepting social courtesies which promote good public relations, not to prohibit employees from obtaining loans from regular lending institutions. 
(b)  It is particularly important that inspectors, contracting officers and enforcement officers guard against relationships which might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-143. - Additional ethics provisions. 
All persons employed by the county shall: 
(1)  Put loyalty to the highest moral principles and county above loyalty to person, party or government department; 
(2)  Uphold the Constitution, laws and legal regulations of the United States and the state of all governments therein and never be a party to their evasion; 
(3)  Give a full day's labor for a full day's pay and give to the performance of such person's duties such person's earnest effort and best thought; 
(4)  Seek to find and employ more efficient and economical ways of getting tasks accomplished; 
(5)  Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not, and never accept, for himself or his family favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of such person's governmental duties; 
(6)  Make no private promises of any kind binding on public duty; 
(7)  Engage in no business with the government, either directly or indirectly, which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of such person's governmental duties; 
(8)  Never use any information coming to such person confidentially in the performance of governmental duties as a means for making private profit; 
(9)  Expose corruption wherever discovered; 
(10)  Uphold these principles, ever conscious that public office is a public trust. 
(Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-144. - Political activity. 
Employees of the county are encouraged to exercise their rights to vote; but no employee shall make use of county time or equipment to aid a political candidate, party or cause or use a county position to influence, coerce or intimidate any person in the interest of a political candidate, party or cause. An employee violating this sections shall be dismissed; as set forth in Division 8. 
(Ord. of 8-2-88; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-145. - Public office. 
(a)  No employee of the county shall hold public office in any political subdivision in the county. Political subdivision shall mean the county, any municipality, the board of education, or any authority of commission set up under the laws of the state or by ordinance of the county. 
(b)  Any employee who qualifies for public office in the county shall immediately resign. Failure to resign upon qualification shall result in dismissal. 
(Ord. of 5-16-89; Amd. of 6-17-03; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Sec. 13-146. - County dress code. 
(a)  Appearance is an important part of community relations and it is not only important that employees be courteous and efficient but that they also contribute favorably to the county's image through proper dress and personal grooming. Employees should appear on the premises appropriately and modestly dressed, neat and clean in person, and in clothing that is devoid of unpleasant perfumes and body odors. Good taste must be displayed with regard to fit. Tight, extremely baggy, low cut or revealing garments are not acceptable for the work setting. Appropriate appearance includes hairstyles. 
(b)  The following should be considered a set of standards and guidelines for what is appropriate to wear in the workplace and to provide consistency in the type of dress worn throughout the county. (Please note that department heads reserve the right to require change in an employee's attire if it is deemed inappropriate.) 
(1)  Female personnel: Hair should be neat and clean. Dresses or pantsuits should be modest. Denim may be worn in denim coordinates. Employees should be properly attired, and this means no halters, shorts, blue jeans, see-through blouses or slogan T-shirts. 
It shall be the policy of the Douglas County Board of Commissioners that office employees who are not designated to wear uniforms will be permitted to wear split skirts upon the approval of their supervisor. Employees who work outside the office environment will be allowed to wear jeans, split skirts, capris leggings are acceptable if worn with appropriate coverings (long blouse, dress or tunic), and shorts upon the approval of their supervisor. The clothing must not be higher than two (2) inches above the middle of the knee. Supervisors who approve clothing under this policy must assure that it provides a well-mannered and professional appearance for the employees. Clothing with holes, torn, dirty, or similar appearance is not acceptable. 
(2)  Male personnel: Hair should be kept neat and clean and above collar. Faddish and long hairstyles are not appropriate in the professional departments and are not considered safe for the maintenance or construction related employees. 
For reasons of safety, no facial hair, except a moustache, may be worn by a firefighter or deputy Sheriff unless approved by department head (ie, undercover, etc.) 
Unless you are required to wear a uniform or if your position requires a specific type of clothing, daily attire for men should include knit slacks, dress pants, Khakis, long/short sleeve dress shirts, button down shirts and polo style shirts. This does not include tank tops, shorts, blue jeans, see through shirts or slogan T-Shirts. 
(3)  Footwear: In an effort to keep the workplace safe and the environment professional, the following shoe types should not be worn to work; flip flops, excessively worn or soiled shoes, or any shoes that the department head feels is inadequate for the workplace and the environment in which it is worn. 
Employees are required to wear their county identification badges where visible at all times while at work. 
Exceptions: 
•  Special accommodations may be made for this dress code, based upon health reasons documented by a physician's note. 
•  Exceptions to these guidelines shall be made for those departments that have a specific dress code or uniforms (public safety, maintenance, transportation, appraisal, property management, etc.) or for employees who regularly work outdoors. 
•  The department head has the discretion to make adaptions to the dress code guidelines for special events. 
•  Please use the aforementioned standards and guidelines as a benchmark for casual Fridays. 
(Ord. of 5-16-93; Ord. of 3-29-93; Ord. of 6-21-11; Ord. of 6-19-18, § 2) 
Sec. 13-147. - Non-harassment policy. 
It is the firm policy of the county to maintain a workplace free from unwanted harassment based upon race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, disability, veteran's status or any other status protected by applicable state, federal or local law. All such harassment is prohibited. Retaliation against employees or prospective employees reporting harassment is also prohibited. 
Harassment. Unlawful harassment is prohibited by the policy and consists of verbal or physical conduct that is abusive toward an individual. Such prohibited harassment may occur because of that individual's race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, disability, veteran's status or other prohibited reason that has the purpose or effect of: 
(1)  Creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment; 
(2)  Unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance; or 
(3)  Otherwise adversely affecting an individual's employment opportunities. 
Harassing conduct includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Epithets, slurs, negative stereotyping, or threatening, intimidating or hostile acts that relate to race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, disability, veteran's status or other prohibited reason; and 
(2)  Written or graphic materials which are abusive towards an individual or group because of race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, disability, veteran's status or other prohibited reason and which are communicated on walls, bulletin boards, through electronic communications, or otherwise circulated in the workplace. 
This policy extends to all electronic and voice mail communications. 
Sexual harassment. All county employees must be allowed to work in an environment free from unsolicited and unwelcomed sexual conduct and comments. Sexual harassment is a violation of the law and of this policy. Sexual harassment is defined by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission as any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors, or other physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
(1)  Submission to the conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment. 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting the individual; or 
(3)  The conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the individual's performance or of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
Sexual harassment does not refer to occasional compliments. It refers to behavior which is not welcome, which is personally offensive, which debilitates morale, and which therefore interferes with the work effectiveness of the individual harassed. Sexual harassment may occur between employees or between employees and suppliers/customers and is not limited to employees and supervisors. 
Sexual harassment may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
•  Verbal conduct, such as epithets, derogatory comments, slurs, unwanted sexual advances, or sexually-oriented verbal "kidding" or abuse; 
•  Physical conduct, such as unwanted touching, patting, pinching, blocking normal movement or assault; 
•  Subtle pressure for sexual activity; 
•  Demands to submit to sexual requests, accompanied by implied or direct promises of preferential treatment or threats concerning an individual's employment status; 
•  Visual harassment such as sexually-explicit or sexually-derogatory posters, obscene gestures; cartoons, photographs, or drawings; or 
•  Retaliation for opposing, reporting or threatening to report unlawful harassment, or for participating in an investigation, proceeding or hearing regarding potential harassment. 
Employee responsibility. Employees should not tolerate harassing conduct. Any employee who believes that he or she has experienced unlawful harassment in connection with his or her employment or who is aware of the harassment of other employees or prospective employees has a duty to report the potential policy violation so that the appropriate corrective action may be taken. 
All employees are responsible to ensure that they do not participate in, promote or support any form of harassment that affects the workplace. 
Management responsibility. Managers and supervisors are to comply with the county's anti-harassment policy and to prevent and correct any harassment prohibited by the Policy. Managers and supervisors are responsible to ensure that the employees in their areas are aware of the policy and that any and all complaints of harassment are promptly and properly investigated and any appropriate action taken. The personnel department is available for consultation. 
Complaint procedure Any employee or prospective employee who experiences harassment in connection with his or her employment, or who is aware of the harassment of other employees or prospective employees, should immediately contact his or her supervisor, or the human resources director or the county administrator. If you have made a complaint which you believe has not been properly addressed or resolved, you should immediately contact the human resources director or the county administrator. Complaints should be in writing where possible and should include all details, specifying all names, dates, times, etc. 
Any reported violation of this policy will receive prompt and appropriate action. The county will investigate all complaints alleging harassment and all instances potentially constituting harassment that come to its attention. When conducting an investigation, care will be taken to protect confidentiality to the degree possible, while still permitting the county to conduct the investigation and to comply with applicable federal, state and local law. 
Following an investigation, the county will take prompt and appropriate corrective action to remedy any harassment. Employees who are found to engage in harassment will be subject to corrective action, up to and including termination. 
If a harassment complaint is direct against a county representative normally involved in processing such complaints, the functions assigned to the (those) person(s) by these procedures will be transferred to a superior as designated by senior county management. 
No retaliation. The county strictly prohibits retaliation against any employee for using the complaint procedure or for truthfully and in good faith filing, testifying, assisting in or participation in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing regarding potential harassment. 
(Ord. of 9-15-92; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 15, 1992, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 13-147 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 13-148. - Drug-free workplace statement. 
The county is a drug-free workplace. 
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in the workplace, and disciplinary action will result for violation of this prohibition pursuant to the county merit system, section 13-101 (9). Disciplinary action includes; reprimand, probation, suspension, demotion/reduction in salary, and termination. If an employee is convicted of a criminal drug statute involving the manufacture, distribution, dispensation, use, or possession of any controlled substance for a violation occurring in the workplace, the employee must notify the director of human resources within five (5) days of such conviction. A conviction includes a plea of nolo contendere. As a condition of employment, an employee is required to abide by the terms of this drug-free workplace statement. 
Any individual covered by this policy may be subject to a fitness for duty evaluation, and urine and/or breath testing when there are reasons to believe that drug or alcohol use is adversely affecting job performance. A reasonable suspicion referral for testing will be made on the basis of documented objective facts and circumstances which are consistent with the short-term effects of substance abuse or alcohol misuse. 
Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made or authorized by a supervisor who is trained to detect the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use and who reasonably concludes that an individual covered by this policy may be adversely affected or impaired in his/her work performance due to possible prohibited substance abuse or alcohol misuse. 
As a condition of employment, an employee is required to abide by the terms of this drug-free workplace statement. 
If an employee needs information, assistance, and/or counseling on the dangers of drug abuse in the work-place, the employee may contact the director of human resources or the county's E.A.P. services to be directed to an agency or person who can provide assistance. 
(Ord. of 3-7-95; Ord. of 3-7-00; Ord. of 3-20-01; Ord. of 6-21-11) 
Chapter 14 - ROADS, STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Obstructing streets, § 9-65. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETLIGHTS 

Sec. 14-20. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The board of commissioners does hereby declare that it shall promote the health, safety and general public welfare of the citizens of the county by providing for the erection of streetlights in the public rights-of-way of the county. To that end, therefore, this article is adopted in order to effect the creation of streetlight districts and to provide for the construction of streetlights in the public rights-of-way in the county. This article shall not be deemed to apply to property in the county other than in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1101; Ord. of 5-1-90, § 1) 
Sec. 14-21. - Street light tax districts created; register; responsibility for cost. 
(a)  There is created hereby special tax districts which shall be known as street light tax districts which shall be identified by a number assigned by the engineering/public works department. Each such street light tax district identified by a street light tax district number shall contain and include the tax parcel number of each lot within the said street light tax district. Existing street light districts shall become street light tax districts upon the enactment of the legislation from which this section derived, and new street light tax districts shall be created upon application or proper petition and approval of the board of commissioners as provided hereinafter. Each new street light tax district so created shall be assigned a number and shall contain the tax parcel numbers of each lot contained therein. 
(b)  A register of street light tax districts shall be maintained in the office of engineering/public works and the office of the Douglas County Tax Commissioner. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(c)  The cost of providing and maintaining street light services as provided by this article shall be borne by the owners of the property receiving that service. The charge therefore shall be such as is determined by resolution of the board of commissioners, giving consideration for the street lights, electrical service charges, and the size and number of the lots serviced by the street lights. In the event of excessive vandalism to street lights within a district which results in a county being billed for repairs, the county may pro rate these repair bills and add a pro rata share of these bills to the charge. Charges shall be assessed against all lots within the street light district whether or not the lot is located within the boundaries of a particular subdivision, so long as the lot is located within the boundaries of the street light districts. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1102; Ord. of 5-1-90, § 2) 
Sec. 14-22. - Collection and responsibility for administration. 
(a)  The charges for street lighting in each street light district shall be paid as a street light district tax, and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot or lot resident within each street light tax district. 
(b)  The administration of the services herein provided and for all billing and accounting shall be the responsibility of the board of commissioners or some department of the county government to which that responsibility shall be assigned by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Whereas the office of the tax commissioner of Douglas County shall be responsible for the timely collection of the tax assessed to each street light tax district, it shall not be responsible for accounting beyond its internal accounting procedures in order to provide an adequate record of the collection and the transmittal of the funds collected. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1103; Ord. of 5-1-90, § 3) 
Sec. 14-23. - Lien created. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the county shall have the rights available under the laws of the state for assessment, the creation of a lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided, together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure and sale. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1104; Ord. of 5-1-90, § 4) 
Sec. 14-24. - Deposit required; forfeiture. 
In addition to the other charges authorized in this article, the county shall have the right to require deposits from the lot owners receiving the streetlight service in such amount as shall be determined by the board of commissioners. This deposit shall be held by the county as security for payment for services rendered pursuant to this article, and the county shall have the authority to set off against the deposit for nonpayment for services at such times and on such occasions as shall be determined by the county. Notice of such setoff shall be given to the lot owner by mail at the address of the property serviced by the streetlights, although advance notice of such setoff shall not be required. In the event of a reduction in the deposit of a property owner because of failure to pay charges assessed pursuant to this article, the lot owner shall be required to restore the deposit to its required level upon request by the county. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1105) 
Sec. 14-25. - Streetlight construction by property developers. 
(a)  All developers of residential subdivisions in the county with lots less than five (5) acres in size, and all developers of shopping centers, industrial parks and similar such developments, shall be required at their own expense to provide streetlight services in the public rights-of-way in such developments in conformity with this article. 
(b)  Such developers, at the time of the submission of the preliminary plats or drawings of the development, or at the time of application for a building permit, whichever shall first occur, shall present a proposed streetlight layout which details the proposed streetlight service for the development. The proposal presented by the developer must be approved by the county engineer prior to obtaining any building permit for that development. All fixtures and standards/poles installed or to be used shall be approved not only by the county but also by the utility company which will provide electricity to the streetlights and which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. All such fixtures shall have appropriate arm length to place the light over the street, provided that no arm shall be less than two and one-half (2½) feet long. Should the county engineer disapprove the streetlight layout, the grounds for disapproval shall be communicated in writing to the developer. Any such disapproval by the county engineer may be appealed to the board of commissioners by filing a request for review with the county engineer within thirty (30) days from the date of the written notice of disapproval. The county engineer shall at that point transmit to the board of commissioners all papers and related documents pertaining to the action taken by the county engineer, and the board of commissioners shall review the matter at the next regularly scheduled public meeting. The board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, entirely or in part, the decision of the county engineer. 
(c)  At the time of the submission of the final plat for the subdivisions, shopping centers, industrial parks, office parks or other such development on which streetlights have been constructed at the expense of the developer, the developer shall pay to county in advance a sum equal to the customary streetlight rates charged by the county for similar developments for a period of one (1) year. 
(d)  The county engineer shall not receive the final plat until such time as all the provisions of this section have been satisfied, and until the developers further submit to the county engineer proof of payment for construction and installation of the streetlights in the areas sought to be dedicated, together with a copy of an executed agreement with the appropriate utility company for complete maintenance of all streetlights and related structures, wires and installations. 
(e)  Upon the recommendation of the subdivision review staff the board of commissioners shall approve or deny the final plat by resolution at a regularly scheduled board of commissioners meeting not later than forty-five (45) days following the submission of the recommendation of the review staff. The streetlight district is created upon the approval of the board of commissioners of the final plat. The date of creation for the streetlight district shall be the date of approval of the final plat. 
(f)  Notwithstanding all other provisions of the subdivision laws, rules and regulations of planning and zoning of Douglas County and other ordinances, any developer, contractor or other persons securing approval in accordance with section 14-25 shall post a bond equal to the installation cost and one year's electrical power for the street lighting. This bond must be given at the time of written approval of design as specified in section 14-25(b). The bond shall be payable to the chairman of the board of commissioners of Douglas County, Georgia and will provide that it shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the county manager of Douglas County or his designed representative shall have indicated that the work required for the construction and installation of street lighting in a subdivision has been satisfactorily completed. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1106; Ord. of 10-17-89; Ord. of 1-21-92) 
Sec. 14-26. - Lighting in existing residential areas; creation of streetlight districts. 
(a)  Any lot owner in any unincorporated area of the county may present a request for the creation of a streetlight district to the county engineer. Upon receipt of the request, the county engineer shall determine the appropriate boundaries for a street lighting district which will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The county engineer shall then prepare a plat showing this proposed street lighting district, and a petition for the creation of the proposed street lighting district shall then be circulated among the lot owners in the proposed district. If seventy-five (75) percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition for the creation of a street lighting district, the petition shall be presented to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed street lighting district, giving consideration to safety and economic factors in making such determination. Unless one hundred (100) percent of the lot owners have signed the petition, the public hearing shall be advertised one (1) time in the official organ of the county; and signs shall be posted in the proposed street lighting district giving notice of the hearing, at least ten (10) days before the public hearing. The number and size of the signs shall be such as is required by the county zoning ordinance for a request to rezone property. 
(b)  The petition for creation of the proposed street lighting district must be returned to the county engineer within ninety (90) days after it is obtained from such engineer's office. The county engineer, in such engineer's sole discretion, will verify the signatures on the petition prior to advertising the public hearing. 
(c)  All other provisions of this article with respect to payment for street lighting, including provisions for required deposits, shall apply equally to the services created and provided pursuant this section. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1107) 
Sec. 14-27. - Lighting in other areas. 
Street lighting in any other areas in the county shall be authorized upon recommendation by the county engineer, approval by the board of commissioners, and compliance with the rules and regulations established by this article. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1108) 
Sec. 14-28. - Creation of districts under special conditions. 
In areas where special conditions as to safety, security, land topography, economic and other factors may be involved, the board of commissioners may create special lighting districts and provide for special street lighting under such terms and conditions as may be determined by the board of commissioners, any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding; provided, however, that in such instances, a public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners after advertisement in the official organ of the county one (1) time at least ten (10) days before conducting such public hearing. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1109) 
Sec. 14-29. - Authority to contract with public utilities. 
The board of commissioners may contract with the public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1110) 
Sec. 14-30. - Other lights in or near public right-of-way. 
The approval of the county engineer shall be necessary before any person shall be authorized to install a security light or other such lighting fixture within the public right-of-way. All lighting fixtures within or near the public rights-of-way shall be installed and operated in such a manner so as to prevent interference with the normal use of the public rights-of-way in any manner, including glare, location of blinds, and other such means of potential interference. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1111) 
Sec. 14-31. - Operation standards. 
The county engineer, in conjunction with the appropriate local utility companies, and in consideration of the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1973), as amended, shall seek to insure adequate illumination of the public rights-of-way, and, to that end, shall be authorized to require lighting fixtures to be installed which comply with certain minimum foot-candle illumination standards. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1112) 
Sec. 14-32. - Exceptions to terms of article. 
The board of commissioners may grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article where special conditions or hardships exist. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1113) 
Sec. 14-33. - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1114) 
Sec. 14-34. - Copies, availability of provisions. 
A copy of this article shall be spread upon the official minutes of the board of commissioners, and the county engineer is hereby required to post a copy of the same in the office of the county engineer, and to provide copies thereof for persons desiring the same. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1115) 
Sec. 14-35. - Rate schedule. 
The board of commissioners is authorized to adopt a rate schedule and to affix that rate schedule as an exhibit to this article, which schedule may be amended or modified upon properly adopted resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 55-1116) 
Secs. 14-36—14-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY EASEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— County Drawings, Standard numbers 3.01 and 3.02, of Backfilling and Repaving Utility Cuts, and Underground Utilities—Typical Locations, respectively, are on file in the office of the clerk. 

Sec. 14-40. - Notice of intention to utilize right-of-way. 
Any public utility seeking to condemn or utilize an easement over or through or within the paved portion of the public right-of-way which is under the supervision and control of the county, in order to run wires, pipes, cables, maintain dams, flow backwater, or for any other uses necessary to its purpose, shall first notify the county engineering department or its designated agent of the utility's intention to so condemn or utilize, and all cases other than condemnation said utility shall obtain a permit from the engineering department. Utilization shall mean any manner of use of the above-described right-of-way, including but not limited to, cutting of the pavement or boring under the pavement. Such notification shall include the location and description of the right-of-way to be condemned or utilized and the purpose of the condemnation or utilization. In the event of emergency repair service involving utilization of the paved portion of the right-of-way during hours other than normal office hours, the utility shall notify the engineering department on the next business day. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-101; Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 14-41. - Promulgation of standard specifications. 
The county engineering department is hereby authorized to prepare standard specifications regulating the installation of pipes, wires, cables, poles, lines, etc., over, through or within a public right-of-way. These specifications shall be in conformance with the requirements of this article and shall be designed to protect and safeguard the welfare of the county and its citizens. A copy of the specifications shall be available for public view during normal business hours at the county engineering department. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-102; Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 14-42. - Approval of installation. 
As to new installation, no public utility shall install any lines, wires, pipes or poles, or otherwise utilize a public right-of-way until after obtaining prior written approval from the county engineering department respecting the proposed location of said lines, wires, pipes, etc., in accordance with these regulations. The engineering department shall determine if the installed location and placement of any utility along a public right-of-way meets the requirements of this article and the specifications of the county engineering department (see section 14-41). The engineering department shall then issue a written approval or disapproval to the public utility regarding the installation. Any installation made by any utility in a location other than that specified in this regulation or the county engineering department standard number 3.02 "Underground Utilities-Typical Locations" shall be removed and reinstalled in the proper location entirely at the expense of the utility. Failure to reinstall at the proper location will result in the withholding of any further installation permits. Failure to conform to this article or the permit will result in the withholding of any further installation permits. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-103) 
Sec. 14-43. - Particular side of street for specific utilities. 
Water, electrical, telephone and cable television lines shall be located on the south or west side of any road, highway or street; and gas, electrical, telephone and cable television lines shall be located on the north or east side of any road, highway or street. The determination of which side is north and which side is south and which side is east and which side is west shall be made at the point where said street, road or highway begins. If there is any question regarding which side of the highway, road or street any particular utility should use, then said utility shall contact the county engineering department. The county engineering department shall then instruct the public utility regarding which side of a specific road, street or highway the particular utility should use. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-104) 
Sec. 14-44. - Minimum depths of lines. 
(a)  Gas. All gas service lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches. All gas main lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of thirty (30) inches. 
(b)  Water. All waterlines shall be installed at a minimum depth of forty-eight (48) inches. 
(c)  Telephone. All underground telephone wires shall be installed at a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches. 
(d)  Power. All underground power lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of forty-two (42) inches. 
(e)  Cable television. All underground cable television lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, §§ 57-105—57-109) 
Sec. 14-45. - Minimum distances from curb and street centerline of underground lines and poles. 
(a)  Gas. All gas lines shall be installed at a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches from the curb and seventeen (17) feet from the centerline of a county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(b)  Water. All waterlines shall be installed a minimum of sixty (60) inches from the curb or eighteen and one-half (18.5) feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(c)  Telephone. All telephone lines shall be installed a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the curb or fifteen and one-half (15.5) feet from the centerline of a county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(d)  Electrical. All electrical lines shall be installed a minimum of ninety-six (96) inches from the curb or twenty-two (22) feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(e)  Cable television. All cable television lines shall be installed a minimum of six (6) inches from the curb or fourteen and one-half (14.5) feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(f)  Sanitary sewer. All sanitary sewer main lines shall be installed a minimum of six (6) feet deep in any county right-of-way. All sanitary sewer service lines must be a minimum of five (5) feet deep in any county right-of-way. 
(g)  Poles. All poles for overhead utilities shall be installed with pole centerline a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, §§ 57-110—57-115, 57-117) 
Sec. 14-46. - Location of transformer pads. 
All electrical transformer pads shall be installed with the rear edge of the pad at the right-of-way line. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-116) 
Sec. 14-47. - Variances. 
The county engineering department is authorized to approve a variance from the requirements of section 14-43 through section 14-46, if, in its opinion, such variance is absolutely necessary under the conditions then and there existing; and, such variance will not create a public hazard or otherwise be detrimental to the best interest of the county and its citizens. The county engineering department shall keep a record of all variances granted under this section. This record shall include the name of the utility to which said variance is granted, the description and location of the variance, and the reasons for granting said variance. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-118) 
Sec. 14-48. - Use of minimum area; restoration of disturbed areas. 
Any utility shall condemn or utilize only that portion of a public right-of-way necessary for the purpose intended. It shall leave undisturbed the area surrounding the condemned or utilized right-of-way and shall replace or repair, in kind, any structures, shrubbery, driveways, embankments, ground cover, etc., which are altered or disturbed while installing pipes, wires, ditches, or otherwise using the public right-of-way, and shall regrade the undisturbed area to its original contours. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-201) 
Sec. 14-49. - Excavations; backfilling. 
No street cuts for crossings will be made unless specifically approved by the county engineering department after at least three (3) attempts to bore at different locations. Patches shall be made in accordance with county engineering department standard number 3.01 "Backfilling and Repaving Utility Cuts." 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-202) 
Sec. 14-50. - Liability for costs and expenses. 
Any costs or expenses incurred by county in repairing or replacing any such structures, etc., as described in section 14-41, which are not left in their original condition by the public utilities shall be chargeable to the public utility, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of said costs or expenses. 
(Ord. of 3-3-81, § 57-203) 
Sec. 14-50.1. - Inspections. 
The utility cutting the asphalt of the roadway for the installation/repair of a utility is required to notify the engineering department, in advance, of the date and time of the roadway backfilling and repaving so that the engineering department can schedule an inspection of this work. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 14-50.2. - Penalties. 
Any utility that does not notify the engineering department in advance of the date and time of the roadway backfilling and repaving, shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per occurrence. In addition, the utility may be required by the engineering department to core the patching, at the utility's cost, to determine its compliance with the Douglas County Standard Number 3.01, "Backfilling and Repaving Utility Cuts." All cost or expenses incurred by the county in repairing or replacing any structure, shrubbery, driveway, embankment, ground cover or any other item which has been altered or disturbed and not left or returned to the original condition by the utility, shall be chargeable to the utility which disturbed the area or cut the county roadway. The county shall be entitled to collect reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of such costs or expenses and all costs of collection. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 14-50.3. - Applicability of other ordinances. 
In addition to the above-described regulations, all utility installations are subject to the requirements of Article XI, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, including all penalties for noncompliance. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED HUMP DISTRICTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of April 2, 1996, repealed Art. IV, §§ 14-51—14-61, and added a new Art. IV, §§ 14-51—14-53, and 14-55—14-61. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted June 20, 1995; and an ordinance adopted December 5, 1995. 

Sec. 14-51. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The board of commissioners hereby declares that it shall promote the health, safety and general public welfare of the citizens of the county by providing for the construction of speed humps in the public rights-of-way of the county to aid in the moderation of vehicle speed throughout the county. To that end, therefore, this article is adopted in order to effect the creation of speed hump districts and to provide for the construction of speed humps in the public rights-of-way of the county. This article shall not be deemed to apply to property in the county other than in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-52. - Speed hump districts created; register; responsibility for cost. 
(a)  There are hereby created speed hump districts which shall be identified by a number assigned by the county public works department, engineering division. Each such speed hump district shall contain and include the tax parcel number of each lot within the said speed hump district. Speed hump districts shall be created upon the receipt of a petition and approval of the board of commissioners as provided hereinafter. 
(b)  A register of speed hump districts shall be maintained in the county public works department, engineering division and in the office of the county tax commissioner. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(c)  The cost of establishing, providing and maintaining speed humps as provided by this article shall be borne by the owners of the property receiving this particular service. The charge therefore shall be such as is determined by motion of the board of commissioners, giving consideration for the construction, maintenance and program administration costs. Charges shall be assessed against all lots within the speed hump district whether or not the lot is located within the boundaries of a particular subdivision, so long as the lot is located within the boundaries of the speed hump district. 
(d)  General standards, program elements and general construction guidelines for speed humps may be found in the county speed hump program manual. The county speed hump program manual is hereby incorporated, by reference, into this article. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-53. - Collection and responsibility for administration. 
(a)  The charges for the speed humps in each speed hump district shall be paid as a speed hump district fee, and shall be paid by the owner of each property parcel within each speed hump district to the public works department, engineering division, prior to the construction of the speed hump. 
(b)  The administration of the services herein provided and for all billing and accounting shall be the responsibility of the county public works department, engineering division. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 11-16-99; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-54. - Definitions. 
(a)  Department. The county public works department. 
(b)  MUTCD. The Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  Program manual. The Douglas County Speed Hump Program Manual. 
(d)  Street. A right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or otherwise. Street definitions herein are taken from the county zoning ordinance. Various classifications of streets and roads shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Interstate highway or expressway. A general road alignment as identified and described by the county road classification system for dedication and use as a public right-of-way to carry large volumes of through traffic at high speeds. These facilities have limited or controlled access to adjoining properties. 
(2)  Major arterial road. A general road alignment as identified and described by the county road classification system for dedication and use as a public right-of-way. These are thoroughfares providing access into and through the county. Major arterials serve intrastate travel and are usually multilane roadways in urban areas. They may have a turning lane or a median. Major arterial roads may also warrant controlled access in certain areas to encourage the through movement of traffic and discourage adjacent development and turning movements which might limit the through traffic carrying capacity of the roadway. Major arterials in rural areas may be two-or four-lane roadways depending upon traffic volumes. Major arterials may provide local access to property abutting the roadway in addition to their primary function which is to move traffic. 
(3)  Minor arterial road. A general road alignment as identified by the county road classification system for dedication and use as a public right-of-way. These facilities provide access into and through the county, only to a lesser extent than the major arterials. Minor arterials predominately serve intracounty traffic and may be two-or four-lane roadways. There is usually no access control on minor arterials. Minor arterials may provide local access to property abutting the roadway in addition to their primary function which is to move traffic. 
(4)  Collector street. A general road alignment as identified and described by the county road classification system for dedication and use as a public right-of-way. The primary function of these facilities is to provide internal, low-volume traffic circulation and access to abutting properties. 
(5)  Local street. A general road alignment as identified and described by the county road classification system for dedication and use as a public right-of-way. The primary purpose of these roadways is to provide access to abutting properties and connect those properties to the arterial and collector street system. 
(6)  Cul-de-sac. A street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end. 
(7)  Dual or boulevard. A street with opposing lanes separated by a median strip, center island, or other form of barrier, which cannot be crossed except at designated locations. 
(8)  Loop. A local street that has its only ingress and egress at two (2) points on the same collector street. 
(9)  Private. A street that has not been accepted by the county. 
(e)  Zoning ordinance. The county zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-55. - Streets eligible for speed hump construction. 
Residential local and loop streets, with speed limits of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less and with grades of eight (8) percent or less are eligible for speed hump construction. Collector, major and minor thoroughfare streets are not eligible for speed hump construction. Cul-de-sac streets greater than five hundred (500) feet in length may be eligible for installation of speed humps, provided they meet all other requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-56. - Optional speed hump construction by property/residential subdivision developers. 
(a)  All developers of residential subdivisions in the county with lots less than five (5) acres may choose to provide speed humps in the public rights-of-way in such developments in conformity with this article. 
(b)  Such developers who desire to provide speed humps during the subdivision development stage shall present a proposed speed hump layout for the development at the time of submission of the construction drawings. This proposal must have the approval of the county public works department, engineering division, prior to any construction of the speed humps. The department may require modifications to the proposal due to stormwater controls, driveway locations, sight distances, or any other valid reason. 
(c)  The speed hump district is automatically created upon the approval of the board of commissioners of the final plat of the residential subdivision. The date of creation of the speed hump district shall be the date of approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-57. - Creation of speed hump districts in existing residential areas. 
To create a speed hump district in an existing residential area, the following procedure must be followed. 
(1)  Any property parcel owner in any unincorporated area of the county may present a request for the creation of a speed hump district to the county public works department, engineering division. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the request the department shall determine the appropriate boundaries for a speed hump district which will serve the property parcel owner presenting the request and all other affected lot owners. The determination of this district by the department will include a consideration of traffic patterns, major and minor streets, and other similar factors. The department shall determine the location of each speed hump in the district. This determination shall consider stormwater controls, driveway locations, sight distances, and other relevant factors. If the department determines that a speed hump cannot be safely placed at any location in the district, the department shall notify the requesting property owner of this fact, and no further action will be taken by the department. 
(3)  If the department determines that a speed hump(s) can be safely placed within the proposed district, the department shall prepare a map delineating the proposed speed hump district, and a list of names from the records of the tax commissioner of those believed to be property owners. 
(4)  The two (2) methods of acquiring the approval of seventy-five (75) percent of the property parcel owners necessary before a public hearing can be held are: 
a.  The department will mail a petition to each property owner in the proposed district, including with it a map of the proposed district, a diagram of the proposed speed hump, a copy of the enabling ordinance, and any other similar information the department feels should be provided to the property owners to educate them about the proposed district. The petition will ask the property owner to answer "yes" or "no" to the formation of the proposed speed hump district. The petition shall include the following language: 
"I/We, the undersigned, certify that I/we am/are the owner(s) of the above referenced property of the proposed speed hump district. I/We certify that the signature(s) below are by any and all of those who claim ownership of this property. 
____________  I/We do hereby petition for the installation of speed humps. I/We understand that if 75% of the lot holders in the proposed district indicate that they want speed humps, the Douglas County Board of Commissioners will hold a Public Hearing on this request. If the speed hump district is created, I/we will be held responsible for the cost of materials to construct the speed hump(s). I/We hereby pledge to pay our share of the costs of the construction of the speed hump(s) when billed by the County. 
____________  I/We do not desire the installation of speed humps. I/We understand that if 75% of the lot holders in the proposed district indicate that they want speed humps, the Douglas County Board of Commissioners will hold a Public Hearing on this issue. If the speed hump district is created, I/we will be held responsible for the cost of the materials to construct the speed hump(s). 
My/Our signature(s) on this petition indicate(s) that I/we understand all information concerning the speed hump program of Douglas County." 
The petition must contain the signature of every person with an ownership interest in an individual property. All signatures on the petition form must be notarized by a disinterested person who will not be affected by the creation of a speed hump district, i.e., not a resident of the proposed speed hump district; or 
b.  The petitioner will obtain a petition, a map of the proposed district, a diagram of the proposed speed hump, a copy of the enabling ordinance, and any other similar information the department feels should be provided to the property owners to educate them about the proposed district from the department. The petition will ask the property owner to answer "yes" or "no" to the formation of the proposed speed hump district. The petition shall include the following language: 
"I/We, the undersigned, certify that I/we am/are the owner(s) of the above referenced property of the proposed speed hump district. I/We certify that the signature(s) below are by any and all of those who claim ownership of this property. 
____________  I/We do hereby petition for the installation of speed humps. I/We understand that if 75% of the lot holders in the proposed district indicate that they want speed humps, the Douglas County Board of Commissioners will hold a Public Hearing on this request. If the speed hump district is created, I/we will be held responsible for the cost of materials to construct the speed hump(s). I/We hereby pledge to pay our share of the costs of the construction of the speed hump(s) when billed by the County. 
____________  I/We do not desire the installation of speed humps. I/We understand that if 75% of the lot holders in the proposed district indicate that they want speed humps, the Douglas County Board of Commissioners will hold a Public Hearing on this issue. If the speed hump district is created, I/we will be held responsible for the cost of the materials to construct the speed hump(s). 
My/Our signature(s) on this petition indicate(s) that I/we understand all information concerning the speed hump program of Douglas County." 
The petition must contain the signature of every person with an ownership interest in an individual property. All signatures on the petition form must be notarized by a disinterested person who will not be affected by the creation of a speed hump district, i.e., not a resident of the proposed speed hump district or of any area directly affected by the creation of the speed hump district. 
(5)  If a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the property parcel owners in the proposed district return the petition in favor of the creation of a speed hump district, or if the petition circulated by the petitioner is returned to the department with a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the property parcel owners in the proposed district signing in favor of the creation of a speed hump district, the petition will be forwarded to the board of commissioners for a public hearing on the creation of the proposed district. If less than seventy-five (75) percent of the property parcel owners return the petitions in favor of the creation of the speed hump district, no further action will be taken by the department. If less than seventy-five (75) percent of the surveys are returned to the department, no further action will be taken by the department. The petitions must be returned to the department within ninety (90) days of their mailing by the department, or the petition will be null and void. A proposed speed hump district will only be surveyed by the department one (1) time in any six-month period. 
(6)  Upon acceptance of the surveys from the county public works department, engineering division, the board of commissioners will advertise a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed speed hump district. The public hearing date, time, and place shall be advertised one (1) time in the legal organ of the county at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. A minimum of one (1) sign shall be placed at a visible location within the proposed district announcing the public hearing at least five (5) days prior to the hearing date. Additional signs may be required as the board of commissioners and/or the public works department, engineering division may determine. 
(7)  During the advertised public hearing, the board of commissioners will hear a report from the public works department, engineering division, concerning the location of all speed humps proposed for the district, and the total estimated project costs, as outlined in paragraph (8) of this section. 
(8)  If the board of commissioners votes to create a speed hump district, the public works department, engineering division will prepare a summary of costs which shall include material cost of the speed hump(s). This summary of costs will be given to the petitioner for the petitioner to collect from the affected property parcel owners in the newly created speed hump district. When a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the total costs have been paid to the public works department, engineering division, the construction of the speed hump(s) shall be authorized. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-58. - Specifications. 
Specifications for design and installation of speed humps may be found in the Speed Hump Program Manual, and include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The geometric design of speed humps shall generally be in conformance with the following specifications: 
a.  Four (4) to six (6) inches maximum vertical rise and decline over six-foot horizontal sections; 
b.  Twenty-two (22) feet total horizontal length; and 
c.  Incline/flattop/decline construction. 
The geometric design of the speed humps has been proven to be a critical factor in their effectiveness, and the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) has recommended the above stated geometric design. The county public works department, engineering division, may make minor modifications to these specifications to fit specific sites in the interest of safety or environmental reasons. 
(2)  The county public works department, engineering division shall determine the location of each speed hump in the district. This determination shall consider stormwater controls, driveway locations, sight distances, and other relevant factors. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-59. - Removal of speed humps. 
The county will remove speed humps installed on public rights-of-way and dissolve the speed hump district created under this article if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Seventy-five (75) percent of the property owners, via formal petition to the board of commissioners, request the removal of the speed humps and dissolution of the district; 
(2)  The humps have been in place for a minimum of one (1) year; 
(3)  The property owners are made aware, during a public hearing called by the board of commissioners to hear the petition for removal and dissolution of the district, that vehicle speeds will increase; and 
(4)  The property owners agree to pay all costs, including, but not limited to, labor, equipment, disposal of materials, notification to property owners, advertisement costs, and any other costs associated with the removal of the speed humps; however, such costs shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-60. - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order shall prevail over the conflicting section of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-61. - Rate schedule. 
The board of commissioners is authorized to adopt a rate schedule, which schedule may be amended or modified upon properly adopted motion of the board of commissioners, meeting in public session. (Ord. of 4-2-96; Ord. of 6-19-01) 
Sec. 14-62. - Creation of speed hump districts. 
The following are speed hump districts on county roadways: 
(1)  Aspen Road. 
(2)  Old Lower River Road. 
(3)  North Anneewakee Road (a.k.a. Old Anneewakee Road). 
(Res. of 4-20-00; Res. of 4-21-00) 
Secs. 14-63—14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution of May 7, 1996, amended the Code by adding a new Art. IV, §§ 14-60 and 14-61. In order to prevent duplication of article and section numbers, the editor has redesignated said provisions as Art. V, §§ 14-71 and 14-72. 

Sec. 14-71. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The board of commissioners does hereby declare that it shall promote the health, safety and general public welfare of the citizens of Douglas County by providing for regulations of the use of roads contained in the Douglas County road system pursuant to the authority granted in the Georgia Constitution, Article IX, Section II Paragraphs I and III and the Official Code of Georgia §§ 40-6-371 and 32-4-42. 
(Reg. of 5-7-96) 
Sec. 14-72. - Zones prohibiting trucks with more than six wheels. 
(a)  When the board of commissioners determines that the use of certain roads within the Douglas County road system by trucks with more than six (6) wheels is incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic, it may adopt a resolution establishing zones where trucks with more than six (6) wheels are prohibited except that local traffic shall be permitted. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in the resolution, the trucks with more than six (6) wheels prohibited zone shall become effective upon the signing of the resolution and the placement of signs marking the zone. 
(c)  Any owner, agent and/or driver of a truck with more than six (6) wheels that is found operating in a prohibited zone, other than local traffic, shall be in violation of this article. Any owner, agent and/or driver convicted of violating this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or sixty (60) days imprisonment or as otherwise provided by Georgia law. All Douglas County law enforcement personnel shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Trucks Over Six Wheels Prohibited Zones, Local Traffic Only Permitted 
Banks Mill Road, from Liberty Road to Highway 5 
Beechwood Drive; 
Bowden Street from Bankhead Highway to Sweetwater Terrace; 
Brewer Road between Mann Road and Stockmar Road; 
Bright Star Road between Douglas Boulevard and State Route 5; 
Bullard Road from Rock House Road to Douglas Hill Road; 
Cave Springs Road between Chicago Avenue and State Route 92 North; 
Cedar Terrace Road from Lee Road to Mount Vernon Road; 
Chatham Place between Anneewakee Road and State Route 92; 
Cherokee Boulevard between State Route 92 and Dodson Drive; 
Cole Road from Ephesus Church Road to Liberty Road; 
Colonial Trail from Midway Road West County Line Road; 
Echo Road from Riverside Parkway to Rock House Road; 
Ephesus Church Road; 
Hannah Road between State Route 166 and East Carroll Road; 
Hill Street from Bankhead Highway to Highland Terrace; 
Huey Road between Kemco Court to Malone Road; 
Huey Road between Industrial Access Road to Maroney Mill Road; 
Ivory Circle; 
Jade Drive, between Berea Road and Highway 5; 
John West Road between Bright Star Road and US Highway 78; 
Kings Drive between Riverside Parkway and State Route 166; 
Kull Drive from US Highway 78 to Old Beulah Road; 
Mann Road between Cedar Mountain Road and Stockmar Road; 
Maroney Mill Road between State Road 92 and US Highway 78; 
Mason Creek Road between State Route 5 and Dorset Shoals Road; 
McKown Road from South Burnt Hickory Road to Riley Road; 
Midway/Burnt Hickory Road between State Route 92 and US Highway 78; 
Mt. Vernon Road between Skyview Drive and South Sweetwater Road; 
North Anneewakee Road between Anneewakee Road and State Route 92; 
North Baggett Road; 
North County Line Road between Vulcan Drive and US Highway 78; 
North Helton Road from Post Road to Carroll County Line; 
Oak Hill Road from Chapel Hill Road to State Route 166; 
Old Beulah Road from Riley Road to US Highway 78; 
Riley Road from US Highway 78 to North County Line Road; 
Rock House Road between Riverside Parkway and Douglas Hill Road; 
Shawnee Trail from Slater Mill Road to Slater Mill Road; 
Skyview Drive between South Sweetwater Road and Mt. Vernon Road; 
Skyview Drive from Mt. Vernon Road to Maxham Road; 
South Flat Rock Road between Cedar Mountain Road and West Strickland Street; 
Strawn Road (Residential); 
Sullivan Drive from Midway Road to West County Line Road; 
Sunset Drive; 
Temple Street between North Sweetwater Road and the Cobb County Line; 
Timber Ridge Road from Chapel Hill Road to Slater Mill Road; 
Tyree Road between State Route 5 and East Carroll Road; 
Wenona Street from State Route 5 to West Stewarts Mill Road; 
West Stewart Mill Road; 
Wilson Road between State Route 5 and Tyree Road. 
(Res. of 5-7-96; Res. of 6-4-96; Res. of 11-19-96; Res. of 5-20-97; Res. of 9-16-97; Res. of 5-5-98; Res. of 5-19-98; Res. of 10-6-98; Res. of 12-15-98; Res. of 4-20-99; Res. of 6-15-99; Res. of 7-20-99; Res. of 2-15-00; Res. of 3-21-00; Ord. of 3-19-03; Amd. of 7-15-03; Ord. of 1-20-04; Amd. of 4-20-04; Ord. of 3-20-18, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-18, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 14-73. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The board of commissioners hereby declares that it shall promote the health, safety and general public welfare of the citizens of the county by creating school zones for schools that front county roadways. To that end, therefore, this article is adopted in order to effect the creation of school zones and speed limits in these school zones. 
(Res. of 8-19-97) 
_____
Sec. 14-74. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, of the uniform rules of the road act, for local authorities to alter lawful speed limits, this section regulates speed limits within the county. 
(b)  The board of commissioners hereby authorizes the use of speed detection devices by the county sheriff's department as deemed necessary to effectuate the orderly flow of traffic and for the safety and welfare of the public on such highways, streets and roads in the unincorporated areas of the county, as hereinafter designated. 
The board of commissioners has determined on the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that in certain instances the maximum vehicle speed permitted under state law is greater than is reasonable and safe under conditions found to exist upon the highways, streets and roads of the county. Speed zones are therefore established as follows: 
On-System 

 
*School zone hours are effective: 
a.m. from 30 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time — School days only. 
p.m. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time — School days only. 
**School zones are effective: 
a.m. from 30 minutes prior to the earliest commencement time to 15 minutes after the latest commencement time — School days only. 
p.m. from 15 minutes prior to the earliest dismissal time to 30 minutes after the latest dismissal time — School days only. 
Off-System 

 
*School zone hours are effective: 
a.m. From 30 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time — School days only. 
p.m. From 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time — School days only. 
**School zones are effective: 
a.m. From 30 minutes prior to the earliest commencement time to 15 minutes after the latest commencement time — School days only. 
p.m. From 15 minutes prior to the earliest dismissal time to 30 minutes after the latest dismissal time — School days only. 
(Ord. of 6-6-00; Ord. of 11-8-00; Ord. of 2-2-10; Ord. of 4-2-13; Ord. of 4-7-15, § 1(Att.); Ord. of 11-6-18, § 1) 
Secs. 14-75—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 14-81. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The board of commissioners does hereby declare that it shall promote the health, safety and general public welfare of the citizens of the county by providing for regulations of the use of roads, contained in the county road system pursuant granted in the Georgia Constitution, Article IX, Section II Paragraphs I and III and the O.C.G.A., §§ 40-6-371 and 32-4-42. 
(Res. of 12-16-97) 
Sec. 14-82. - Parking prohibitions. 
(a)  No automobiles for over twenty-four (24) hours, and no school buses, vehicles over six (6) wheels, commercial vehicles, trailers, and other nonmotorized vehicle accessories for any length of time are allowed to be parked on the roadway pavement that is twenty-five (25) feet in width or smaller, or within the roadway rights-of-way of roadways fifty (50) feet in width or smaller, and/or all roadways that are contained within residential subdivisions. Local deliveries are exempted from this requirement, as long as the delivery vehicle does not remain overnight. 
(b)  No vehicles over six (6) wheels are allowed to be parked within any park-and-ride lot maintained by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97) 
Sec. 14-83. - Penalties. 
Violators of this article are subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than that prescribed in section 1-8 and/or sentenced to perform not more than forty (40) hours of community service. The guilty party shall pay all court costs as determined by the court. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97) 
Secs. 14-84—14-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-90. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Owner" means the registrant of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor vehicle rental company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. 
(b)  "Recorded images" means images recorded by a traffic-control signal monitoring device: 
(1)  On: 
a.  Two (2) or more photographs; 
b.  Two (2) or more microphotographs; 
c.  Two (2) or more electronic images; or 
d.  Videotape; and 
(2)  Showing a traffic-control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly revealing the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. 
(c)  "Traffic-control signal monitoring device" means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic-control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-91. - Authorization of traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
Subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-14-21, the board of commissioners authorizes the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices for purposes of automated traffic enforcement. Use of said devices shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-20, 40-14-21, 40-14-22, 40-14-23, and 40-14-24, and any other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-92. - Identification of intersections for use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
The county department of transportation shall be responsible for the identification and selection of intersections where traffic-control signal monitoring devices will be utilized and for compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 40-14-22 and 40-14-23. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-93. - Warning period. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(B)(vi), only warning notices and not citations for violations shall be sent during the thirty-day period following the installation of any traffic-control signal monitoring device. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-94. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone or a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal or a steady green arrow signal indication. 
(b)  The owner of a vehicle shall be liable for a monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this article if such vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic-control signal monitoring system, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal as designated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-95. - Enforcement. 
The county sheriff's office shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-96. - Civil penalty. 
The driver of a motor vehicle cited pursuant to this ordinance shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty not to exceed seventy dollars ($70.00). Citations shall be issued by the county sheriff's office in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(B). 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-97. - Contesting the civil penalty. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(D), liability shall be determined based upon preponderance of the evidence. Prima-facie evidence that the vehicle described in the citation issued pursuant to this ordinance was operated in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the registered owner of the vehicle, shall permit the trier of fact in its discretion to infer that such owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Such an inference may be rebutted if the owner of the vehicle: 
(1)  Testifies under oath in open court that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation; 
(2)  Presents to the court prior to the return date established on the citation a certified copy of a police report showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation; or 
(3)  Submits to the court prior to the return date established on the citation a sworn notarized statement identifying the name of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from another source or sources which constitutes a prima-facie case of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provided by law in lieu of, but not in addition to, enforcement under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-98. - Annual report to state. 
The sheriff's office shall be responsible for the annual report to the state required by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-24. 
(Ord. of 9-20-05) 
Sec. 14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATION 

Sec. 14-100. - Charitable solicitation along roads and road right-of-way. 
No person shall stand on any street, highway, road or right of way for the purpose of transacting business or soliciting contributions directly from the occupant of any vehicle, except in accordance with a charitable solicitation permit issued pursuant to this section. Charitable solicitation permits may be issued by the director of development services or his or her designee to charitable organizations registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 and to charitable organizations exempt from registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. The issuance of a charitable solicitation permit shall be accompanied by the issuance of county-owned safety vests for each individual who will participate in the solicitation. Safety vests issued by the county shall be worn by all persons participating in charitable solicitation along roads and rights-of-way. No permit shall be issued where the director of development services or his or her designee deems the same to be a substantial threat or impediment to public safety or to traffic efficiency. The director or his or her designee may consult with the county department of transportation to evaluate any application for a permit. Every permit shall be for a specified location and for one (1) continuous time period. The director or his or her designee may impose reasonable safety restrictions upon any permit, including a minimum age limit for all solicitors, as well as adult supervision. The development services director shall create and maintain a list of intersections at which charitable solicitation will not be permitted, said list to include but not be limited to all intersections with signalized turn lanes. The fee for a charitable solicitation permit shall be set by the development services director and shall include a refundable sum as a deposit for the issuance of county-owned safety vests, which sum shall be refunded upon the return of the safety vests in satisfactory condition. 
(Ord. of 9-1-09) 
Chapter 15 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 15-1. - Definition. 
Any person shall be deemed doing business in the county when operating a passenger-carrying vehicle from a fixed terminal located in the unincorporated area of the county or when soliciting passengers within the unincorporated area of the county who have or have not requested transportation by telephone or personal command. 
Sec. 15-2. - Scope of chapter. 
Taxicabs, limousines and other passenger-carrying vehicles (hereinafter referred to as passenger-carrying vehicles) are those vehicles regulated by this chapter. 
Sec. 15-3. - License—Required. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating a passenger-carrying vehicle in the unincorporated area of the county without having first applied for and obtained a license under the provisions of this chapter. All licenses shall expire March thirty-first of each year and are not transferable. 
Sec. 15-4. - Same—Application; fees as fixed; insurance required; registration of vehicles; change of vehicles. 
Application for a passenger-carrying vehicle license may be obtained at the permit office. An application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed from time to time by the board of commissioners, on file in the office of the clerk, for each vehicle operated. The application shall also be accompanied by proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurance company approved by the state. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third persons against personal injury and property damage in amounts complying with state law. Such proof of insurance must evidence that all motor vehicles used for passenger conveyance operated by the licensee are insured as required by state law. Applicants and licensees shall register all vehicles operated with the permit office and shall provide the permit office with information as to the equipment actually in service. Licensed, registered vehicles may be exchanged or transferred with the approval of the permit office and the subsequent filing of a new or updated list of equipment in service. 
Sec. 15-5. - Permit—Required for operators and drivers. 
No passenger-carrying vehicle license shall be issued before a permit has been issued. The permit application shall be filed by the license applicant with the sheriff's office. That office shall complete a criminal background investigation of the applicant. In addition, all passenger-carrying vehicle drivers operating in the unincorporated area of the county must file a permit application with the sheriff's office and have a criminal record check completed before being issued an operator's permit. 
Sec. 15-6. - Same—Fees as fixed. 
The schedule of permit fees, as adopted from time to time by the board of commissioners, shall be posted in the permit office. 
Sec. 15-7. - Same—Termination when erroneously issued. 
All permits issued through administrative error or an error in the completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the permit office. 
Sec. 15-8. - Same—Perjury or misrepresentation on application. 
Any acts of perjury or misrepresentation on a license or permit application shall result in the denial of such application or the revocation of the license or permit. 
Sec. 15-9. - Same—Expiration; posting. 
(a)  All operator permits expire March thirty-first of each year and are not transferable. 
(b)  All operators must post their permit in public view within the interior of the vehicle. 
Sec. 15-10. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No license or permit shall be issued unless the applicant: 
(1)  Is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(2)  Has not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned within a period of five (5) years previous to the date of application for the violation of any of the following criminal offenses of this state or of any other state, or of the United States: homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempt to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony where a motor vehicle was used; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; any crime of moral turpitude. First offender status is recognized. 
Sec. 15-11. - Suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
A license or permit may be suspended or revoked by the permit office where the applicant has furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or permit; for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter; for conviction of a violation of any other the provision of this chapter. 
Sec. 15-12. - Vehicle markings; filing of rates. 
(a)  Each passenger-carrying vehicle shall have plainly printed on each side thereof the name of the licensed person operating the vehicle and shall have printed on the rear of the vehicle an identification number not less than five (5) inches in height. 
(b)  A schedule of rates and hours of operation shall be filed with the permit office by the licensee and posted in a place plainly visible to passengers within the vehicle. 
Sec. 15-13. - Cruising. 
No passenger solicitation shall be done while cruising. "Cruising" as used herein is defined as moving about the streets of the unincorporated area of the county for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or personal command. 
Sec. 15-14. - Parking; record of calls; receipts. 
No passenger-carrying vehicle shall be parked in the unincorporated area of the county except at its licensed terminus or such other places as may be designated for that purpose by the permit office. Records shall be kept of all calls and receipts shall be provided upon request of any passenger. 
APPENDIX C - ELIMINATION OR REPAIR OF UNSAFE AND NONFUNCTIONING STRUCTURES (OTHER THAN BUILDINGS)[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix C contains the code for the elimination or repair of unsafe and nonfunctioning structures (other than buildings) as originally adopted on May 17, 1994. History notation following a particular section or subsection indicates legislation amendatory of said section or subsection. Words contained in brackets [ ] have been included by the editor for clarity. 

CHAPTER 1. - ADMINISTRATION 
101. - TITLE AND SCOPE 

101.1. - Title. 
The provisions included within the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be known and may be cited as "The Douglas County Code for the Elimination or Repair of Unsafe and Nonfunctioning Structures (Other than Buildings)," hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.2. - Code remedial. 
This code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, and safety to life and property from hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, neglect, and use of structures or premises. 
101.3. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code shall apply to all structures other than buildings, as herein defined, and shall apply equally to new and existing conditions. 
101.4. - Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work. 
101.4.1. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure without requiring it to meet all of the requirements of current Douglas County regulations as long as the alterations, repairs or rehabilitation meet all of the requirements of the Douglas County regulations at the time of the original construction. However, this in no way relieves the responsibility to meet all of the applicable regulations of state and federal agencies. 
101.4.2. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or nonfunctioning. 
101.5. - Maintenance. 
All structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and fully functioning condition. All devices or safeguards required when erected, altered or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the full functioning operation and maintenance of structures. 
102. - ORGANIZATION 

102.1. - Enforcement officer. 
The provisions of this code shall be enforced by the Douglas County director of engineering and/or his authorized representative. 
102.2. - Restrictions on employees. 
An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of a board established by this ordinance, shall not have a financial interest in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration, demolition, repair or maintenance of a structure, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such structure. Such officer or employee shall not engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the department. 
102.3. - Records with respect to this code. 
The director of engineering shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department in regards to this code. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
103. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING WITH RESPECT TO THIS CODE 

103.1. - Right of entry. 
103.1.1. The director of engineering and/or his authorized representative may enter any property at all reasonable times to make an inspection or to enforce any of the provisions of this code. 
103.1.2. When entering property that is occupied, the director of engineering and/or his authorized representative, shall first identify himself, present proper credentials, and request entry. If the property is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge of the property and request entry. If entry is refused, the director of engineering shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
103.1.3. No person, owner, or occupant of any property shall fail, after proper credentials are displayed, to permit entry onto any property by the director of engineering and/or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspections pursuant to this code. Any person violating this action shall be prosecuted within the limits of the law as established by the proper governing authority. 
103.2. - Inspections. 
The director of engineering and other authorized representatives are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this code. 
103.3. - Requirements not covered by this code. 
Any requirement necessary for the strength, stability and/or proper functioning of an existing or proposed structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, or neighbors thereto, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the director of engineering. 
103.4. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the applicable governing body in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the Douglas County board of commissioners until the final termination of the proceedings. 
104. - VIOLATIONS AND APPEALS 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved thereunder, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local law. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for any violation of any of the provisions of this code, and upon connection of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state or local laws. 
105. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 

105.1. - Appointment. 
A board of adjustments and appeals shall be established for the expressed purpose of providing for the final interpretation of provisions of this code. The board shall consist of five (5) members who are not elected officials or employees of Douglas County and shall be appointed by the Douglas County board of commissioners. The composition of the board shall be one (1) engineer, one (1) construction industry employee, and three (3) citizens not employed in the engineering profession or the construction industry; all five (5) members must be Douglas County property owners. 
105.2. - Term of office. 
Of the members first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, one (1) for a term of three (3) years, and thereafter they shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
105.3. - Quorum. 
Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of this code or in modifying an order of the director of engineering, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three (3) affirmative votes, shall be required. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal interest. 
105.4. - Records of the board. 
The director of engineering shall act as secretary to the board, shall not vote, and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings. The record shall set forth the reasons for the board's decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
105.5. - Procedures. 
The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. The board shall meet at a regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after notice of appeal has been received. 
106. - VALIDITY 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 
201. - GENERAL 

201.1. - Tense, gender, and number. 
For the purpose of this code, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as set forth in this section. Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. Words in the feminine and neuter gender include the masculine. The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. 
201.2. - Words not defined. 
Words not defined herein shall have the meanings stated in the Standard Building Code, Standard Mechanical Code, Standard Plumbing Code, Standard Gas Code, Standard Housing Code or Standard Fire Prevention Code, as developed and issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI). Words not defined in the standard codes shall have the meanings stated in the Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, latest edition, as revised. 
202. - DEFINITIONS 
Applicable governing body. Douglas County board of commissioners. 
Approved. Approved by the director of engineering or other authority having jurisdiction. 
Board. Board of adjustments and appeals (for this code). 
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which has enclosing walls for fifty (50) per cent of its perimeter. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." For the purpose of this code, each portion of a building separated from other portions by a fire wall shall be considered as a separate building. 
Chief appointing authority. The Douglas County board of commissioners or the persons or persons designated by the laws of Douglas County as having authority to appoint persons to various boards. 
Clerk of superior court. That office in Douglas County responsible for recording deeds and other legal documents or actions. 
Department. The Douglas County department of engineering or other agency charged with the enforcement of this Code. 
Director of engineering. The Douglas County officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or his duly authorized representative. 
Nonfunctioning. A structure designed and constructed to accomplish a certain purpose, but is not performing its full and intended purpose, regardless of whether or not part of its purpose is being met. 
Owner. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property. 
Premises/property (used interchangeable). Land. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed, either with natural or man-made materials not for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons or animals, the term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure. Any structure (other than a building) that has any of the following conditions, such that the life, health, property, or safety of its occupants, its neighbors, and/or the general public are endangered: 
1.  The structure or portion thereof, has been damaged/destroyed/filled in by fire, flood, earthquake, wind, erosion, siltation, vandalism, or other cause to the extent that the integrity of the structure is less than it was prior to the damage and/or is less than the minimum required when the structure was construed; 
2.  If for any reason the structure, or portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose or which it is being used; 
3.  The structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of a county, state, or federal law; 
4.  Any structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance; 
5.  Any structure or portion thereof that is nonfunctioning, unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous to human life, and/or which in relation to existing use or non-use, constitutes a hazard to safety, property, or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, siltation, erosion, dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, or similar cause. 
CHAPTER 3. - INSPECTION AND NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE 
301. - ACTION REQUIRED 

301.1. - General. 
The director of engineering shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, any structure or portion thereof which is or may be unsafe and/or nonfunctioning. After the director of engineering has inspected or caused to be inspected a structure or portion thereof and has determined that such structure or portion thereof is unsafe and/or nonfunctioning, he shall initiate proceedings to cause the abatement of the unsafe and/or nonfunctioning condition by repair, vacation, or demolition or combination thereof. 
The director of engineering shall also inspect, or cause to be inspected, structures, properties, etc., which may be located adjacent/near to the unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure, which have been negatively affected due to the unsafe and/or nonfunction structure, and shall also initiate proceedings to cause the correction of the negatively affected adjacent/near to structure or property. 
302. - NOTICE 

302.1. - Content. 
302.1.1. The director of engineering shall prepare and issue a notice of unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure directed to the owner of record of the structure or property. The notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  The street address and legal description of the structure or property; 
2.  A statement indicating the property or structure has been declared unsafe and or nonfunctioning by the director of engineering, and a detailed report documenting the conditions determined to have rendered the property of structure unsafe and/or nonfunctioning under the provisions of this code; 
3.  A statement advising that if the following required action, as determined by the director of engineering, is not commenced within or completed by the specified time, the director of engineering may cause the work to be done and all costs incurred charged against the property and/or the owner of record; 
3.1.  If the structure is to be repaired, the notice shall require that all necessary permits be secured and the work commenced within sixty (60) days and continued to completion with such time as the director of engineering determines. The notice shall also indicate the degree to which the repairs must comply with applicable regulations. 
3.2.  If the structure is to be vacated, the notice shall indicate the time within which vacation is to be completed. 
3.3.  If the structure is to be demolished, the notice shall require that the premises be vacated within sixty (60) days, that all required permits for demolition be secured, and that the demolition be completed within such time as determined reasonable by the director of engineering. 
4.  A statement advising that any person having any legal interest in the property may appeal the notice by the director of engineering to the board of adjustment and appeals and that such appeal shall be in writing in the form specified in Section 401 of this Appendix, and shall be filed with the director of engineering within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice and that failure to appeal in the time specified will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing. 
If an adjacent/near to structure or property has been negatively affected by the cited unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure, the notice shall also include this information, location, and required corrective action. The owner of the unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure shall be responsible for the correction of the negatively affected adjacent/near to structure or property, regardless of its ownership. 
302.1.2. The notice and all attachments thereto shall be served upon the owner of record and posted on the property in a conspicuous location. A copy of the notice and all attachments thereto shall also be served on any person determined from public records to have a legal interest in the property. Failure of the director of engineering to serve any person herein required to be served other than the owner of record shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder nor shall it relieve any other person served from any obligation imposed on him. 
302.1.3. The notice shall be served either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each person at the address as it appears on the official public records. If addresses are not available on any person required to be served the notice, the notice addressed to such person shall be mailed to the address of the structure involved in the proceedings. The failure of any person to receive notice, other than the owner of record, shall not invalidate any proceedings under this section. Service by certified or registered mail as herein described shall be effective on the date the notice was received as indicated on the return receipt. 
302.1.4. Proof of service of the notice shall be by written declaration indicating the date, time, and manner in which service was made and signed by the person served on by the return receipt. 
302.2. - Recording of notice. 
If the notice is not complied with or an appeal filed within the allotted time, the director of engineering shall file, in the office of the clerk of superior court of Douglas County, a certificate describing the property and certifying that the structure is unsafe and/or nonfunctioning, and that the owner of record has been served. This certificate shall remain on file until such time as the conditions rendering the structure unsafe and/or nonfunctioning have been abated. At such time, the director of engineering shall file a new certificate indicating that corrective action has been taken and the structure is no longer unsafe and/or nonfunctioning from that condition. 
303. - STANDARDS FOR COMPLIANCE 
The following action shall be taken by the director of engineering when ordering the repair, vacation, or demotion of an unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure. 
1.  The structure shall be ordered repaired in accordance with its construction design criteria, or demolished if its function is no longer necessary. 
2.  If the structure poses an immediate hazard to life or to the safety of the public, it shall be ordered vacated immediately and safety precautions installed until permanent actions can be taken. 
304. - POSTING OF NOTICE TO VACATE 
Every notice to vacate, in addition to complying with section 302 of this appendix, shall be posted at the structure or property and shall state: 
"THIS PROPERTY CONTAINS A  STRUCTURE WHICH IS UNSAFE AND/OR  NONFUNCTIONING, AND ITS USE OR  OCCUPANCY IS PROHIBITED EXCEPT AS  DIRECTED BY THE DOUGLAS COUNTY  DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING" 
Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation or their agents to remove such notice without written permission of the director of engineering, or for any person to enter the property except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing same. 
CHAPTER 4. - APPEALS 
401. - RIGHT OF APPEAL 

401.1. - Filing. 
Any person entitled to service in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of this appendix may appeal any action of the director of engineering under this code to the board of adjustments and appeals. Such appeal must be filed in writing with the director of engineering within thirty (30) days from the date of service and must contain at least the following information: 
1.  Identification of the structure concerned by street address or legal description; 
2.  A statement identifying the legal interest of each appellant; 
3.  A statement identifying the specific order or section being appealed; 
4.  A statement detailing the issues on which the appellant desires to be heard; 
5.  The legal signature of all appellants and their official mailing address. 
401.2. - Hearing. 
Upon receipt of an appeal, the board shall, as soon as practicable, fix a date, time, and location for the hearing of an appeal. The hearing date shall not be more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed with the director of engineering. Written notice of the time and location of the hearing shall be delivered personally or mailed to each appellant at the address on the appeal by certified mail, postage prepaid, and receipt requested. 
402. - FAILURE TO APPEAR 
Failure of any person to appear at the hearing set in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of his right to an administrative hearing on this notice. 
403. - SCOPE OF HEARING 
The hearing shall offer the appellant reasonable opportunity to be heard on only those specific matters or issues raised by the appellant in his appeal. The appellant may appear at the hearing in person or through his attorney or other designated representative. 
404. - STAYING OF NOTICE UNDER APPEAL 
Except for a vacation order issued in accordance with section 303 of this appendix, enforcement of any notice issued by the director of engineering under the provisions of this code shall be held in abeyance during the course of an appeal. 
CHAPTER 5. - RULES OF PROCEDURES FOR HEARING APPEALS 
501. - GENERAL 

501.1. - Hearing examiners. 
The board itself may conduct the appeals hearing or, at its discretion, may appoint one (1) or more hearing examiners to conduct the appeals hearing. The examiner shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct of hearings until a report is submitted by him to the board. 
501.2. - Reporting. 
A permanent record shall be made of all hearings and proceedings using the method of recording designated by the board. A transcript of the proceedings of all hearings shall, upon payment of the prescribed fees, be made available to any person on request. 
501.3. - Reasonable dispatch. 
The board shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it, with due regard to the convenience and necessity of the parties involved. 
501.4. - Form of notice. 
501.4.1. The hearing notice shall include, but not be limited to, the following information. 
You are hereby notified that, on the ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________ , at ____________ a.m./p.m., at ____________ , a hearing will be held before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals (for the (Unsafe and/or Nonfunctioning Structures Code) or its hearing examiner to consider the appeal from the order of the Douglas County Director of Engineering regarding property located at ____________ . You may choose to be represented by counsel. You may present relevant evidence and will be given an opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel witnesses to appeal and/or for the production of other supporting data or documentation, by filing a written report with the Board of Adjustments and Appeals (for the Unsafe and/or Nonfunctioning Structures Code). 
501.4.2. The hearing notice shall be served personally or mailed as required in subsection 302.1.3 of this appendix at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. 
502. - SUBPOENAS 

502.1. - Filing. 
The board or hearing examiner may obtain the issuance and service of subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of evidence at the hearings. Subpoenas may be issued upon the request of any member of the board, the hearing examiner, or upon the written request of any party involved in the hearing. The issuance and service of subpoenas shall be in accordance with established law. 
502.2. - Failure to appear. 
Any person who refuses, without legal excuse, to respond to any subpoena lawfully issued and served may be prosecuted to the extent established by law. 
503. - PROCEDURES FOR HEARING 

503.1. - Rules. 
503.1.1. Hearings shall not be required to be conducted in accordance with the technical rules relating to evidence and testimony. 
503.1.2. The board may grant continuance for good cause. 
503.2. - Evidence. 
503.2.1. In any proceedings under this chapter, any member of the board or the hearing examiner shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify official acts. 
503.2.2. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
503.2.3. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence. The further use of hearsay evidence shall be limited to that which would be admissible in civil court. 
503.2.4. Relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil courts. 
503.3. - Inspections. 
The board or the hearing examiner may inspect any structure or premise involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided the following are complied with: 
1.  Notice of such inspection is given to the parties prior to making the inspection, and 
2.  The parties are allowed to be present during the inspection, and 
3.  The inspector states for the record, upon completion of the inspection, the facts observed and any conclusions drawn therefrom. 
504. - DECISION PROCEDURE 

504.1. - Board hearing. 
When an appeal is heard before the board itself, any member who did not hear the evidence presented, or has not read the entire record of the proceedings, shall not vote or take part in the decision. 
504.2. - Hearing before examiner. 
504.2.1. When an appeal is heard before an examiner, the examiner shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date the hearing is closed, submit in writing a report to the board. Such report shall summarize the evidence submitted and considered and state precisely the examiner's findings, conclusions and recommendations. The report shall also contain a proposed decision that may be adopted by the board. All such reports shall become matters of public record and shall be mailed to each party on the date they are filed with the board. 
504.2.2. The board shall set a time, date, and location to consider the examiner's report. Such date shall not exceed thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the hearing examiner's report. Each interested party shall be notified by mail at least five (5) days prior to the meeting date by the manner prescribed in subsection 302.1.3 of this appendix. 
504.2.3. The board may adopt or reject the hearing examiner's proposed decision in whole or in part and may modify the proposed decision. 
504.2.4. If the proposed decision is not adopted as provided in section 504.2.3 of this appendix, the board may decide the appeal upon the entire record before it with or without taking additional evidence, or the cause may be referred back to a hearing examiner for additional evidence. 
504.2.5. The final decision of the board shall be in writing and shall contain all findings of fact and detailed requirements to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
504.2.6. The effective date of the board's final decision shall be as stated therein. 
505. - RECOURSE 
If the appellant feels he is aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustments and appeals, nothing in this code shall be construed to deprive him of seeking redress in the civil or other applicable court. Said appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days from the effective date of the board's final decision. 
CHAPTER 6. - IMPLEMENTATION 
601. - COMPLIANCE 

601.1. - Failure to respond. 
Any person who, after the order of the director of engineering or the decision of the board becomes final, fails or refuses to respond to the direction of such order, shall be prosecuted to the extent provided for by law. 
601.2. - Failure to commence work. 
601.2.1. Whenever the required repair, vacation or demolition is not commenced within thirty (30) days after the effective date of any order, the structure or premise shall be posted as follows: 
UNSAFE AND/OR NONFUNCTIONING STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY  DO NOT OCCUPY  IT SHALL BE PUNISHABLE BY LAW TO OCCUPY THIS STRUCTURE OR REMOVE OR DEFACE THIS NOTICE  Director of Engineering  Douglas County, Georgia 
601.2.2. Subsequent to posting the structure or property, the director of engineering may cause the structure, to the extent required to render it safe or if the notice required demolition, to be repaired or demolished and all debris removed from the premise. The cost of repair or demolition shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be collected in a manner provided by law. 
601.2.3. Any monies received from the sale of a structure, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost incurred, shall be paid to the owner of record or other persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
602. - EXTENSION OF TIME 
The director of engineering may approve one (1) or more extensions of time, at time intervals of his own determination, as he may determine to be reasonable to complete the required repair or demolition. Such requests for extensions shall be made in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the extensions of time, in total, exceed one hundred twenty (120) days, they must also be approved by the board which may act without further public hearing. 
603. - INTERFERENCE 
No person shall obstruct or interfere with the implementation of any action required by the final notice of the director of engineering or the board. Any person found interfering or obstructing such actions shall be prosecuted to the extent provided for by law. 
604. - PERFORMANCE OF WORK 
The repair or demolition of an unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure or property as required in the notice by the director of engineering or the final decision by the board shall be performed in an expeditious and workmanlike manner in accordance with the requirements of this code and all other applicable codes and accepted engineering practice standards. Any repair or demolition of an unsafe and/or nonfunctioning structure or property must be permitted, inspected, and approved by the applicable local, county, state and/or federal agencies. 
CHAPTER 7. - RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION 
701. - GENERAL 
Whenever a structure is repaired or demolished in accordance with the provisions of this code, and the cost of such repair or demolition is borne by Douglas County, procedures for the budgeting, expenditure, and recovery of such funds shall be established. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the County used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 

 

 