THE CODE OF THE CITY OF PERRY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 2006 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF PERRY 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________    
Lewis M. Meeks  Mayor 
____________    
C. Ralph Gentry  Bobby E. Glover  Hervia M. Ingram, St.  Frank H. Roper  H. E. Smith  Edmond H. Wilson  City Council 
____________    
David G. Walker  City Attorney 
____________    F. Marion Hay, Sr.  City Manager 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF PERRY 
____________    
James E. Worrall  Mayor 
____________    
Phyllis Bynum-Grace  Bobby Glover  Brian L. Bowen  Joe Kusar  Riley Hunt  James Moore  City Council 
____________    
David G. Walker  City Attorney 
____________    R. Lee Gilmour  City Manager 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Perry, Georgia, of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1966 Code, as supplemented through November 16, 1986, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1966 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the first section of Chapter 5 is 5-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 18-2 and 18-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 18-2.1, 18-2.2 and 18-2.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 15 and 16, it will be designated as Chapter 15.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The republication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Kyle D. Christopher, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Lee Gilmour, City Manager, Ms. Laura Loewen, Administrative Secretary, and Mr. David G. Walker, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ORDINANCE NO. 87-23 
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PERRY HEREBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
1.  The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Perry, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 25, each inclusive, is adopted. 
2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 16, 1987, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days or both. In lieu of fine, imprisonment or fine and imprisonment a person convicted of a violation of the Code may be sentenced to labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public places for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
5.  Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
6.  Ordinances adopted after June 16, 1987, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
7.  This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. This 24th day of November, 1987. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To reincorporate and provide a new charter for the City of Perry in Houston County; to provide for the corporate limits of the city, the powers of the city, the form and method of government of the city; the administration of city affairs, the municipal court of the city, elections for city offices, taxation by the city, and the financial management of the city; to provide for all related matters; to repeal a specific act; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the charter of the city as enacted by 1983 Georgia Laws, Act. No. 444. Section 7.13 of the charter repealed the former charter which was derived from Ga. Laws 1937, p. 2029, and amendments. See the charter comparative table for the disposition of the former charter and amendments. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Perry in Houston County is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Perry." References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Perry. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the mayor of the city and to be designated, as the case may be, "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Perry, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace but such earlier maps shall be retained in the office of the mayor. 
State Law reference— Municipal annexation, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of this city shall include, but are not limited to, the following powers: 
(1)  Ad valorem taxation: To levy, assess, and collect ad valorem taxes on all taxable property in the city. 
(2)  Other taxes: To levy, assess, and collect other taxes allowed by general law; 
(3)  Business regulation and taxation: To levy assess, and collect occupational and business taxes and to license and regulate occupations and businesses; 
(4)  Appropriations: To make appropriations and expend funds for support of the city and any other lawful purposes; 
(5)  Municipal debts: To borrow money and issue bonds as authorized by general law; 
(6)  Property: To own property and interests in property; 
(7)  Gifts: To accept gifts and grants for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city on such terms as the donor may impose; 
(8)  Condemnation: To condemn property inside or outside the city for present or future use; 
(9)  Municipal utilities: To acquire, lease, operate, and dispose of public utilities; 
(10)  Public utilities: To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and to prescribe the conditions of such franchises and contracts; 
(11)  Roadways: To open, maintain, improve, and close streets and roads and to grant franchises and rights-of-way thereon; 
(12)  Public facilities: To acquire, operate, and dispose of public buildings, public projects, parks, cemeteries, golf courses, and other public improvements inside or outside the city; 
(13)  Sidewalk maintenance: To require real estate owners to repair and maintain sidewalks adjoining their land; 
(14)  Building regulation: To regulate the building trades and the construction of buildings and to adopt and enforce building, housing, plumbing, electrical gas, heating, and air-conditioning codes; 
(15)  Planning and zoning: To provide for city planning by zoning, subdivision regulation, and the like; 
(16)  Police power: To exercise the police power for the public safety and well-being of the city; 
(17)  Roadside regulation: To prohibit or regulate signs, billboards, and other items upon or adjacent to streets and roads; 
(18)  Health: To prescribe and enforce health and sanitation standards; 
(19)  Pollution: To regulate emissions which pollute the air and water; 
(20)  Fire safety: To fix fire limits and to prescribe and enforce fire safety regulations; 
(21)  Public hazards: To provide for the destruction or removal of public hazards; 
(22)  Waste disposal: To provide for and regulate the collection, disposal, and recycling of garbage and wastes; 
(23)  Garbage fees: To fix and collect garbage fees; 
(24)  Sewer fees: To fix and collect sewer fees; 
(25)  Nuisances: To define and provide for the abatement of nuisances; 
(26)  Property protection: To preserve and protect the property of the city; 
(27)  Prisoners: To provide for public work by municipal prisoners and for their confinement; 
(28)  Animal control: To regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals; 
(29)  Motor vehicles: To regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles; 
(30)  Taxicabs: To regulate vehicles operated for hire in the city; 
(31)  Pensions: To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for city employees and officers; 
(32)  Special assessments: To levy, assess, and collect special assessments to cover the cost of public improvements; 
(33)  Contracts: To enter into lawful contracts and agreements; 
(34)  City agencies: To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer appropriate authority upon them; 
(35)  Penalties: To provide penalties for violations of municipal ordinances; 
(36)  Police and fire protection: To exercise the power of arrest through appointed policemen and to operate a fire department; 
(37)  Emergencies: To provide for the determining, proclamation, and combating of emergencies; 
(38)  Urban redevelopment: To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(39)  Public transportation: To organize and operate public transportation systems; 
(40)  General health, safety, and welfare: To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; and 
(41)  Other powers: To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; powers generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq. 
Section 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by the Constitution of Georgia, by general law, or by this charter. If general law and this charter make no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance. 
Section 1.15. - Redevelopment powers. 
The city shall have and shall be authorized to exercise all redevelopment powers and other powers which are granted or authorized to be granted to municipalities pursuant to the `Redevelopment Powers Law,' Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. These powers shall include, without being limited to, all redevelopment powers, the power to issue tax allocation bonds and incur other obligations without such bonds or other obligations constituting debt within the meaning of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution, and the power to enter into contracts with private persons, firms, corporations, and business entities for the period specified in the `Redevelopment Powers Law.' 
(Ga. Laws 1987, p. 4115, Act. No. 201, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six (6) council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
Section 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless he or she is a qualified municipal voter and shall have been a resident of the city for one (1) year immediately prior to the date of his or her election. No person shall be eligible to serve as a council member unless he or she shall have been a resident of the council district he or she represents for six (6) months immediately prior to the date of his or her election. The mayor shall continue to reside in the city and each council member shall continue to reside in his or her council district during his or her term of office. If the mayor or any council member fails to continue to meet this residency requirement during his or her term of office, he or she shall immediately resign from office or, upon failure to resign, be removed from office by operation of law. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3531, Act No. 19, § 1) 
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.1 provides that the term of office of municipal officers is four (4) years. At the request of the city attorney, the editors have changed the two-year term provided for in section 2.11 to four (4) years. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article V. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  Until changed as provided in subsection (b) the mayor and council members shall continue to receive the same compensation to which they were entitled immediately prior to the effective date of this charter. 
(b)  The compensation of the mayor and council may be changed by ordinance; and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, additional compensation may be provided by ordinance for the council member who serves as mayor pro tempore. Any ordinance providing for an increase in compensation shall be subject to Code Section 36-35-4 or any similar law hereafter enacted. 
Section 2.14. - Holding other office. 
Except as authorized by general state law, the mayor or any council member shall not hold any city office or city employment during the term for which he or she was elected. 
Section 2.15. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  If the mayor or any council member has any private financial interest in any contract or other matter pending before the city council or any department of the city, the mayor or council member shall disclose such private financial interest to the city council and shall abstain from taking any part in proceedings relating to such contract or other matter. 
(b)  The city council may promulgate policies concerning conflicts of interest on the part of other officers and employees of the city. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3535, Act No. 20, § 2) 
Section 2.16. - Inquires and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.17. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I. 
Section 2.18. - Organization meeting. 
The city council shall meet for organization on the first Tuesday in January of each year or as soon thereafter as practicable. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor or council member, as the case may be) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Section 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Except where waiver by all members is effected by their presence or in writing, only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of all meetings shall be made as required by general state law. 
Section 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to remove members of any committee and the power to appoint new members to any committee, at any time, within the mayor's discretion. 
State Law reference— Public meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-80-1, 50-14-1 et seq. 
Section 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
Three (3) council members and the mayor or mayor pro tempore shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. The mayor, or mayor pro tempore if presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. 
Section 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be: "The Council of the City of Perry hereby ordains …" and every ordinance shall begin so. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances as provided in Section 2.24. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each council member and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(c)  Proposed ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall be given a second reading at the next meeting of the council following the introduction of the proposed ordinances and, after such reading, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A vote of the council may be taken at that time and the proposed ordinance adopted. 
(d)  The council may then pass such ordinance with or without amendment, except that if it shall make an amendment which constitutes a change of substance, it shall not finally pass the ordinance until the next meeting of the council following the amendment. 
(e)  Upon passage, all ordinances shall be signed by the mayor, or mayor pro tempore if presiding, and the city clerk. 
(Ga. Laws 1989, p. 4345) 
Section 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this charter, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law may be done by motion or resolution of the city council, except that any act of the city council to amend the charter or the code of ordinances or any other act required by general state law to be done by ordinance shall be done by ordinance. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3668, Act No. 610, § 1) 
Section 2.24. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three (3) council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within thirty (30) days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed thirty (30) days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council and shall be published as soon as is practicable, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Perry, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be published as soon as is practicable following its adoption, and the published ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 2.27. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four (4) years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. He or she shall be a qualified elector of the city shall have been a resident of this city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding his or her election. He or she shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his or her service. He or she shall forfeit his or her office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for council members. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for council members. 
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.1 provides that the term of office of municipal officers is four (4) years. At the request of the city attorney, the editors have changed the two-year term provided for in section 2.27 to four (4) years. 
Section 2.28. - Chief executive officer. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. He or she shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter. 
Section 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Preside at all meetings of the mayor and council and have the right to take part in the deliberations of said board, but shall not vote on any question except in the case of a tie; 
(3)  Sign all deeds and contracts, except deeds for property sold under execution at public sale; 
(4)  Cosign, along with the city clerk, all checks for the payment of money, after payment of unpaid invoices, bills, and vouchers is approved by the mayor and council and approval for payment has been entered upon the minutes of the city; 
(5)  Be clothed with veto power as hereinafter set out; 
(6)  Keep the council advised from time to time of the general condition of the city and recommend such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city; and 
(7)  Call the council together at any time when deemed necessary by him or her. 
Section 2.30. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The city council shall elect by a majority vote from among its members a mayor pro tempore who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence. 
Section 2.31. - Veto power. 
Every ordinance and resolution passed and every election of an officer or employee by the mayor and council shall be subject to the veto of the mayor in the following manner: The mayor shall within three (3) days write out his or her objections to such resolution, ordinance, or election and the mayor and council shall, at the next regular or called meeting at which a quorum shall be present, order said objections entered on the minutes and take a vote on the question as to whether said ordinance, resolution, or other action shall become adopted over said veto. Should as may as four (4) council members vote in the affirmative, said resolution, ordinance, or other action shall stand affirmed and become effective without the approval of the mayor; otherwise, not. The ayes and nays shall in all cases be entered on the minutes. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties of and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general state law or federal law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the immediate direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. Directors shall be appointed upon approval by a majority vote of the city council. The city manager may make recommendations to the city council regarding the appointment, suspension, demotion, or discharge of such directors, but any such recommendation shall be subject to approval by resolution adopted in accordance with the provisions of section 2.21 of this charter. Each director shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ga. Laws 1995, p. 3893, Act No. 117, § 1) 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative functions as the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general state law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as specifically authorized by general law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter, by general law, or by ordinance. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman and one member as secretary. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. 
(b)  In the event the city attorney has a conflict of interest in representing the city on any particular matter or otherwise feels that he or she cannot adequately or properly represent the city, he or she shall so inform the city council and the city council shall be authorized to hire another attorney to represent the city in the matter in which the city attorney has disqualified himself or herself. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3535, Act No. 20, § 3) 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
(a)  There shall be a City Clerk who shall be appointed and removed as provided in this charter for department heads. He or she shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive, administrative and managerial qualifications. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall be secretary to the mayor and council; keeper of official records and seal of the city; and shall perform any other duties that may be provided by this charter, ordinance or by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-20, § 2, 10-7-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-20, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 7, 2014, repealed § 3.13 in its entirety and enacted a new § 3.13 to read as set out herein. Former § 3.13 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3535, Act No. 20, § 4. 
Section 3.14. - City treasurer. 
The city council shall appoint a city treasurer to perform the duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. In the event that the position of city manager is created as authorized by section 3.16 of this act, the city council may by ordinance abolish the position of city treasurer and provide that the duties of the city treasurer shall be performed by the city manager. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3535, Act No. 20, § 5) 
Section 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
The city council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Section 3.16. - City manager. 
(a)  Upon the recommendation of the mayor, the city council may in its discretion appoint a city manager who shall be the administrative head of the city government and shall be responsible for the administration of all departments of city government. The city council shall be authorized to create the office of city manager only upon the recommendation of the mayor both as to the creation of the position and as to the person to be appointed; and if the mayor does not make such a recommendation, or if the council does not by the affirmative votes of four (4) council members accept the recommendation of the mayor both as to the creation of the position and of the person to be appointed, then the position shall not be created. 
(b)  After the creation of the office of city manager, upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of city manager, a new city manager to fill the vacancy may be selected by the affirmative vote of four (4) council members to accept a person nominated by the mayor. With respect to such future city managers, if the city council fails to accept by the specified majority a person nominated by the mayor, then the office of city manager shall be abolished as of the date of the council's failure to accept by the specified majority the person nominated by the mayor. If so abolished, the office of city manager may thereafter be re-created in the manner specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The city manager shall be appointed with regard to merit only. The city manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council and may be discharged at any time, with or without cause, in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (f) of this section. The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall determine. 
(d)  The city manager shall: 
(1)  See that the laws of the state and the ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the city are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(2)  Prepare the agenda and attend meetings of the mayor and council and recommend for adoption any measure deemed expedient; 
(3)  Make reports to the mayor and council from time to time upon the affairs of the city and keep the mayor and council fully advised of the city's financial condition and its future financial needs; 
(4)  In consultation with the appropriate department or agency director and the personnel officer or committee, if any, appoint and, when deeming it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove any and all city employees, except department or agency directors and those persons appointed by the mayor and council under the provisions of this charter or by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter; 
(5)  Prepare and submit a proposed annual budget and capital program to the mayor and council; 
(6)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, properties, and operations of the city, except as otherwise provided by this act or general state law; 
(7)  Investigate the affairs, records, accounts, and expenditures of the various commissions and boards created by the City of Perry and report thereon at least once a year to the mayor and council; 
(8)  Have the right to request the counsel, advise, or opinion of the city attorney concerning any matter affecting the interest of the city; and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to respond to such request to the best of his or her ability; 
(9)  Act in a liaison capacity on behalf of the mayor and council with boards, offices, agencies, and commissions of the city; and 
(10)  Exercise any other powers and perform any other duties required or authorized by the mayor and council and not inconsistent with this charter. 
(e)  Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation, the mayor and council shall deal with city employees who are subject to appointment and removal by the city manager solely through the city manager and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
(f)  The city manager may be removed from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Removal of the city manager shall require adoption of a resolution for removal in accordance with the provisions of section 2.21 of this charter; 
(2)  The resolution may also provide for the suspension of the city manager for a period not to exceed forty-five days; 
(3)  A certified copy of the resolution shall promptly be served on the city manager; 
(4)  The city manager shall be entitled to receive his or her salary up until the effective date of a resolution of removal; and 
(5)  The action of the council in suspending or removing a city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency except for the determination of constitutional questions. 
(g)  In the event of the absence or disability of the city manger or a vacancy in the office, the mayor and council shall appoint an acting city manager to serve until the return of the city manager, or the removal of the disability, or until the vacancy in office shall have been regularly filled. An acting city manager shall take the same oath, exercise all of the powers, and discharge all of the duties of the city manager. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3535, Act No. 20, § 6; Ga. Laws 1995, p. 3893, Act No. 117, §§ 2—4) 
Section 3.17. - Combination of functions of clerk, treasurer, and manager. 
The functions of any of the offices of city manager, city treasurer, and city clerk may be combined so that a single person serve in any two (2) or more of such offices, except that the office of city manager shall be created only as provided in section 3.16 of this act. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3535, Act No. 20, § 7) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Perry. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by associate judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. Members of the State Bar of Georgia shall be given preference in selection. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four (4) members of the city council. 
(e)  Before entering on duties of his or her office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as designated by ordinance or as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or fifteen (15) days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may: 
(1)  fix punishment for offenses within in its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or 60 days' imprisonment or both, except as otherwise provided by general law or may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days. 
(2)  suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, for performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended shall not begin unless and until ordered by the municipal court, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms or conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the municipal court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the municipal court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the costs of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths are necessary. 
(h)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by general state law. All judges of the municipal court and the city clerk are authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a justice of the peace to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to mayor's, recorder's, and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
State Law reference— Municipal court jurisdiction and authority regarding nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-02) 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Houston county under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations for procedure in the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Georgia Municipal Election Code, as now or hereafter amended. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-31-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  On the first Tuesday in December, 1983, and on that day annually thereafter, there shall be an election for successors to the council members and mayor, if applicable, whose terms will expire the following January. The terms of office shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in Section 2.18 of this Charter. 
(b)  For the purpose of electing the council members, the City of Perry shall be divided into three (3) council districts. The members representing each council district shall be elected only by the voters residing in that district and not at large. Said three (3) council districts shall consist of the territory shown on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and enumerated on Exhibit "B" attached hereto. 
Editor's note— The above-referenced Exhibit A, a map identifying the election districts, is for illustrative purposes only and is on file in the offices of the city. 
EXHIBIT B 
DISTRICT 1 

 
DISTRICT 2 

 
DISTRICT 3 

 
(c)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  The terms "tract" or "census tract," "block group," and "block" shall mean and shall describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1980 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Whenever the description of any council district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1980 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of the City of Perry which is not included in any district described in this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1980 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Each council district shall consist of two (2) posts which shall be designated as Post 1 and Post 2. 
(e)  At the city election to be held in 1984, the mayor and the council members from Council District 1, Post 1 and Council District 3, Post 1 shall be elected. Their successors shall be elected in every even-numbered year thereafter. 
(f)  At the city election to be held in 1985, the council members from Council District 1, Post 2, Council District 2, Post 2, and Council District 3, Post 2 shall be elected. Their successors shall be elected in every odd-numbered year thereafter. 
(g)  The mayor and council members in office on April 1, 1984, shall remain in office until their successors are elected and take office as provided in this section. 
(h)  Any person seeking to qualify as a candidate for a council member shall designate the district and post to which he or she seeks election. A candidate must meet the residency requirements of Section 2.11 of this act. 
(Ga. Laws 1984, p. 3654, Act No. 606, § 1; Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3531, Act No. 19, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 2002-21, §§ 1, 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 1, 2, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 5.12. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office. However, if such a vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall by majority vote, appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
Section 5.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Section 5.14. - Election by majority. 
Persons receiving the majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
(Ga. Laws 1984, p. 3654, Act No. 606, § 2) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rates; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum and may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18. 
State Law reference— Municipal business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. The city council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer, sanitary, health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, allowing exceptions for hardship, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
State Law reference— Municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-38-1 et seq., 36-82-1 et seq. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the product, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
State Law reference— Revenue bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
Any short-term loan obtained by the city must be repaid by December 31 of the year in which the loan was obtained unless otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
Section 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. The city council may by ordinance prescribe a different fiscal year. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial reporting and accounting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. (Ga. Laws 1985, Act No. 20, § 8) 
Section 6.23. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt and may thereafter amend an annual budget, except that the budget as finally adopted and amended must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance seeking out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such; and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable unless by a majority vote of the city council. 
Section 6.24. - Tax levies. 
As the next order of business following adoption of the budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.25. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council, by majority vote, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. 
Section 6.26. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Section 6.27. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council minutes. 
Section 6.28. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council may prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.29. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city is of no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
State Law reference— Sale of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6 et seq. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue; and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel, or office as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.13. - Repealer. 
An act incorporating the City of Perry in Houston County, approved March 29, 1937 (Georgia Laws 1937, p. 2029), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are repealed. 
Section 7.14. - Effective date. 
This act shall become effective on July 1, 1983. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
  This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et. seq.; Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-30. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "the Code of the City of Perry, Georgia" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1966, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 2.26. 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Generally. In the interpretation and application of any provision, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
Acts by agents. When any provision of this Code requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal such requisition shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Perry" followed. The word "city" shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City council. The words "city council" shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Perry. 
Code. The word "Code" means "The Code of the City of Perry, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which any act is to be done, as provided in any provision of this Code or in any order issued pursuant to any provision of this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day be Sunday it shall be excluded; and when any such time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday, from midnight to midnight shall be excluded. 
County. The words "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean Houston County, Georgia. 
Gender. Any word importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the provisions giving the authority. 
May. The word "may" shall be construed as being directory and not mandatory. 
Must. The word "must" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person or thing, and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one (1) person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Other city officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of this city. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of part of such building or land. 
Person. Unless otherwise provided, "person" means individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other legal entity. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall extend to every species of property except real property. 
Reasonable time. In all cases where any provisions shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
Shall. The word "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
Shall have been. The words "shall have been" include past and future cases. 
State. The words "state," "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Technical and nontechnical words. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days; but publication in a newspaper or any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one (1) insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one (1) day in each week. 
(Code 1966, §§ 1-2, 1-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1—1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money. 
(2)  Authorizing the issuance of bonds or any evidence of indebtedness. 
(3)  Authorizing or approving a contract. 
(4)  Granting a franchise. 
(5)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving or widening any street or public way. 
(6)  Establishing or altering the grades of any street. 
(7)  Approving a budget. 
(8)  Levying or imposing taxes that are not codified in this Code. 
(9)  Establishing salaries or other benefits for officers or employees of the city. 
(10)  Dealing with special assessments. 
(11)  Annexing property into the city. 
(12)  Dealing with subdivisions, zoning and/or development. 
(13)  Whose purpose has been accomplished. 
(14)  Which is special although permanent in effect. 
(15)  Which is temporary although general in effect. 
Sec. 1-4. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or allowing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc.; references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1966, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1966, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect any section or subsection of this Code, shall be numbered consecutively, but shall refer specifically to the section or subsection affected, and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions shall be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of the City of Perry, Georgia is amended to read as follows:…" The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of the City of Perry, Georgia is amended by adding a new section to be numbered section ____________ , which section shall read as follows: …" The new section shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number in the following language: "Section (chapter or article) ____________ of the Code of the City of Perry, Georgia is repealed." 
(Code 1966, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
No person shall change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1966, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both. In lieu of fine, imprisonment or fine and imprisonment a person convicted of violating this Code may be sentenced to labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public places for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Each day a violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each act in violation of the provisions of this Code shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1966, § 1-9) 
Charter reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, § 4.13. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; Imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; Additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; Alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections or subsections of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Supplemental powers of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; Powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2, 36-34-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § 2.10 et seq. 
Cross reference— Elections, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meetings. 
The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6:00 p.m. in the municipal building and at such other times and places as the council may designate. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-99) 
Charter reference— Regular meetings, § 2.19. 
State Law reference— Requirements to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-27. - Salary of mayor and councilpersons. 
The salary of the mayor is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month. The salary of the councilpersons is five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) per month. The salary of the mayor pro tempore is six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month. 
(Code 1966, §§ 12½-1, 12½-2; Ord. No. 89-7, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-89; Ord. No. 2007-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-6-07) 
Charter reference— Compensation of mayor and council, § 2.13. 
State Law reference— Governing authority of municipality authorized to fix salaries of employees and officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Secs. 2-28—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-51. - Establishment of office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. 
The office of the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Perry in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, 8-17-12) 
Sec. 2-52. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as a prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Perry shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, 8-17-12) 
Sec. 2-53. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court of the City of Perry shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will wear, faithfully and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Perry." 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, 8-17-12) 
Sec. 2-54. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the Charter of the City of Perry, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council of the City of Perry. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, 8-17-12) 
Sec. 2-55. - Jurisdiction, duties and authority. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Perry shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the City Charter and by state law, particularly described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, 8-17-12) 
Sec. 2-56. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one (1) or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, 8-17-12) 
Sec. 2-57. - Ratification. 
This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the position of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-17, 8-17-12) 
Secs. 2-58—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Departments, § 3.10. 

Secs. 2-101—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV(a). - ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE POLICY 

Sec. 2-150. - Policy statement. 
It is the position of the city that alcohol and controlled substance abuse is the number one health problem in the United States today. The costs involved with this problem include lost jobs, morale problems, injuries, illnesses, and deaths, as well as economic costs such as property damage, tardiness, absenteeism, lost productivity, increased health insurance costs, and the costs involved in replacing and retraining new employees. 
The use of alcohol and controlled substances by the city employees while on the job constitutes a direct threat to property and the safety of others. The work involved in many positions is inherently dangerous, and the safety of citizens and fellow employees depends upon the ability of employees to think clearly with unimpaired faculties. 
It is the objective of the city to provide safe and effective public service. To meet this objective, the problem of alcohol and controlled substance abuse must be identified, confronted and defeated. In order to achieve this, the city has developed a comprehensive alcohol and controlled substance policy. This policy consists of three (3) interrelated programs: (1) An employee education/supervisor training program; (2) an employee assistance program (EAP); and (3) an alcohol and controlled substance testing program. Although these programs cost money to implement, they should prove to be cost effective if they eradicate alcohol and controlled substance abuse among all employees. The city considers its employees to be its most valuable resource, and sincerely wishes to assist its employees with any alcohol or controlled substance related problems they might have. As used in this policy, the term "controlled substance" shall have the meaning and include the substances defined as "controlled substances" in the Georgia Controlled Substance Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20, et seq., and especially O.C.G.A. § 16-12-21(4) as said section and said Act shall appear from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 3-16-04) 
State Law reference— Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-151. - Regulations applicable to all employees of the city. 
A.  The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance or associated paraphernalia at any time or place, including while at the workplace shall be prohibited. 
B.  The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of alcohol while on work time or work premises shall be prohibited. 
C.  Reporting to work, or working, while intoxicated or otherwise impaired by alcohol or controlled substance use shall be prohibited. 
D.  The use of alcohol off-duty in a manner that tends to undermine the reputation, authority, or efficiency of the city shall be prohibited. 
E.  The use or possession of prescription drugs while on work premises, or while working, which could affect or impair their ability to function in their job shall be prohibited unless: 
1.  The prescribing physician has been notified of the duties involved with the employee's position, and has approved, in writing, the use of the drug while that employee is performing those duties; and 
2.  The employee's immediate supervisor has been notified in writing by the employee that he/she is using a prescription drug, and the immediate supervisor has been provided a written statement by the employee's physician approving the use of the drug while the employee is at work. 
F.  Any employee who is arrested for or convicted (including a plea of nolo contendere) of violating any criminal drug statute of any jurisdiction, regardless of whether the alleged violation occurred at the workplace or elsewhere, must notify the department of personnel of this city in writing of each arrest or conviction as soon as possible but in no event more than five (5) calendar days after the arrest or conviction. 
G.  Any individual employed by the city to drive city vehicles or operate city heavy equipment who is arrested or convicted (including a plea of nolo contendere) of violating any statute of any jurisdiction regarding driving under the influence of alcohol regardless of whether the alleged violation occurred at the workplace or elsewhere, must notify the department of personnel of this city in writing of each arrest or conviction as soon as possible but in no event more than five (5) calendar days after the arrest or conviction. 
H.  Individuals shall submit to alcohol and/or controlled substance abuse testing as follows: 
Note: Additional requirements relative to pipeline employees and employees subject to department of transportation regulations are contained in subsections (4) and (5) below. In the event of conflicts between the sections, subsection (4) will control as to pipeline employees and subsection (5) will control as to employees subject to department of transportation regulations. 
1.  At any convenient time during the final processing prior to the actual hiring. (See attachment A.) 
2.  When, in the opinion of the department director, there is reasonable suspicion that an employee of the city has violated any provision of the alcohol and controlled substance policy dealing with the use of alcohol and/or any controlled substance. (See attachment B.) 
3.  When any employee is involved in an on-the-job accident involving property damage or personal injury. (See attachment C.) 
4.  When employed in safety-sensitive positions, which include all certified law enforcement officers, all firefighters, life guards, water/wastewater plant operators, utility personnel handling gas service, all city employees assigned or expected to operate a city owned vehicle on public routes and all operators of heavy equipment, random testing will be conducted. (See attachment D.) 
5.  Upon return to work after participating in a rehabilitation program, random testing will be conducted, at least quarterly, for a twelve-month period. (See attachment E.) 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 2, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 2-152. - A procedural guide to the city alcohol and controlled substance policy. 
A.  Introduction. The problem of alcohol and controlled substance abuse has reached epidemic proportions in the United States. Although controlled substance abuse continues to receive a large amount of attention from the news media, alcohol remains the biggest substance abuse problem in the American workplace. 
It is likely that some of these individuals are employed by the city. Although it would be pleasant to assume that all employees never break the law, or report to work under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance, such an "ostrich-like" approach ignores the fact that substance abuse is a major public health problem. This problem must be squarely dealt with. Employees abusing alcohol and controlled substances are more apt to be involved in accidents, and have a higher absentee rate than non-abusers. To combat this problem the city has developed a comprehensive alcohol and controlled substance policy that shall apply to all employees. 
B.  Overview of the alcohol and controlled substance policy. The alcohol and controlled substance policy of the city is made up of three (3) separate but interrelated programs: 
1.  An employee awareness/supervisor training program; 
2.  An employee assistance program (EAP); 
3.  An alcohol and controlled substance screening test program. 
The overall responsibility for the alcohol and controlled substance policy lies with the program manager. (See attachment F.) Drug tests and any other expenditures for program costs will be cleared through and approved by the personnel director and the city manager. Although it was already prohibited for an employee of the city to be "under the influence of alcohol and/or nonprescribed drugs on the job," this alcohol and controlled substance policy was developed to prevent illicit use of alcohol or controlled substances by city employees without violating the legal rights of those employees. In order to do this, it is necessary that supervisors at every level within the city understand the policy, follow the policy, and give the policy their full support. This will lead to greater acceptance and understanding of the policy more easily attained. 
The policy has five (5) primary goals. These are: 
(A)  Prevention. To prevent the abuse of alcohol and controlled substances by the city employees. 
It is universally accepted that alcohol and controlled substance abuse is destructive. Yet many individuals start or continue these habits because they lack reliable information about devastating effects of alcohol and controlled substance abuse. The policy seeks to educate the employees about the facts behind substance abuse so that they can see the potential effects of this behavior. This should help prevent employees from developing alcohol or controlled substance-related problems. The policy also seeks to educate and motivate the "nonusing" coworkers so that they will encourage employees to seek help. Peer group pressure can be an extremely powerful force. 
The policy also seeks to communicate to the employees the fact that the city is concerned about alcohol and controlled substance abuse among its employees, and that the city will do everything within its power to prevent such abuse. 
(B)  Cost effectiveness. To combat the abuse of alcohol and controlled substance in a way that is cost effective. 
Although alcohol and controlled substance abuse is recognized primarily for its "human" costs, the economic costs associated with the problem are also unacceptable. Properly instituted, the policy will increase worker productivity, and decrease absenteeism, accidents, and health care costs. 
As a good many of the workers affected by the policy are in safety-sensitive positions, the policy will also help decrease the changes of the city being held legally liable for acts committed by an impaired employee. 
Finally, the policy should improve employee retention rates, thereby lowering employee "turn-over" costs such as hiring and training new employees to replace those who have quit or have been terminated due to alcohol and controlled substance abuse. 
(C)  Clear communication of city's policy. To clearly communicate the position of the city regarding the abuse of alcohol and controlled substances. 
The policy seeks to effectively communicate to each employee and the general public the position that alcohol and controlled substance abuse will not be tolerated among employees of the city. Employee awareness of this position and of the mechanisms to enforce this position should act as a deterrent to substance abuse. Additionally, awareness on the part of employees may encourage those who believe they might have a problem to seek assistance. Awareness of the provisions of the policy should lead to greater compliance with the policy by all employees. 
Furthermore, publicity about the policy should act to increase public respect for the employees of the city. Implementing such a policy reassures the citizens that city employees are not entitled to a double standard, that they do in fact obey the law, and that they will continue to serve as role models for citizens of all ages. The policy will also reassure the public that city services paid for by tax dollars are the safest and most effective services available. 
(D)  Provide assistance to alcohol/controlled substance dependent employees. To provide assistance to employees who need it. 
A chemically dependent individual is not able to control his/her alcohol or controlled substance intake. The policy recognizes this fact by providing for discretionary department director referral to the employee assistance program. (See attachment F.) This in not a device for the employee to use to "get around the rules". Rather, the decision to terminate or to refer to the EAP is to be made in accordance with this policy. 
The decision to terminate an employee is a drastic one, with personal, economic, and possible legal consequences. 
It is not a decision to be made lightly. If an employee has exhibited substance dependence, it may be more beneficial to the city and the employee to present that employee with a "firm choice" between rehabilitation or termination. Most experts agree that a substance abuser must face a "firm choice" before a rehabilitation program can succeed. This is not to say that all employees violating the alcohol and controlled substance policy will be given a "firm choice". If an employees' policy violation does not involve evidence of alcohol/controlled substance dependence, there would be no reason to refer the employee to EAP. 
(E)  Legal method of control. To provide a legal means to employee control. 
One of the challenges facing the city is to devise a way to test employees for alcohol or controlled substance use that would withstand legal challenge. It is necessary for the city to control its employees as it may be held liable for injuries to coworkers or the public caused by impaired employees. At the same time, the city employees have rights that need to be protected. The policy balances these two interests, by stating precisely what is expected of the employees, as well as explaining what will happen should a violation occur. 
C.  Specific guidelines on policy administration. The preceding section of this guide discussed some of the general considerations behind the alcohol and controlled substance policy. The next section of the guide will provide practical assistance in implementing the three (3) programs within the policy. 
1.  Implementing the alcohol/controlled substance awareness program. The basic idea behind this program is that employee alcohol/controlled substance abuse can be prevented by supplying the employees with information about the problems alcohol/controlled substance abuse can create. The awareness program is subdivided into two (2) sections, an employee education section to include all city employees and a supervisor training section. 
The city will work with local resources to provide instruction and materials for training programs. Awareness services are provided by various hospitals, clinics, and organizations such as Alcoholics Anonymous. 
The employee education section will provide: 
a.  Educational seminars; 
b.  Questionnaires at both the start and the completion of the program (to chart belief/knowledge changes); 
c.  Audiovisual programs; 
d.  Group discussions; 
e.  A presentation of what a treatment program is, what it does, and how to take advantage of one; and 
f.  A description and discussion of the city alcohol and controlled substance policy. 
The supervisor training section will focus on the important role supervisors have in preventing alcohol/controlled substance abuse. This program will include: 
a.  Instruction in identifying warning signs of alcohol/controlled substance abuse by employees; 
b.  Role-playing scenarios; 
c.  Group discussions; 
d.  First-line supervisors and upper-level supervisors, during which first-line supervisors should be assured of the support they will receive should they intervene with a problem employee; and 
e.  A thorough presentation of the alcohol and controlled substance policy, with particular emphasis placed upon the procedural requirements involved with disciplining employees. 
2.  Implementing the employee assistance program. 
a.  The employee assistance program. The reference point and clearing house of the EAP will be the Houston Health Care Complex. The EAP will be provided with proper resources to interview employees and refer them to appropriate rehabilitation/treatment programs. The EAP office will not be located in the department of personnel. Employees will be hesitant to avail themselves of the EAP if it appears adverse employment action will be taken against them, in spite of the employer assurance to the contrary. 
The confidentiality of the records of the coordinator will be assured to further promote employee trust and confidence in the EAP. For purposes of statistical reporting, names and dates will not be released. However, the coordinator will have the authority to sideline an employee who has informed the coordinator that he/she is presently impaired. The notion of confidentiality does not give an impaired employee the right to continue working simply because he/she accessed the EAP. In such a situation, the coordinator will seek a "disability leave" or some other type of action that will not label the employee as an alcoholic or drug user. 
b.  Employee's completion of EAP. If an employee must take time off to take part in a rehabilitation program, the absence will be treated as sick leave, annual or leave without pay for seniority purposes. 
If the employee was referred to the EAP by his department director or his designee, upon returning to work, the employee will be subject to unannounced alcohol/controlled substance screening tests for a period of twelve (12) months. These tests will be administered approximately every three (3) months, with an emphasis on post-weekend (Monday) testing. However, an element of surprise must be retained, so a fixed schedule will not be established. Management should refrain from directing the administration of more than one (1) screening test per month, unless the circumstances clearly require more frequent testing. 
c.  Financing the EAP. An outside EAP professional will be utilized as the EAP coordinator at no charge. The cost of the rehabilitation programs themselves will be covered as any other medical problem by the employee's health insurance. 
3.  Implementing the alcohol and controlled substances screening test program. 
a.  Establishing necessary test procedure. The first step in implementing the screening test program will be to provide employees proper notice. Copies of the alcohol and controlled substance policy will be distributed to each affected employee through in-house orientation programs within each department and bulletin board postings. 
After policy distribution has occurred, the city will establish a professional relationship with a quality laboratory certified through NIDA-DHHS. 
The city will establish the procedure involved with the collection of samples. Samples will be collected at the alcohol testing laboratory/agent or drug testing collection agency (see attachment F); samples will not be collected at the workplace. The samples will be carefully checked and marked with the name of the employee, the date the sample was collected, and the location where the sample was collected. A chain of custody/control will be established so that samples are properly handled before testing occurs. Every effort must be made to assure that the sample being tested is the sample actually collected from the employee/applicant in question. 
When testing for alcohol, the standard Breathalyser used for DUI suspects is sufficient. The city policy is that, any alcohol content (BAC) level indicates policy violation. The employee has the right to request a blood test if he/she so desires. This test will be conducted at the employee's expense. 
Although some laboratories have their own policies, the city will establish which chemical tests are to be performed on the urine samples. For controlled substance testing, urine samples will be used, and the presence of foreign metabolites in urine will indicate a violation of this policy. 
However, alternatives such as blood tests and hair analysis may be interpreted as more intrusive, and may be used if necessary. 
There are a variety of chemical tests that can be performed on urine samples to detect controlled substance abuse. The most widely used technique is called immuno-assay technique. The immuno-assay technique has a high degree of reliability under "optional" conditions, but can produce, in certain cases, false positive rates. The manufacturers of the leading immuno-assay counsel that every positive immuno-assay test should be confirmed by another more elaborate and expensive test method. 
The confirmatory methods include thin layer chromatography, gas chromatography, and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Ideally, all samples that test positive should be confirmed with one of the three (3) confirmatory techniques. 
Finally, in establishing necessary test procedures, the city will decide which substances are to be tested for. The Official Georgia Code Annotated lists over one hundred ninety-three (193) controlled substances, the possession or use of which is illegal. The cost of individual tests for each substance would probably be prohibitive. Additionally, urinalysis tests are directed at drug use and do not detect alcohol in the bloodstream. Thus, the city will establish testing for alcohol by use of the Breathalyser, and the use of urinalysis to detect controlled substances such as marijuana (THC), cocaine, amphetamines, barbiturates, etc. 
b.  Issues and procedures involved with testing. Testing will begin upon implementation of this policy. The alcohol and controlled substance policy provides for testing in five (5) different situations: 
(1)  Pre-employment for employees in safety-sensitive positions of sworn police personnel, trained firefighter, police reserve officers, utility employees handling gas service, city drivers and operators of heavy equipment. 
(2)  The "reasonable suspicion" test; 
(3)  Following accidents of any employees involving property damage or personal injury; 
(4)  Random testing when employed in safety-sensitive positions which include sworn police personnel, trained firefighters, police reserve officers, utility employees handling gas service, city drivers and operators of heavy equipment. 
(5)  Random testing upon return to work after participating in a rehabilitation program. 
(A)  The pre-employment test. 
(1)  During the final interview process the job applicant for safety-sensitive positions will be provided with a copy of the "pre-employment consent and notice" form. 
(2)  At that time, the alcohol and controlled substance policy will be explained to the applicant and the pre-employment consent and notice" form will be signed by the applicant. 
(3)  Should the applicant refuse to sign the consent form, the application process will continue. On the application it will be noted only that the applicant "refused test". It will not mention suspected alcohol or drug use by the applicant. The applicant has the right to refuse to consent to the test, but the city has the parallel right to refuse to hire the applicant. 
(4)  Should an inquiry as to that specific application be made by the applicant or a third party at a later date, the city must be sure to protect the confidentiality of the application process. For instance, if another employer contacts the city in the context of the reference check, the only information that will be supplied is that the applicant did apply and that the applicant "failed to meet the qualifications necessary for employment". It will never be revealed that the applicant refused to consent to an alcohol/controlled substances test. 
(5)  If the applicant being considered for a position consents to the test and the test results are negative, the applicant will continue with the hiring process. 
(6)  Should the test results be positive, the test must be confirmed. If the confirmatory test also indicates the presence of alcohol or controlled substances, the applicant will be assumed to be in violation of this policy and will no longer be considered for employment. Inquiries to a specific application will be advised the applicant "failed to meet the qualifications necessary for employment". 
(B)  The test upon "reasonable suspicion". 
(1)  The test upon "reasonable suspicion" involves a great deal of discretion on the part of the supervisory personnel. 
(2)  The supervisor training program will provide precise guidelines as to what is involved with identifying a potential alcohol or controlled substance abuser. The task of identifying potential abusers does not include diagnosing a worker. The fact that a problem exists is all that is to be discussed when dealing with an employee. 
(3)  When it is suspected that an employee has violated the alcohol and controlled substance policy, the employee will only be told that job-related problems have developed and that it is suspected that these job-related problems are the result of alcohol or controlled substance abuse. The underlying cause of such abuse should not be a concern of the supervisor. 
(4)  The phrase "reasonable suspicion" means just that—a screening test should be administered if it is reasonable to suspect that an employee has violated the policy. A "suspicion" must be based upon objective indications of substance abuse, or other policy violations. 
(5)  There are a few considerations to keep in mind before a test upon reasonable suspicion is administered. Thorough documentation of all steps of the investigation is a must. This will include such items as (1) memos to the personnel file of the employee, stating why a reasonable suspicion exists; (2) notes placed in the file stating the date and time of any discussions with the employee regarding substance abuse, and the employee's reaction; and (3) documentation of any evidence suggesting alcohol or controlled substance abuse. 
(6)  In documenting the investigation, every effort will be made to assure the confidentiality of the case. 
(7)  After it has been determined that a "reasonable suspicion" exists, the next step is to actually test the employee for the presence of alcohol and/or controlled substances. 
(8)  The employee will be called into a private office, informed of the allegations of policy violation, and be requested to sign the "employee consent and notice" form. 
(9)  If the employee refuses to consent to the testing, he/she will be allowed to leave the office. 
(10)  If an employee consents to testing, he/she always has the option of taking a blood test at his/her own expense. This test must be under such circumstances to insure validity of the test. 
(11)  The supervisor should not touch the employee at any time or attempt to coerce the employee into consenting to the screening test. 
(12)  Upon the employee's refusal to consent, he/she may be disciplined. The employee may be terminated for insubordination pursuant to the procedure outlined in the personnel rules and regulations and the alcohol and controlled substance abuse policy. 
(13)  If the employee consents to the screening test, and the confirmed results indicate the presence of alcohol or controlled substances in the employee's system, the employee will be assumed to be in violation of this policy and will be suspended without pay in accordance with this policy and the personnel rules and regulations. 
(14)  If it is determined that a violation of the policy has occurred (the reasonable suspicion has been backed up by a positive confirmed screening test plus any other corroborating evidence of a violation), the employee may be terminated or referred to the EAP. 
(15)  As a practical matter, the fact that the employee's alcohol and/or controlled substance abuse bad affected the employee's work performance to the degree that a reasonable suspicion was developed in the first place should be considered when deciding whether to terminate the employee or refer him/her to the EAP, in addition to the factors discussed earlier in this guide. 
(16)  If the investigation reveals that the employee has not violated the policy, or if the evidence is ambiguous, the employee will be reinstated with back pay. 
(C)  The testing following an accident of any employee which involves property damage or personal injury. 
(1)  At the time a person is employed by the city, the alcohol and controlled substance policy will be explained to them along with city policies regarding accidents and the employee will sign the "employee consent and notice" form. 
(2)  At the time an employee is involved in an accident, the employee will undergo a screen test. 
(3)  The department head or his designee will contact the department of personnel to arrange for the employee to be taken to a city designated physician, medical facility, or police department for testing. 
(4)  Should the employee be injured, the testing will be handled by medical personnel other than those treating the employee for injuries. 
(5)  Should the test results be negative, normal city policy and procedure in dealing with accidents will be followed. 
(6)  Should the confirmed test results indicate the presence of alcohol or controlled substance, the employee will be assumed to be in violation of this policy and may be disciplined, in accordance with the alcohol and controlled substance policy and personnel rules and regulations. 
(7)  If there is sufficient cause to believe that a policy violation has occurred, the employee may be either (a) terminated, pursuant to the procedure set forth in the personnel rules and regulations; or (b) referred to the EAP by his/her department director. 
(8)  If after the investigation has been completed, it is determined that a policy violation has not occurred, the employee will be reinstated with back pay to his/her former position and standard city policy in regard to accidents will be followed. 
(9)  The individual's refusal to sign the consent form at the time of employment, may be grounds for nonhire. (Attachment A) 
(D)  The random testing of safety-sensitive positions of certified law enforcement officers, firefighters, life guards, water/waste water plant operators, utility personnel handling gas service, all city employees assigned or expected to operate a city owned vehicle on public routes and all operators of heavy equipment. 
(1)  The random testing of employees involves periodic testing of all persons authorized by the city to carry firearms or who are otherwise employed in safety-sensitive positions. The names of such employees will be drawn at random throughout the year. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the workforce will be tested annually. 
(2)  Upon adoption of this policy, all employees holding these safety-sensitive positions will be requested to sign an "employee consent and notice" form. 
(3)  Should the employee refuse to sign the consent form, the employee will be disciplined following the procedure set forth in the city personnel policy. 
(4)  The employee may be terminated for "insubordination", pursuant to the procedure set forth in the personnel policy manual. The stated reasons for terminating an employee will never be "refusal to submit to urinalysis", but rather "insubordination" or "failure to follow the legitimate instructions of the supervisors" or a reason of similar language. 
(5)  If the employee consents to the test and the test results are negative, the employee can return to work. 
(6)  Should the test results indicate the presence of alcohol or controlled substances, that test result must and will be confirmed. 
(7)  If the confirmatory test also indicates the presence of alcohol/controlled substances, the employee will be assumed to be in violation of this policy, and will be disciplined in accordance with the alcohol and controlled substance policy and personnel rules and regulations. 
(8)  An intensive investigation into the employee's background and the circumstances behind the alleged policy violations will take place. After investigation is completed, and there is sufficient cause to believe that a policy violation has occurred, the employee will be either: (a) terminated, pursuant to the procedures set forth in the personnel rules and regulations; or (b) referred to the EAP by his/her department head or his designee. 
(9)  If after the investigation has been completed and it is determined that a policy violation has not occurred (for example, if the employee successfully rebuts the assumption of policy violations by requesting additional testing of the same urine samples or submitting to a blood test, the results of which are negative), the employee will be reinstated with back pay to his/her former position. 
(E)  Testing following return to work after rehabilitation. 
(1)  This random testing of employees follows their return to work after voluntary or department head referral for rehabilitation services. 
(2)  At the time the employee enters into a rehabilitation program, the department head or the department of personnel is notified immediately by the employee or their representative. 
(3)  Upon release from a rehabilitation program the employee will be subject to random alcohol and controlled substance screening tests for a twelve-month period. 
(4)  Prior to returning to work, the employee will be requested to sign an "Employee Consent and Notice" form. Should the employee refuse to sign the consent form, the employee will be disciplined following the procedures set forth in the city personnel policy manual. 
(5)  An investigation into the matter will be made. Following investigation, he/she may be terminated for "insubordination" pursuant to the procedure set forth in the personnel policy manual. The stated reasons for terminating an employee will never be "refusal to submit to urinalysis", but rather "insubordination" or "failure to follow the legitimate instructions of the supervisors" or a reason of similar language. 
(6)  If the employee consents to the test and the test results are negative, the employee can return to work. However, should the test results indicate the presence of alcohol or controlled substances, that test result must and will be confirmed. 
(7)  If the confirmatory test also indicates the presence of alcohol/controlled substances, the employee will be assumed to be in violation of this policy, and will be disciplined, in accordance with the alcohol and controlled substance policy and personnel rules and regulations. 
(8)  An intensive investigation into the employee's background and the circumstances behind the alleged policy violations will take place. After investigation is completed, and there is sufficient cause to believe that a policy violation has occurred, the employee will be terminated pursuant to the procedures set forth in the personnel rules and regulations. 
(9)  If after the investigation has been completed and it is determined that a policy violation has not occurred (for example, if the employee successfully rebuts the assumption of policy violations by requesting additional testing of the same urine samples or submitting to a blood test, the results of which are negative), the employee will be reinstated with back pay to his/her former position. 
D.  Other issues involving the policy. 
1.  The duty to protect other employees and the public from impaired individuals. If it is discovered that an employee is impaired while working, the employee will not be allowed to drive home. After the necessary disciplinary procedures have taken place, the impaired employee should either be driven home, or a taxi should be called for the employee. If the employee is allowed to leave on his own in an obviously intoxicated state, it is possible the city or the employee's supervisors may be held legally liable for the actions of the employee. 
2.  Discipline generally. The suspension or termination of an employee will never be justified on the basis that the employee is an alcoholic or substance abuser. The employee's physical/psychological state of being will not be mentioned when disciplining that employee. Instead, discipline will center around the employee's failure to meet objective, job-related criteria. "Substandard performance", "insubordination", "violation of policy", or "failure to follow orders" are examples of proper reasons for discipline. Supervisors are to remember—don't diagnose it, describe it. 
3.  Employees' right to privacy. All meetings involving a violation of the alcohol and controlled substance policy should be on a "closed-door" basis, with admission restricted to those who have a legitimate interest in the proceedings. Under no circumstances will the proceedings be discussed outside of these closed-door meetings, nor will it ever be publicly stated that an employee is an alcoholic or controlled substance abuser. After disciplinary proceedings have taken place, inquires as to the reason for termination/suspension will be answered with an "objective" cause only ("insubordination", for example). The use of alcohol or controlled substances shall not be publicly attributed to an employee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 3, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 2-153. - Alcohol and drug misuse prevention policy for pipeline employees 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to prevent accidents that result from the misuse of alcohol and drugs, thereby reducing fatalities, injuries and property damage; and to comply with the alcohol and drug testing standards promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation and set forth in 49 CFR part 199. In the event that there is a conflict between the provisions of this policy and the alcohol and drug testing standards promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation or the requirements of 49 CFR part 199, the standards of the United States Department of Transportation and the terms and conditions of 49 CFR part 199 shall prevail. 
B.  Scope of policy. This policy applies to every city employee who performs any function on a pipeline including operation, maintenance and emergency response. This policy also applies to any pipeline employees who are contractors or employed by contractors and compliance with each and every provision of this policy shall be required of each contractor. Any questions concerning this policy should be directed to the program manager listed in attachment F. 
C.  Required testing. 
1.  Pre-employment testing. A pre-employment drug test shall be conducted when an individual applies for a position which is covered by this policy. Any job applicant who refuses to submit to a pre-employment drug test or who has a confirmed positive test shall not be hired. An employee who transfers from one position covered by this policy to another position covered by this policy does not require pre-employment testing. 
2.  Postaccident testing. Following an accident, the city will promptly test each surviving employee for alcohol and drugs if that employee's performance either contributed to the accident or cannot be completely discounted as a contributing factor to the accident. An accident for purposes of this policy means an incident reportable under 49 CFR part 191 involving gas pipeline facilities or LNG facilities, or an accident reportable under 49 CFR part 195 involving hazardous liquid pipeline facilities. 
Any employee who is involved in an accident must remain available for alcohol and drug testing. Each employee who is requested to submit to testing shall do so within two (2) hours of the accident. Employees who have been involved in an accident may not consume alcohol for eight (8) hours following the accident or until an alcohol test has been conducted. 
An employee who is subject to postaccident testing and who fails to remain readily available for such testing may be deemed to have refused to submit to testing. An employee who leaves the scene of the accident prior to submission to an alcohol and drug test without first notifying the public gas system via his or her supervisor shall be deemed to have refused to submit to testing unless the employee left the scene to seek emergency medical attention or assistance in responding to the accident. If an employee who is subject to postaccident testing is hospitalized, the hospital or medical facility shall be asked to obtain samples for alcohol and drug testing. 
If an alcohol test is required pursuant to this section and is not administered within two (2) hours following the accident, the supervisor for the employee shall prepare a written report explaining why the test was not promptly administered and shall forward that report to the designated risk management official for the city. If an alcohol test is required pursuant to this section and is not administered within eight (8) hours following an accident, the city shall discontinue efforts to administer an alcohol test and the supervisor for that employee shall prepare a written report explaining why the alcohol test was not conducted. The written report shall be sent to the designated risk management official for the city. 
If a drug test is required pursuant to this section and is not administered within thirty-two (32) hours following an accident, the city shall discontinue efforts to administer a drug test and the supervisor for that employee shall prepare a written report explaining why the drug test was not conducted. The written report shall be sent to the designated risk management official for the city. 
3.  Reasonable suspicion testing. Reasonable suspicion testing is designed to identify alcohol or drug affected employees who may pose a danger to themselves or to others in their job performance. 
The decision to test an employee for alcohol or drugs pursuant to this section must be based on a reasonable and articulable suspicion of alcohol or drug use by the employee on the basis of specific contemporaneous physical, behavioral, or performance indicators. The observations which underlie the decision to test on the basis of reasonable suspicion for alcohol must be made during, just before, or just after the performance of covered functions by the employee. Only supervisors who have received at least sixty (60) minutes of training in detecting the symptoms of alcohol misuse may make a determination that reasonable suspicion of alcohol use exists. One (1) supervisor who has received the required training may make the decision to test an employee for alcohol under this provision. At least two (2) of the employee's supervisors, one (1) of whom is trained in detection of the possible symptoms of drug use, shall substantiate and concur in the decision to test an employee for drugs. The concurrence between two (2) supervisors may be by telephone. 
If a reasonable suspicion test is not administered within two (2) hours following the determination that testing is appropriate, the supervisor shall prepare a written report explaining why the test was not promptly administered and forward the report to the designated risk management official for the city. If the test is not performed within eight hours of the determination, then the city will discontinue efforts to administer a test and the supervisor shall prepare a written report explaining why the test was not administered and forward the report to a designated risk management official for the city. 
The city will not permit a covered employee to report for duty or to remain on duty requiring the performance of covered functions while the employee is under the influence of or impaired by alcohol or drugs, as shown by the behavioral, speech, or performance indicators of alcohol or drug misuse. 
4.  Return to duty testing. Before an employee may return to duty to perform covered functions after engaging in prohibited conduct, the city shall require the employee to successfully complete a substance abuse evaluation and any recommended course of treatment. Employees who have violated the policy with respect to the use of alcohol must also take a return to duty alcohol test with a result indicating an alcohol concentration of less than two one-hundredths (0.02) before the employee may resume his or her duties. Employees who have violated the policy with respect to the use of drugs must also take a return to duty drug test with a confirmed negative result and must also have been recommended for a return to duty by the medical review officer. 
5.  Follow-up testing. Following the return to duty of an employee who has violated the terms of this policy, the employee will be subject to unannounced follow-up alcohol or drug testing as directed by a substance abuse professional (SAP) for up to sixty (60) months after his or her return to duty. The employee will be subject to at least six (6) unannounced alcohol or drug follow-up test during the first twelve (12) months following his or her return to duty in addition to any other testing conducted pursuant to the provisions of this policy. The SAP may terminate the requirement for follow-up testing at any time after the initial six (6) tests have been completed if the SAP makes the determination that continued testing is not warranted. Follow-up testing shall be conducted just before, during or immediately following the performance of a covered function. 
6.  Random testing. All employees who work in a position which is covered by this policy shall be subject to unannounced drug testing based on a random selection process. To insure that the selections are random, employees shall be placed in a common pool via their Social Security numbers and the selections shall be computer generated. Employees shall be tested at a rate of fifty (50) percent every twelve (12) months. Test dates shall also be randomly selected and there shall be a minimum of four (4) test dates per year or one (1) per quarter. A person may be selected for drug testing more than once or not at all during the annual period. 
D.  Prohibited conduct. 
1.  General prohibitions. The use or possession of alcoholic beverages or prohibited drugs while on city property, or in any city vehicle, or during working hours, including breaks or lunch, paid or unpaid, on any shift, is strictly prohibited. The use or possession of prohibited drugs by employees covered under this policy at any time is strictly forbidden. 
2.  Alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater. Covered employees are prohibited from reporting to work or remaining at work while having an alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater (which means two one-hundredths (0.02) grams or more of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath). 
3.  Preduty use within four (4) hours. Covered employees may not use alcohol within four (4) hours prior to reporting to work. If an employee is called to work to respond to an emergency, the employee may not use alcohol after the employee has been notified to report for work. 
4.  On-duty use. Employees may not use or possess alcohol or prohibited drugs while at work. 
E.  Penalty for failure to submit to an alcohol or drug test. Any employee who refuses to submit to any test required pursuant to this policy shall not be permitted to perform covered functions and may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment at the sole discretion of the city. 
F.  Consequences of engaging in prohibited conduct. 
1.  Evaluation and treatment. Any covered employee who has an alcohol test administered and who is found to have an alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater will be sent for an evaluation by a substance abuse professional. Any covered employee who has a confirmed positive drug test result will be sent for an evaluation by a substance abuse professional. Any refusal to submit to an alcohol or drug test shall be considered, for purpose of this policy, as a confirmed positive test result. Following a violation of this policy and prior to any return to duty, the employee must: 
a.  Complete the evaluation process with a substance abuse professional to determine whether the employee is in need of treatment; 
b.  Complete any treatment recommended by the substance abuse professional; 
c.  Be re-evaluated by the substance abuse professional to ensure that the employee has properly followed the treatment program; 
d.  Provide documentation to a designated risk management official of both evaluations and the successful completion of all recommended treatment; 
e.  Successfully take a return-to-duty alcohol test with resulting alcohol concentration of less than two one-hundredths (0.02) or a drug test with a confirmed negative test result. 
f.  Be recommended for a return to duty by the medical review officer in accordance with 49 CFR part 199.15(c) if the offense involved drugs. 
2.  Suspension from duty. Any covered employee who has an alcohol test administered and who is found to have an alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater, or who has a confirmed positive test result in a drug test, or who refuses to submit to an alcohol or drug test shall be suspended from duty without pay until all conditions set forth in the preceding section have been met. 
3.  Disciplinary actions. 
a.  The following violations of this policy may result in immediate termination from employment; refusals to submit to an alcohol or drug test without a valid medical explanation, or engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing procedure; refusals to report for assessment, evaluation, and/or referral for treatment with a substance abuse professional; refusals to enter or successfully complete a rehabilitation program which has been recommended by a substance abuse professional; on-duty use or possession of alcohol or drugs; any second test result for alcohol in a concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater or a second confirmed positive test result for drugs. 
b.  The following violations of this policy shall result in suspension from duty without pay until such time as the employee completes all required evaluations and treatment; any test result for alcohol in a concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater; any confirmed positive test result for drugs; any refusal to submit to alcohol or drug testing. 
c.  The following violations of this policy may result in permanent removal from any job which involves covered functions; any test result which indicates an alcohol concentration of four one-hundredths (0.04) or greater; any confirmed positive test result for drugs; any refusal to submit to alcohol or drug testing. 
G.  Testing site. All alcohol testing for the city will be conducted by Houston Medical Center, is a qualified and approved laboratory and shall take all necessary steps to comply with the regulatory requirements of the department of transportation. 
All drug testing for the city will be conducted by SmithKline Beecham Lab, NIDA Testing. SmithKline Beecham Lab is certified by the department of health and human services under the United States Department of Transportation procedures and shall take all necessary steps to comply with the regulatory requirements of the department of transportation. 
H.  Records and confidentiality. 
1.  Types of records regarding alcohol testing which shall be maintained by the city. The following types of records regarding alcohol testing shall be maintained by the city: 
a.  Records relating to the collection process including calibration documentation for EBT devices, documentation of BAT/STT training, documents prepared in connection with decisions to administer postaccident alcohol test, and documents verifying the existence of a medical explanation of the inability of a covered employee to provide adequate breath for alcohol testing; 
b.  Records relating to test results including the pubic gas system's copy of the alcohol test form, including results of any test, documents relating to the refusal of any covered employee to submit to a required alcohol test, and documents presented by a covered employee to dispute the result of an alcohol test administered under this policy; 
c.  Records relating to any violations under this policy; 
d.  Records of procedures to be followed if there is a positive confirming test; 
e.  Records relating to referrals and evaluations including any determinations by a substance abuse professional concerning an employee's need for assistance, and records concerning an employee's compliance with the recommendations of the substance abuse professional; 
f.  Records relating to the city's annual alcohol misuse testing data and any information regarding missed tests. (The city shall submit all required alcohol misuse MIS testing data and missed test information to the research and special projects administration of the department of transportation as prescribed by the federal regulations); 
g.  Records relating to the education and training of employees and supervisors including materials provided on alcohol misuse awareness, including a copy of this policy, documentation of compliance with the requirements of 49 CFR parts 199.231 and 40, documentation of training provided to supervisors for the purpose of qualifying the supervisors to make a determination concerning the need for alcohol testing based on reasonable suspicion, and certification that any training conducted under this policy complies with the requirements of 49 CFR parts 199 and 40. 
2.  Length of time that records regarding alcohol testing shall be maintained. Records regarding alcohol testing shall be maintained for the following periods of time: 
For a minimum of five (5) years. 
a.  Records of employee alcohol test results indicating an alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater; 
b.  Documentation of refusals to take required alcohol tests; 
c.  Calibration documentation of each EBT used in alcohol testing, including records of the results of external calibration checks; 
d.  Employee referrals and evaluations; 
e.  Management information systems (MIS) annual alcohol misuse report data; 
f.  Documents pertaining to failures to test within established time limits. 
For a minimum of two (2) years. 
a.  Records relating to the collection process (except calibration of EBT devices); 
b.  Records related to training; 
c.  Records of the inspection and maintenance of each EBT used in employee testing; 
d.  Documentation of the public gas system's compliance with the quality assurance procedure for each EBT it uses for alcohol testing; 
e.  Records of the training and proficiency testing of each BAT used in employee testing in the public gas system. 
For a minimum of one (1) year. All records of employee alcohol test results indication and alcohol concentration below two one-hundredths (0.02). 
3.  Types of records maintained regarding drug testing and the lengths of time that those records shall be maintained. The city shall keep the following records regarding drug testing for the periods of time specified: 
a.  Records that demonstrate the collection process conforms to the requirements of 49 CFR part 199 shall be kept for a period of three (3) years; 
b.  Records of employee drug tests that show employees who had a positive test result, and the type of test (e.g. postaccident), and records that demonstrate rehabilitation, if any, must be kept for at least five (5) years and include the following information: 
(1)  The function performed by each employee who had a positive drug result; 
(2)  The prohibited drug(s) used by each employee who had a positive drug test result; 
(3)  The disposition of each employee who had a positive drug test result or who refused a drug test (e.g. termination, rehabilitation, removed from performing covered functions, etc.) 
c.  Records of employee drug test results that show employees passed a drug test must be kept for at least one (1) year; 
d.  A record of the number of employees tested, by type (e.g. postaccident), must kept for at least five (5) years; 
e.  Records confirming that supervisors and employees have been trained as required by 49 CFR part 199 must be kept for at least three (3) years. 
4.  Confidentiality and when the release of records is authorized. The city shall maintain all alcohol and drug related testing information, including all test results, in a secure manner to prevent the disclosure of such information to unauthorized personnel. All information concerning alcohol and drug testing conducted pursuant to this policy is strictly confidential. The city will not release any records except as provided by law or when expressly authorized or required by 49 CFR parts 199 and 40. A covered employee is entitled, upon written request, to obtain copies of any records pertaining to that employee's use of alcohol or drugs, including any records pertaining to his or her alcohol or drug tests. The city shall make records available to a subsequent employer upon receipt of the written request from the covered employee, however, disclosure shall be strictly limited to that which is expressly authorized by the written request from the employee. The city may disclose information to the decision maker in a lawsuit, grievance, or other proceeding. Examples of the types of proceedings where the protected information may be disclosed include worker's compensation hearings and unemployment compensation proceedings. 
I.  Subsequent tests of positive samples. Employees who receive a confirmed positive drug test result may request that the original sample be retested. All requests for a subsequent test of an original sample must be in writing and made within sixty (60) days of receipt of the final test result from the medical review officer. The employee may specify testing by the original laboratory or by a second laboratory that is certified by the department of health and human services. The city shall require the employee to pay in advance the cost of shipment and analysis of the sample. The city shall reimburse the employee for said expenses if the subsequent test is negative. 
J.  Education and training. Each employee who is subject to the testing requirements of this policy shall receive a copy of this policy. Copies of this policy shall also be displayed in the work areas of covered employees. Informational materials concerning substance abuse additions and the community service hot-line telephone number for employee assistance will be displayed in the work areas of covered employees and will be periodically distributed to the employees. Written notice of the availability of this information shall be given to any representatives of employee organizations. 
All supervisors who are responsible for making reasonable suspicion testing determinations shall receive all necessary training to comply with the requirements of the United States Department of Transportation regulations. 
K.  Definitions. 
1.  Accident. For purposes of this policy, an accident means an incident reportable under 49 CFR part 191 involving gas pipeline facilities, which includes all parts of those physical facilities through which gas moves in transportation, including but limited to pipes, valves, and other appurtenances of pipes, compressor units, metering stations, regulatory stations, delivery stations, holders, and fabricated assemblies, or LNG facilities, or an accident reportable under 49 CFR part 195 involving hazardous liquid pipeline facilities. 
2.  Breath alcohol technician (BAT). A breath alcohol technician is an individual who is authorized to operate an EBT and who has received appropriate training to do alcohol testing according to the provisions of the department of transportation federal regulations and also with regard to the specific instrument used. 
3.  Covered employee. A covered employee is a person who is an employee of the city and of the public gas system, or who is an employee of a contractor engaged by the public gas system, and who regularly performs work on a pipeline including operation, maintenance or emergency response functions regulated by the department of transportation, as provided in 49 CFR parts 192, 193 and 195. 
4.  Covered function (safety-sensitive function). A covered function or safety-sensitive function is one in which the employee performs an operation, maintenance, or emergency response function on a pipeline and is regulated by 49 CFR parts 191 and 192. 
5.  Performing a covered function. Performing a covered function means any time during that period in which the employee is actually performing, is ready to perform, or is immediately available to perform covered functions. 
6.  Refusal to submit to testing. A refusal to submit to testing means that an employee fails to provide an adequate breath sample for testing without a valid medical explanation or engages in any conduct that obstructs in any way the testing process. 
7.  Substance abuse professional (SAP). (See attachment F.) A substance abuse professional is a licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy) or a licensed or certified psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor (certified by the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification Commission), with knowledge of an clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol-related disorders. 
8.  Prohibited drugs. Prohibited drugs mean any of the following substances specified in Schedule I or Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 801, 812 (1981 & 1987 Cum. P.P.); marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine (PCP). 
9.  Medical review officer. (See attachment F.) The medical review officer must be a licensed physician with knowledge of substance abuse disorders. The medical review officer reviews the results of all drug tests for accuracy, conducts medical interviews with tested individuals to determine whether or not there are alternative explanations for a positive test result, order samples retested if necessary, determines if an employee may return to duty following a refusal or a positive test result, directs return to duty tests and follow-up testing schedules, and performs other duties as set forth in 49 CFR part 199. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 4, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 2-154. - Drug and alcohol testing policy for employees subject to department of transportation regulations. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to assist in the creation of a safe driving environment and to meet the requirements of the guidelines established by the United States Department of Transportation. This policy is specifically intended to meet all regulatory requirements of 49 CFR parts 40 and 382. If there is any part of this policy is in conflict with those regulations found at 49 CFR part 40 or part 382, the terms of those regulations control. 
B.  Scope of this policy. This policy applies to every city employee who operates a commercial motor vehicle ("CMV") and who is required to have a commercial driver's license ("CDL"). Compliance with this policy is a condition of employment. The failure or refusal of an applicant or employee to cooperate fully by submitting to any test or any procedure under the terms of this policy or by signing any consent form or other document required by the testing laboratory shall be ground for refusal to hire or disciplinary actions including termination of employment at the sole discretion of the city. A commercial motor vehicle for purposes of this policy is: a tractor trailer or similar vehicle, with a gross combination weight rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more (inclusive of a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of at least ten thousand (10,000) pounds); a single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more; a vehicle that is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more persons, including the driver, or a vehicle that transports hazardous materials (as defined in 49 CFR part 172.1, et al). 
The provisions of this policy apply to the performance of any safety-sensitive job function, which is defined to include: 
• All time spent at any city property waiting to be dispatched unless the driver has been relieved from duty; 
• All time spent conducting the required equipment inspections and inspecting, servicing, or conditioning any CMV at any time. 
• All driving time; 
• All time other than driving time spent in or upon a CMV; 
• All time spent assisting, supervising or attending the loading or unloading of a vehicle, including remaining in readiness to operate and handling receipts for shipments loaded or unloaded; 
• All time spent following the required procedures for accidents; 
• All time spent repairing, obtaining assistance, or remaining in the attendance of a disabled vehicle. 
Any business which contracts with the city, and as a part of that contract provides employees who are subject to the department of transportation requirements as operators of commercial motor vehicle must comply with the drug and alcohol testing requirements of the department of transportation and must provide to the city written documentation of their drug and alcohol testing policy for those employees prior to performing any work on behalf of the city. 
C.  General statement of policy. Concerning the use of alcohol, no employee who performs safety-sensitive functions shall operate a CMV if the employee: has a blood alcohol concentrations of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater; is presently using alcohol; or, has used alcohol within four (4) hours of coming onto duty. 
Concerning the use of drugs, an employee shall not report for duty or remain on duty if the employee uses or has in their possession any illegal drug. No employee may perform a safety-sensitive job function while unlawfully using or following a positive drug test result. 
Manufacture, distribution, dispensation, sale, unlawful use, or unlawful possession of hallucinogenic drugs, narcotics, or other controlled substances (or paraphernalia related to the use of such substances) is prohibited. Manufacture, distribution, dispensation, sale, use or possession of alcohol is prohibited during working hours or at any time on city property. 
An employee either reporting to work visibly impaired or observed to be visibly impaired while on duty will be deemed unable to perform required duties and will not be permitted to work. If possible, the employee's supervisor will seek another supervisor's opinion to confirm the employee's impaired status. If, in the opinion of the employee's supervisor, the employee is impaired, the employee may be sent home or to a medical facility by a safe means of transportation (after any reasonable cause drug or alcohol testing required by this policy). The employee may be accompanied by the supervisor or another employee if necessary. Under no circumstances will an apparently impaired employee be allowed to drive a car or other vehicle. If a drug or alcohol test cannot be administered under this policy, the apparently impaired driver shall nonetheless remain ineligible to perform any driving duties for at least twenty-four (24) hours. 
If an employee is undergoing any medical treatment that involves the ingestion of any medications that have the potential to impair work performance, he or she must advise their supervisor of treatment and present appropriate medical documentation. A decision will then be made by the supervisor whether the employee should be able to perform his or her job safely and properly. Employees must keep all prescribed medications in its original container, which identifies the drug, date of prescription, and prescribing doctor. 
D.  Required testing. 
1.  Pre-employment and pretransfer testing. The city will test each driver for alcohol and for illegal drugs before the first time a driver performs a safety-sensitive function. All applicants for employment in positions that are covered by this policy must submit to a drug test as a prequalification condition of employment. All current employees whom the city intends to transfer into a position that is covered by this policy must submit to a drug test as a pre-qualification condition of transfer. 
If a driver has participated in a department of transportation-qualified drug testing program within the previous thirty (30) days and the driver passed a drug test administered within the six (6) months prior to the driver's application date, or the driver was subject to random testing for the twelve (12) months prior to the driver's application date, then that driver may be exempt from pre-employment or pretransfer testing. If a pre-employment or pre-transfer test is not performed pursuant to the provision, then the procedures set forth in 49 CFR section 382.301(d) will be followed before the performance of any safety-sensitive job duties. 
No driver will be allowed to perform a safety-sensitive function unless that driver receives a negative drug test result and an alcohol concentration less than two one-hundredths (0.02). Employee found to have an alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater, but less than four one-hundredths (0.04) will not be allowed to perform safety-sensitive functions for twenty-four (24) hours following the test. 
2.  Postaccident testing. For each accident involving a commercial motor vehicle, the city will test each surviving driver if the employee was performing a safety-sensitive function that could have contributed to the cause of the accident. 
All alcohol tests will be administered, if possible, within two (2) hours, but not more than eight (8) hours following the accident. All drug tests will be administered within thirty-two (32) hours following the accident. The results of a breath or blood test for the use of alcohol or a urine test for the use of drugs, if conducted by local or state officials pursuant to an accident investigation, will be considered a test for the purposes of this policy. 
Whenever an alcohol test is not administered within two (2) hours after the accident, the employee's supervisor must prepare a written statement of the reasons that the test was not promptly administered. Whenever a test is not administered within the additional time limits set forth above, the employee's supervisor must prepare a written statement of the reasons that the test was not promptly administered. The original of any such statement shall be forwarded to the program manager (See attachment F). 
Any driver subject to postaccident testing must remain readily available for testing, otherwise, the driver will be deemed to have refused to submit to testing. A driver who is unable to submit to testing at the time of the accident because of serious injuries received in the accident shall provide to the city the necessary authorization for the city to obtain hospital reports or other documents that would indicate the presence of any controlled substances or alcohol in the driver's system. Refusal to provide such authorization may be treated by the city as a refusal to submit to testing under this policy. An employee may be considered readily available for testing if: the employee notifies the city of his or her whereabouts; the employee was required to leave the scene to seek medical attention for himself, herself, or others; or, the employee left the scene to obtain assistance in responding to the accident. 
3.  Random testing. The city will administer random alcohol test to twenty-five (25) percent of the average number of drivers positions in each individual category of driver positions annually unless the federal highway administrator changes the percentage of random test required. The city shall conduct random drug testing of fifty (50) percent of the average number of driver positions in each individual category of driver positions annually. 
Each driver will have any equal chance of being tested each time selections are made. Selections will be made randomly. The dates of testing will be unannounced and will be reasonably spread throughout the calendar year. If a driver is notified of selection for random testing, the driver must proceed to the test site immediately. A driver will only be tested for alcohol while the driver is performing a safety-sensitive function, just before performing a safety-sensitive function, or just after performing a safety-sensitive function. 
4.  Reasonable suspicion testing. If the city has a reasonable suspicion that a driver is under the influence of prohibited drugs or alcohol, the city, will require the driver to submit to a drug or alcohol test. Reasonable suspicion will be based on the observations of the actions, appearance, speech, body odors, or conduct of an on-duty driver that indicate the possible use of a prohibited drug or alcohol. The actions, appearance, speech, body odors, or conduct of the driver must be witnessed by at least one (1) city official or supervisor who has received department of transportation approved training, in the detection of probable drug or alcohol use. Third-party reports that an employee is impaired in his or her driving duties due to the use of prohibited drugs or alcohol shall not constitute reasonable cause, but may be cause for the observation of the employee by the supervisor. 
Whenever an employee is required to be tested under this provision, the city shall provide transportation to the testing site for the employee. 
A driver will only be required to undergo reasonable suspicion alcohol testing just before, during, or just after the performance of a safety-sensitive function. Reasonable suspicion alcohol testing will be performed if possible within two (2) hours following the reasonable suspicion observation, but not more than eight (8) hours following the observation. If an alcohol test cannot be performed within two (2) hours following a determination of reasonable cause to conduct such test, the supervisor shall prepare a written statement why the test was not administered promptly. If a written statement is made for failure to procure the required test in a prompt manner, the original must be sent to a designated official in the city personnel department. 
Once the city, through an official or supervisor, observes indications of alcohol use, the city will not allow the driver to perform any safety-sensitive functions until an alcohol test is administered and the driver's blood alcohol concentration is less than two one-hundredths (0.02), or twenty-four (24) hours have elapsed. 
A written record shall be made of the observations leading to a reasonable suspicion alcohol or controlled substance test and signed by the supervisor or official who made the specific observations within twenty-four (24) hours of the observed behavior or manifestations or before the results of the controlled substance test are released, whichever is earlier. In addition to the written record set forth above, the supervisor or official shall utilize the observation checklist which is attached. The originals of both the written record and the observation checklist shall be forwarded to the designated official in the city personnel department. 
5.  Testing following a return to duty. Employees who are charged with a criminal offense involving drugs or alcohol, or who voluntarily seek treatment for substance addiction prior to being found in violation of this policy, or who are not discharged or permanently relieved of driving duties following a violation of this policy may not resume driving duties without first: 
a.  Undergoing an initial evaluation by a substance abuse professional; 
b.  Completing all recommended treatment; 
c.  Undergoing a follow-up evaluation, with a substance abuse professional; 
d.  Providing written documentation of the successful completion of all recommended treatment to the designated treatment to the program manager; and 
e.  Taking a return-to-duty drug or alcohol test with a verified negative result. 
A driver who has completed drug or alcohol rehabilitation treatment under this policy shall, upon the resumption of driving duties, be subject to unannounced testing. Such testing shall be conducted over a period of twelve (12) to sixty (60) months and shall include at least six (6) unannounced tests during the first twelve (12) months of his or her return to duty. The type, frequency, and timing of such testing shall be at the direction of such testing shall be at the direction of the substance abuse professional who has evaluated the employee. The substance abuse professional may terminate the testing at any point following the first six (6) tests under this provision. Each unannounced alcohol test shall be administered either immediately before, during or after the driver has performed driving duties. 
E.  Notification of results. For pre-employment drug tests, the city will inform the driver of the result only if the driver requests the results within sixty (60) calendar days of being notified of the disposition of the employment application. 
For random, reasonable suspicion and postaccident test for drugs or alcohol, the medical review officer shall make all reasonable efforts to contact the driver prior to making a determination to verify a test result as positive to determine whether the driver wishes to discuss the test result with the medical review officer. The medical review officer shall notify each employee who has confirmed positive test result that the employee has seventy-two (72) hours to request a test of the split specimen. 
If, after making all reasonable efforts, the MRO is unable to contact an employee, then the MRO must contact a designated city official from the personnel department, who then shall direct the employee to speak with the medical review officer as soon as possible. If the employee cannot be contacted after reasonable efforts have been made to do so, then the employee may be placed on temporary medically unqualified status or medical leave. 
The current medical review officer is Dr. Frank Stagg, who may [be] contacted at 2510 Highway 127, Kathleen, Georgia, 31047 or by telephone at (478) 987-1778. 
F.  Employee assistance program. Each employee driver who has violated any aspect of this policy shall be advised of the resources to the driver in evaluating and resolving problems associated with the misuse of alcohol and the use of controlled substances, including the names, addresses and telephone numbers of substance abuse professionals and counseling and treatment programs. Furthermore, each driver employee who engages in any conduct prohibited by this policy shall be evaluated by a substance abuse professional, through Houston Medical Center, who shall determine what assistance, if any, the employee needs n resolving problems associated with alcohol misuse and controlled substances use. 
No aspect of this policy shall require the city to provide an employee assistance program (EAP) for employees subject to drug and alcohol testing pursuant to this policy and for supervisory personnel. The city may provide an EAP for employees subject to drug and alcohol testing pursuant to this policy; however, the availability of, and eligibility for, benefits under such EAP shall be governed by the terms of that program. Participation in such a program if it is made available by the city shall not excuse an employee from this policy's testing provisions or requirements for removal from duty. 
All employees who return to duty following a period of treatment for substance addiction shall be subject to unannounced follow-up alcohol and drug tests as explained in subsection D-5 of this section. 
G.  Consequences of violating this policy. Violation of the provisions of this policy concerning drug and alcohol abuse may lead to severe disciplinary action, including discharge for the first offense, at the sole discretion of the city. Refusal to submit to testing in any manner prescribed by this policy shall result in termination of employment. 
For all violations of this policy, the city shall take the following action: 
1.  Removal from safety-sensitive function. The city will not permit any driver to perform safety-sensitive functions, including driving a commercial motor vehicle, if the city has determined that the driver has violated this policy. 
2.  Required evaluation, treatment and testing. The city will not allow any driver who has violated this policy to perform a safety-sensitive function unless the driver has met the referral, evaluation, treatment and testing requirements of this policy. 
H.  Additional penalties. In addition to the consequences described above, any driver who is determined by the secretary of transportation to have committed an act that is in violation of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense. 
I.  Records and test results. The city shall maintain those records required by 49 CFR parts 199.227, 382.40 1 and 391. All records shall be kept in a location with controlled access as follows: 
1.  Five-year retention requirement. 
a.  Records of any employee alcohol test results indicating a blood alcohol concentration of two one-hundredths (0.02) or greater, including the alcohol test form and any documents presented by a covered employee to dispute the result of a required alcohol test; 
b.  Records of any employee's verified positive controlled substances test results, including the city's copy of the custody and control form and documents presented by a covered employee to dispute the result of a required controlled substance test; 
c.  Documentation of any refusal to submit to any test under this policy; 
d.  Equipment calibration documentation; 
e.  Records related to referrals, evaluations, treatment, and return-to-duty and follow-up testing for both drug and alcohol violations; 
f.  Copies of the annual management information system reports required to be submitted to the DOT. 
g.  Documents of compliance with the requirement that the city implement this policy and documentation that each covered employee has received all necessary information regarding this policy including information concerning drug and alcohol abuse awareness. 
2.  Two-year retention requirement. 
a.  Records relating to the collection process (except calibration documents) and training; 
b.  Documents relating to the random selection process; 
c.  Documents generated in connection with decisions to administer reasonable suspicion test for drugs or alcohol; 
d.  Documents generated in connection with decisions on postaccident testing; 
e.  MRO documents concerning the inability of any employee to provide any necessary testing sample; 
f.  Documentation of training provided to supervisors under this policy including; all training materials used, including a copy of the city's policy and materials provided to employees on drug and alcohol misuse awareness; the names of supervisors attending training and the dates and times of such training and certification that any training conducted under the rules of any DOT OA complies with such training requirements; 
3.  One-year retention requirement. 
a.  Records of negative and canceled controlled substances test. 
b.  Records of all test results indication an alcohol concentration of less than two one-hundredths (0.02). 
4.  Testing facility records and compliance with the DOT regulations. The testing laboratories used for the drug and alcohol tests pursuant to this policy shall be solely responsible for their individual compliance with the department of transportation regulations, including but not limited to the requirements of proper procedures, record-keeping, the use of proper testing forms for notice requirements and confidentiality of test results. Said facilities shall provide to the city written confirmation of their compliance with the necessary regulations. 
5.  Access to facilities and records. Generally, the city will not release driver information that is contained in records required under this policy. However, the city will release such information in three (3) instances: 
a.  Records will be released to the driver or to third parties upon written consent of the driver; 
b.  Records will be released to the department of transportation or other government officials with regulatory authority over the city or the driver; and 
c.  Records will be released in certain circumstances to a decision maker in a lawsuit or grievance procedure. 
6.  Release of alcohol and drug test information by previous employers. Before a driver will allowed to perform a safety-sensitive function, the driver must sign a consent form allowing the city to obtain information on the driver's alcohol and drug testing within the preceding two (2) years from the driver's previous employers. 
If the city obtains information of a 0.04 or greater blood alcohol concentration in a previous test result, or a verified positive drug test result, or a refusal to be tested, the city will not use the driver to perform safety-sensitive functions without obtaining information on subsequent substance abuse professional evaluation, and compliance with return to duty testing requirements. 
7.  Confidentiality. The city will only release information gathered under this policy in a form that insures confidentiality. The city will maintain a written confidential record with respect to each past employer contacted. 
J.  Training and education. The city shall provide materials concerning the effects of alcohol and use of controlled substances on an individual's health, work, and personal life signs and symptoms of an alcohol or a controlled substance addiction; and, available methods of intervening when an alcohol or a controlled substance addition is suspected, including confrontation, referral to any available employee assistance program and referral to a supervisor. 
In addition, the city shall provide training for supervisory personnel who will determine whether a covered employee must be tested for alcohol or drug use based on reasonable cause. Such training shall include two (2) sixty-minute periods of training on the specific, contemporaneous physical, behavior, and performance indicators of probable drug and alcohol use. Additional supervisory training may cover the effects and consequences of drug use on personal health, safety, and the work environment. 
K.  Drug and alcohol testing procedures and reporting methods. The laboratory performing drug testing for the city under the terms of this policy shall be certified by the department of health and human services under the procedures prescribed by the department of transportation in 49 CFR part 40. The designated laboratory for performing drug tests pursuant to this project is Quest Diagnostic, Atlanta, Georgia. 
1.  Drug testing procedures. 
a.  Drug tests shall be performed on urine specimens collected in accordance with procedures and standards prescribed by the department of transportation in 49 CFR [parts] 40.23 and 40.25. 
b.  All analysis of drug test performed pursuant to this policy shall meet the standards prescribed by the department of transportation in 49 CFR part 49.29. Urine specimens shall be tested only for evidence of use of the following prohibited drugs; marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine (PCP). 
c.  Urine specimens shall be collected at a designated collection site be [by] a "collection station person" (CSP). A collection site will be any suitable location at which a specimen of urine can be collected under the required conditions of privacy, security, and temporary storage of the specimens. The collection site will have at least an enclosure for private urination, a toilet, some surface for writing, and a source of water for washing hands which, if practical, will be located outside the privacy enclosure. Unless an employee is notified otherwise prior to a test, the designated collection site under this policy shall be Occupational Health & Wellness, 2510 Highway 127, Kathleen, Georgia 31047. 
d.  During specimen collection, the CSP will restrict access to the collection site. If the CSP is not a medical professional or if the driver has less than complete privacy, the CSP shall be of the same gender as the driver. Once the driver has completed giving the specimen, no person other than the CSP shall be permitted to handle the specimen until it is secured for transport. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 3-16-04) 
ATTACHMENT A 
PRE-EMPLOYMENT CONSENT AND NOTICE  ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING 
As a condition of employment by the city, you must submit to an alcohol and/or controlled substance screening test. 
By signing this form, you are acknowledging that you consent to such a screening test, and that you understand that such testing is part of the City of Perry's Alcohol and Controlled Substance policy. 

 
ATTACHMENT B 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED FOR EMPLOYEES SUSPECTED TO BE IN VIOLATION OF THE ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE POLICY 
If in the opinion of the department director or his/her designee, a reasonable suspicion (a reasonable suspicion must be based on objective indications of alcohol and/or controlled substance abuse; more obvious indications of alcohol and/or controlled substance abuse include repeated unauthorized absences, repeated illnesses, bloodshot eyes, slurred speech, lethargic behavior, behavior inappropriate or inconsistent with circumstances, or an employees arrest for DUI, public drunk, or violation of the Georgia Controlled Substance Act) exists that the employee is reporting to work, or is working, while under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, or while impaired from the use of same, the following procedures shall be followed: 
1.  A supervisor shall determine if an employee "appears" to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, including controlled substances and prescriptions, or both. 
2.  The supervisor shall arrange, for at least one other supervisor to observe the conduct of the employee. The observing supervisor shall make a written report (See attachment D-1) of the observations, which report shall include a description of the conduct of the employee upon which such reasonable suspicion is based. 
In the case of an arrest, a copy of the police reports will be obtained. 
3.  A supervisor shall personally escort the employee to the supervisor's office. 
4.  The supervisor shall have a witness present during the questioning of the employee. 
5.  The employee shall be asked to explain why it appears that he/she is under the influence of or impaired by the use of alcohol or controlled substances. The supervisor shall ask the questions in sequence as in "Questions for Suspected Alcohol or Substance Users", (attachment B-2). 
6.  If the employee agrees, the supervisor shall have the employee take the "Basic On-Site Coordination Examination", (attachment B-3), in the presence of the witness. 
7.  The supervisor shall complete the "Opinion Based on Observations" checklist, (attachment B-4). 
8.  If the supervisor concludes that the employee does not appear to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, including controlled substances and prescription drugs, or both, and he is able to perform his work duties, then he will have the employee return to his work site. 
9.  If the supervisor concludes that the employee is unfit for work due to the influence of alcohol, drugs, including controlled substances and prescriptions, or both, then the department head or his designee will request the employee to go to a city designated physician for drug screening, or the police department for a Breathalyser, with the employee signing a consent form (alcohol and controlled substance policy attachment B-5) agreeing to testing, and being escorted to the medical facility or police department by a supervisor. 
10.  The department head or his designee will contact the department of personnel who will schedule this test with the medical facility or police department. This test will be conducted at the expense of the city. 
11.  If the chemical analysis results of such tests indicate the presence of alcohol or any controlled substance in the system of the employee in any degree, it will be assumed that the employee is in violation of this policy. This assumption of policy violation will result in: 
a.  Discipline the employee following the procedural guidelines as set forth in the city personnel policy manual. 
b.  Refer the employee to the employee assistance program, when applicable, and they will determine if there is a significant chance that the employee can be rehabilitated and the employee has not committed an act or omission which presented an immediate danger to the public or fellow workers. This referral would be the employee's "last chance". After successful completion of an alcohol and/or controlled substance rehabilitation program, the employee may return to work subject to random alcohol and controlled substance screening tests for a period of twelve (12) months. If at any time during this "last chance" testing period, a screening test indicates the presence of alcohol or any controlled substance in the employee's system, the employee shall be immediately terminated. 
c.  In the event of an employee's arrest, the EAP is not available. 
d.  Violation of regulations A and B of this policy (Page 2) will ordinarily result in termination consistent with the procedural guidelines set forth in the city personnel policy manual. 
12.  The employee may through his/her own effort attempt to rebut the assumption of policy violation. For example, in the case of a urine sample used to detect violation of controlled substances, the employee may request an additional test of the remaining portion of his/her sample. However, additional testing will be at the expense of the employee. If such tests produce negative results, the assumption of policy violation may be considered rebutted depending upon such factors as the timing of the tests and other circumstances surrounding the indication of policy violation, and the employee may be reimbursed the cost of the second test. 
13.  A refusal of testing will be treated as insubordination and will be grounds for discipline. 
14.  Under no circumstances shall the employee suspected of being under the influence of alcohol, drugs, including controlled substances and prescriptions, or both, be permitted to leave the worksite by himself. 
Necessary arrangements should be made to have the employee taken home. If the employee refuses any assistance, be certain that the witness can verify such refusal. However, if an employee cannot control his actions, under no circumstances should he be allowed to leave without assistance. The supervisor must call the Perry Police Department to warn them of the employee's condition and refusal of assistance before the employee is allowed to leave the work site. Law enforcement officials should be told the employee's name and make of car. 
15.  The supervisor and witness shall be present throughout all proceedings, appropriate notes should be taken for future reference and supporting documentation. 
16.  The supervisor and witness shall be aware at all times of the employee's "right to privacy" and involve only those people who have a "need to know" in the situation, the confidentiality of the case will be protected. 
ATTACHMENT B-1 
OBSERVATION CHECK LIST 

 
ATTACHMENT B-2 
QUESTIONS FOR SUSPECTED SUBSTANCE ABUSERS 

 
If employee agrees, department head should: 
a)  Contact the department of personnel to make physician arrangements. 
b)  Get signed release statement by the employee. (Alcohol and controlled substance policy attachment C). 
If the employee refuses to sign the statement for voluntary testing, the employee should be told that he is refusing a direct order which constitutes insubordination and that such refusal may be treated as a violation of the alcohol and controlled substance policy. 

 
ATTACHMENT B-3 
BASIC ON-SITE COORDINATION EXAMINATION 
(check pertinent items) 

 

 
ATTACHMENT B-4 
OPINION BASED ON OBSERVATIONS 
1.  Under the influence of alcohol _____ 
2.  Under the influence of drugs _____ 
3.  When not sure, which one of either alcohol or drugs or both _____ 
4.  Unfit to operate machinery or to perform safely in work place _____ 
5.  Unfit for work for other reasons (list) _____ 
_____
6.  Frequent absences _____ 
7.  Frequent tardiness _____ 
8.  Mood swings _____ 
9.  Other observations _____ 
_____
_____
10.  Recommended for chemical testing _____ 
11.  Does not appear to be under influence of alcohol _____ 
12.  Does not appear to be under influence of drugs _____ 
13.  Remarks _____ 
_____
_____ 

 
ATTACHMENT B-5 
EMPLOYEE CONSENT AND NOTICE: 
ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING  UPON REASONABLE SUSPICION THAT VIOLATION  OF ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE HAS OCCURRED 
It is the opinion of the City of Perry that there is reasonable suspicion to believe that you have been involved in a violation of the Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy of the City. As provided in that policy, you are required to submit to an alcohol and controlled substance screening test. In order to retain your position as a City of Perry employee, you must successfully pass the screening test or participate in the Employee Assistance Program. 
By signing this form, you are acknowledging that you consent to such screening test, that you consent to the release of test results to your Department Head or his designee, and that you understand that such a screening test is part of the City of Perry's Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy. 
You will not be admitting that you have violated the Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy by signing this form. 

 
Notary: 
_____
_____
ATTACHMENT C 
EMPLOYEE CONSENT AND NOTICE: 
ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING OF PERSONS INVOLVED IN AN ACCIDENT INVOLVING PROPERTY DAMAGE OR PERSONAL INJURY. 
An alcohol and controlled substance screening test will be required of all employees when they are involved in an accident involving property damage or personal injury. 
By signing this form, you are acknowledging that you consent to a screening test, that you consent to release of test results to your Department Head or his designee, and that you understand that such a screening test is part of the City of Perry's Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy. You hereby agree to abide by this policy. 

 
Notary: 
_____
_____
ATTACHMENT D 
EMPLOYEE CONSENT AND NOTICE: 
RANDOM ALCOHOL AND/OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING DUE TO EMPLOYMENT IN SAFETY-SENSITIVE POSITION 
You have accepted employment into a safety-sensitive position with the City of Perry. By signing this form, you acknowledge that you understand you will be subject to random alcohol and/or controlled substance screening tests for the duration of your employment in such position. 
If you fail to abide by this agreement, you will be terminated consistent with procedural guidelines set forth in the City of Perry Personnel Policy Manual. 

 
Notary: 
_____
_____
ATTACHMENT E 
EMPLOYEE CONSENT AND NOTICE: 
RANDOM ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING DUE TO PARTICIPATION IN REHABILITATION PROGRAM OR EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE SERVICE 
You have entered into a rehabilitation program or Employee Assistance Service. By signing this form you acknowledge that you will cooperate with counselors or the EAP Coordinator and follow any directions they may give you, and that you understand you will be subject, upon completion of the program, to random alcohol and controlled substances screening tests for a twelve (12) month period. 
If you fail to abide by this agreement, you will be terminated consistent with procedural guidelines set forth in the City of Perry Personnel Manual. 

 
Notary: 
_____
_____
ATTACHMENT F 
Program manager. 
Personnel Director 
1209 Washington Street 
Perry, Georgia 31069 
(478) 988-2713 
Covered positions. 
As designated by the department director, all utility personnel are subject to alcohol and drug testing. 
Alcohol testing laboratory/agent. 
The following party is authorized to perform alcohol tests for the city: 
Houston Occupational Health & Wellness Center 
2510 Highway 127 
Kathleen, Georgia 31047 
Perry Police Department 
1207 Washington Street 
Perry, Washington 31047 
Drug testing collection agency. 
The following is authorized to collect samples for drug testing pursuant to this policy: 
Houston Occupational Health & Wellness Center 
2510 Highway 127 
Kathleen, Georgia 31047 
Drug testing laboratory. 
The following party is authorized to perform tests for the city: 
Quest Diagnostic 
Atlanta, Georgia 
Medical review officer. 
The Medical Review Office for this policy: 
Frank Stagg, M.D 
2510 Highway 127 
Kathleen, Georgia 31047 
(478) 988-1853 
or 
Dr. Luther Vance, Jr. 
1057 Morningside Drive 
Perry, Georgia 30169 
(478) 987-1778 
Substance abuse professional. 
The following party is authorized as the substance abuse professional for the city: 
Houston Occupational Health & Wellness Center 
2510 Highway 127 
Kathleen, Georgia 31047 
Employee assistance program. 
The following provider is authorized to conduct the Employee Assistance Program for the city: 
Employee Assistance Service 
2894 Vineville Avenue 
Macon, Georgia 31204 
(478) 1-800-533-1797 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 3.11. 
Cross reference— Board of adjustments and appeals, § 5-26 et seq.; recreation commission, § 20-21 et seq.; planning commission, § 21-16 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-201—2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERRY BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-12, adopted June 4, 2002, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 2-216—2-224, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 96-7, adopted Nov. 19, 1996 and Ord. No. 2001-4, adopted Feb. 20, 2001. 

Sec. 2-216. - Established. 
There is established the Perry Beautification Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 2-217. - Members. 
(a)  The Perry Beautification Commission shall consist of nine (9) members. All nine (9) members of the commission must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and residents of the city or nonresident owners of property located in the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The mayor and each councilperson shall each appoint one (1) member to the commission as follows: At the first meeting in January at the beginning of their term of office, the mayor and each councilperson shall appoint one (1) member to the commission for a term of office running concurrently with their term of office. One (1) member shall be appointed by the downtown development authority and that member shall be appointed at the first meeting in January at the beginning of the mayor's term of office and run concurrently with the mayor's term of office. The registered garden clubs in the city shall appoint one (1) member and said member shall be appointed at the first meeting in January at the beginning of the term of office of those councilpersons who represent post two in their council district. Provided, however, the initial commission members shall be appointed at the time the ordinance establishing the Perry Beautification Commission is enacted or as soon as practical thereafter. 
(c)  Any member of the commission can be removed by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the mayor and council, with the mayor having the right to vote on the question of removal. Absence from three (3) meetings within a calendar year without justification may be cause for removal from the commission. 
(d)  All members of the Perry Beautification Commission shall serve without compensation; provided, however, the city council may reimburse commission members for reasonable expenses incurred in connection with their services as commission members. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 2-218. - Officers. 
The Perry Beautification Commission shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary-treasurer from its membership. Officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis but may be reelected for succeeding terms. The chairman shall be entitled to vote on all issues. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 2-219. - Meetings. 
(a)  The Perry Beautification Commission shall meet monthly with the date and time and place being initially agreed to by the commission members and at such other times and places as the majority of the commission deems necessary. Meetings of the commission shall be open to the public in accordance with state law. Written minutes of the meeting shall be kept and within ten (10) days of every meeting a copy of the minutes shall be furnished to the city manager. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. 
(b)  Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, including election of officers. The majority of the votes cast shall determine all questions and elections. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 2004-19, §§ 1, 2, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 2-220. - General duties. 
(a)  The duties of the clean and beautiful commission shall be to: 
(1)  Recommend planting schemes for city parks and open space; 
(2)  Recommend green space areas for acquisition, conservation easements, leasing, etc.; 
(3)  Recommend green space layouts and education formats; 
(4)  Coordinate Arbor Day and Earth Day and other affiliated activities; 
(5)  Seek and coordinate volunteers to assist in program tasks; 
(6)  Develop and coordinate clean community activities; 
(7)  Recommend code enforcement priorities improving city appearances; 
(8)  Coordinate interdepartment planning activities relating to beautification; 
(9)  Provide input on city information decorations and beautification; 
(10)  Prepare educational material for public distribution concerning greenspace and public area beautification; and 
(11)  Study and recommend shrub and tree plantings, species replacement, etc. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other commissions, departments, boards and like agencies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 2-221. - Authority. 
In order to perform its duties the Perry Beautification Commission shall have the following authority: 
(1)  To adopt bylaws to facilitate the attainment of its purpose and functions. 
(2)  To initiate, plan, direct and coordinate community-wide efforts to achieve its goals. 
(3)  To solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property and facilities for expenditure and use by the commission for the accomplishment of its objectives. 
(4)  To employ, to pay and to terminate the employment of such staff as may be required for the fulfillment of commission purposes. 
(5)  To make recommendations to the city governing body as well as to the private sector regarding measures which it deems necessary to accomplish its objectives. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 2-222. - Fiscal power, reports required. 
The Perry Beautification Commission will have the power to receive and disburse funds within the limitations of appropriations, gifts and grants which have been previously approved by the city council, and in connection with projects or undertakings consistent with the terms of section 2-220. The commission will report to the city council twice annually, at the first regular council meeting in the months of March and September. The report will include the commission's actions and accomplishments in connection with each project or undertaking, and will include as part of its report a statement of its receipts and disbursements from whatever source and to whatever object for the preceding six (6) months. Additionally, at the March reporting time the commission will present its proposed budget to become effective July first, indicating its anticipated revenues. The commission shall keep such records as will enable it to make such reports and accountings and the same will be subject to verification and examination by the city treasurer and/or auditors of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 2-223. - Contracts, etc., not binding on city. 
The Perry Beautification Commission shall not have the power or authority to bind the city by any contract, agreement, financial obligation or indebtedness or otherwise. No contract, agreement, financial obligation or indebtedness incurred by the commission shall ever be a claim or charge against the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 2-224. - Project may be terminated by mayor and council. 
Any project or undertaking begun by the Perry Beautification Commission shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of the mayor and council that the continuance thereof is not in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02) 
Secs. 2-225—2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 2-231. - Creation. 
There is created a board to be known and designated as the Perry Tree Board for the purpose of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees in public spaces, providing for the pruning and removal of trees on private property which endanger public safety, and to generally improve the general welfare and health of the people of the city through assisting in the control of flooding, soil conservation, air pollution and noise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-232. - Members; terms; vacancies. 
The Perry Tree Board shall consist of three (3) members each appointed by the mayor and council for a term of four (4) calendar years. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Vacancies caused by death, resignation or otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-233. - Compensation. 
Members of the Perry Tree Board shall receive no compensation for their services except that they may be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by them in direct connection with the performance of their services and duties subject to approval by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-234. - Qualifications. 
Candidates selected for the Perry Tree Board shall possess a documented history of expertise in the knowledge of tree species, maintenance, removal, growth patterns and ability to survive in the local climate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-235. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the Perry Tree Board shall be held from time to time as necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. All meetings of the Perry Tree Board shall be subject to the same rules, requirements and conditions that apply to meetings of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-236. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The Perry Tree Board shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Study and determine the problems and needs of the city for the planting of trees in public places. 
(2)  Recommend to the proper city authorities and officials the types and kinds of trees to be planted upon the street right-of-way, parks, facilities and easements. 
(3)  Assist in developing a program to protect and maintain existing trees. 
(4)  Recommend to appropriate city official(s) the removal or any trees deemed to be hazardous to public safety or public health. 
(5)  Assist the proper officials and make available to the general public news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees within the city; recommend from time to time as necessary ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to protect and maintain existing trees; and encourage private property owners to develop landscape areas with trees. 
(6)  Develop guidelines for performance and maintenance of new trees that will be updated as needed by the board. These guidelines will be mandatory on city property and public rights-of-way, but not mandatory for private property. However, these guidelines will be given to developers and contractors in the city for them to follow. 
(7)  Provide review and recommendations of new development plans for tree preservation and replacement as requested from the Perry Planning Commission, as it relates to the provisions of appendix A, article XX in the Perry Land Development Ordinance. 
(8)  Assist and provide guidelines for the annual Arbor Day event. 
(9)  Provide other services as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-237. - Officers. 
Upon appointment of the initial board by the mayor and council, the board shall meet and elect one (1) of its members as chairperson. The chair shall serve for a one (1) year term and then the board shall select a member to be the subsequent chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-238. - Rules or procedures for meetings. 
The Perry Tree Board shall provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the board as it deems advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-239. - Administrative functions. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the provision of the necessary administrative functions required by the board in order for it to fulfill its duties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 4-5-11) 
Sec. 2-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERRY PUBLIC ARTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-241. - Creation. 
The Perry Public Arts Commission, hereinafter known as "the commission" is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-242. - Purpose and authority. 
The commission is charged with the following task and responsibilities: 
(1)  Expand community awareness and appreciation of the value of art; 
(2)  Advise the city council and staff on art-related issues; 
(3)  Assist the city and other organizations and businesses in the commission and selection of artists for public works of art; 
(4)  Develop art master plans, policies, and other program elements; 
(5)  Serve in an advisory capacity to other organizations and businesses pursuing public art projects; 
(6)  Hold predevelopment meetings with applicants seeking a development permit from the city, to encourage and assist in the creation of public art projects. The commission is hereby authorized to convene regular meetings, no less often than once per month, or as necessary, to review the applicant's public art plans. City staff is authorized to alter local permitting procedures in order to require participation with the commission prior to issuance of a development permit. The commission's actions shall be advisory only; 
(7)  Prepare an annual report to the city council on the commission's activities; 
(8)  Solicit temporary and/or permanent displays of art in city facilities; 
(9)  Commission public art projects; and 
(10)  Assist with other public art initiatives, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-243. - Membership. 
(a)  The Perry Public Arts Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. All seven (7) members of the commission must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and citizens of the Perry service area or affiliated with a business located in the corporate limits of the City of Perry. 
(b)  The mayor and each councilperson shall appoint one (1) member to the commission as follows: At the first meeting in January at the beginning of their term of office, the mayor and each council person shall appoint one (1) member to the commission to the term of office running concurrently with their term of office. Provided, however, the initial commission members shall be appointed at the time the ordinance establishing the Perry Public Arts Commission is enacted or as soon as practical thereafter. 
(c)  Any member of the commission can be removed by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the mayor and council, with the mayor having the right to vote on the question of removal. Absence from three (3) meetings within a calendar year without justification may be cause for removal from the commission. 
(d)  All members of the Perry Public Arts Commission shall serve without compensation. Provided, however, the city council may reimburse commission members for reasonable expenses incurred in connection with their services as commission members. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-244. - Officers. 
The commission shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary/treasurer from its membership. Officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis but may be re-elected for succeeding terms. The chairman shall be entitled to vote on all issues. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-245. - Meetings. 
(a)  The commission shall hold regular scheduled monthly meetings. The commission shall determine the time and location of the meetings. Special meetings may be held upon call of the commission chairman, at the request of any four (4) commission members or by a vote of the commission. The commission shall provide notice of all meetings to the city manager a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior to the meeting. 
(b)  All meetings shall be open to the public and shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act and amendments thereto. The meetings shall be held within the corporate limits of the City of Perry, shall be open to the public and shall be accessible to persons with disabilities. All minutes and records with the commission shall be public records and kept in the custody of the city manager. 
(c)  Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, including the election of officers. The majority of the votes cast shall determine all questions and elections. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-246. - Rules of procedure. 
The commission shall provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the board as it deems advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-247. - Legal counsel. 
Upon written request by the chairman and approval by the city, the commission may seek appropriate legal advice from the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-248. - City staff and resources; recommendations. 
(a)  The commission bears no oversight authority over any city department, personnel, consultant, budget, or other committee. 
(b)  The commission's recommendation shall be advisory to the city council and staff. 
(c)  The city manager may assign staff to provide support and assistance for the commission. The staff liaison may provide guidance and input to the commission and may be consulted on an as-needed basis for additional information. Any requests for staff support shall be coordinated with the city manager and his or her designee. 
(d)  The commission shall have access to the following city resources for its use: 
(1)  Meeting rooms and city facilities; 
(2)  Reasonable use of city equipment (copier, fax, telephone, etc.); 
(3)  Copies of publicly available reports maintained by the city that are relevant to the commission's business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 2-249, 2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MAIN STREET ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-08, adopted April 7, 2015, enacted new provisions designated as Div. 4, §§ 2-241—2-247. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, at the editor's discretion these provisions have been redesignated as set out below. 

Sec. 2-251. - Established. 
There is established the Main Street Advisory Board. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 2-252. - Members. 
(a)  The Main Street Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) members. All seven (7) members of the board shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and either a resident of the Perry service area, owner of property in the downtown district, owner or manager of a business in the downtown district or a member of the Main Street program or one (1) of its standing committees as of January 1, 2015. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall appoint seven (7) members to the board. Two (2) of the initial members of the board shall be appointed for a one-year term, two (2) shall be appointed for a two-year term and three (3) shall be appointed for a three-year term. Thereafter, all members appointed shall serve for a three-year term. Prior to the appointment(s), the partner(s), hereinafter named, shall submit persons for consideration that meet the qualifications. 
(c)  The partners making recommendations for consideration for appointment to the Main Street Board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Perry Area Chamber of Commerce; 
(2)  Perry Area Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority; 
(3)  Downtown Development Authority of the City of Perry; 
(4)  Uptown Perry Partnership; 
(5)  Perry Area Historical Society; 
(6)  Perry Downtown Development District property owner or business owner as proposed by the Main Street Advisory Board and city staff. 
(7)  Perry Public Arts Commission. 
(d)  The Main Street nominating committee will review the recommendations made by the partners and, based on said review, the Main Street nominating committee will make recommendations to the mayor and council. Provided, however, the mayor and council shall take under advisement the recommendation(s) but are not bound by said recommendation(s). 
(e)  Any member of the board can be removed by two-third ( 2/3 ) vote of the mayor and council, with the mayor having the right to vote on the question of removal. Absent from three (3) meetings within a calendar year without justification may be cause for removal from the board. 
(f)  All members of the Main Street Advisory Board shall serve without compensation; provided, however, the city council may reimburse board members for reasonable expenses incurred in connection with their service as board members. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 1-2-18) 
Sec. 2-253. - Officers. 
The Main Street Advisory Board shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary/treasurer from its membership. Officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis but may be re-elected for succeeding terms. The chairman shall be entitled to vote on all issues. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 2-254. - Meetings. 
(a)  The Main Street Advisory Board shall meet monthly with the date and time and place being initially agreed to by the board members and at such other times and places as the majority of the board deems necessary. Meetings of the board shall be open to the public in accordance with state law. Written minutes of the meeting shall be kept and within ten (10) days of every meeting a copy of the minutes shall be furnished to the city manager. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. 
(b)  Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, including election of officers. The majority of the votes cast shall determine all questions and elections. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 2-255. - General duties. 
The duties of the Main Street Advisory Board shall be to: 
(1)  Create an annual work plan incorporating incremental and meaningful goals related to the Main Street 4 Point Approach; 
(2)  Provide opportunities for regular public engagement and support of the Local Main Street Program; 
(3)  Conduct appropriate board meeting, training, orientation and planning; 
(4)  Assess the financial solvency and effectiveness of board programs and provide recommendations to mayor and council; 
(5)  Establish such committees as may be needed to fulfill work plan; and 
(6)  Act as a review agency when so directed by council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 2-256. - Contracts, etc., not binding on city. 
The Main Street Advisory Board shall not have the power or authority to bind the city by any contract, agreement, financial obligation or indebtedness or otherwise. No contract, agreement, financial obligation or indebtedness incurred by the board shall ever be a claim or charge against the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 2-257. - Project may be terminated by mayor and council. 
Any project or undertaking begun by the Main Street Advisory Board shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of the mayor and council that the continuance thereof is not in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 4-7-15) 
Secs. 2-258—2-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-05, § 2, adopted on April 4, 2000, deleted division 6, §§ 2-261—2-270, in its entirety. The aforesaid sections were concerned with establishing an economic development commission, and derived from Ord. No. 92-5, adopted June 16, 1992. 

Secs. 2-261—2-270. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State law references— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; Municipal authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; Local government may authorize issuance of license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq.; Governing authority has power to locally regulate, license and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages and wines, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-40 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Brown bagging means the bringing of alcoholic beverages into business establishments holding a license for or eligible to hold a license for the retail sale and consumption of beer and wine or distilled spirits by the drink for the purpose of drinking such alcoholic beverages at such establishments. 
Commissioner means the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Farm winery means a winery which makes at least forty (40) percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state and: 
(1)  Is located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries or fruit to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery; or 
(2)  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the agricultural produce used in its annual production. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Gallon or wine gallon means a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to the volume of two hundred thirty-one (231) cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to division 2 of article II of this chapter and who otherwise complies with all requirements for an alcoholic beverage caterer contained in this chapter. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation, association, partnership, or other legal entity. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Special event means any organized activity, whether for profit or not, having as its purpose entertainment, recreation, and/or education which takes place on public property or takes place on private property but requires special public services such as the use of parks, public streets, rights-of-ways, or sidewalks as well as events that take place in local business establishments that are outside of the "normal" course of business. Special events may include, but are not limited to, activities such as run/walk events, cycling events, street festivals, parades, grand openings, sales promotional events, concerts, assemblies, block parties and certain outdoor promotional events. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Code 1966, § 3-60; Ord. No. 92-7, § 1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 96-5, § 1, 10-1-96; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1, 6-5-12; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 2014-19, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-14; Ord. No. 2014-21, § 1, 10-7-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 3-2. - Restriction on license issuance. 
When any license or permit to sell alcoholic beverage is rejected or revoked by the city, the city shall not accept or consider any application from the same applicant for license within twelve (12) months from the time of such rejection or revocation. 
(Code 1966, § 3-77) 
Sec. 3-3. - Procedure for revocation and suspension of license; judicial review after denial or revocation. 
(a)  No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city under this chapter shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  The failure of the licensee to comply with the terms, provisions, requirements and responsibilities of this chapter. 
(2)  The failure of the licensee to timely pay the annual license fee called for herein. 
(3)  The violation by the licensee of any law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  The conviction of the licensee of any felony, aggravated misdemeanor or drug related law. 
(5)  The licensee's permitting or maintaining a breach, or breaches, of the peace at licensee's establishment. 
(6)  The failure of the licensee or his employee to promptly report to the city and to the police department any violation of the laws or ordinances governing the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages of which he has knowledge. 
(7)  The existence of any other condition which would make the continued operation of licensee's establishment detrimental, harmful or undesirable to the community. 
(8)  The violation by the licensee of any section of article XIII of chapter 15 of this Code or the violation of any state or federal law regulating gambling. 
(c)  Upon information concerning any of the provisions outlined in this section herein above, the city shall serve notice upon licensee, personally or by mail addressed to licensee's establishment, requiring licensee to appear before the mayor and council and show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. The hearing shall not be held sooner than three (3) days from the receipt of this notice, and the notice shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing on the matter. This notice shall also state the condition alleged which could, if sustained, result in suspension or revocation of licensee's license. 
(d)  Within five (5) working days following the hearing on this matter, the mayor and council shall render a decision, notifying licensee in writing of its decision by mail or by personally delivering it to licensee. In the event of revocation, no refund shall be made on any portion of any license fee paid, and the establishment will cease to operate upon notification. 
(e)  Following any decision denying an application for a license, or any decision for revoking or suspending an existing license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to prompt judicial review in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1966, § 3-76; Ord. No. 2007-46, § 1, 12-4-07; Ord. No. 2008-30, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 3-4. - Suspension in the event of disorder. 
The city may suspend the sale of alcoholic beverage under any license issued in any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the city deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. Such suspension may be made effective immediately, and shall remain in force until the city determines the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the city council, at which time the suspension shall cease unless the same be extended by affirmative action of the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 3-78) 
Sec. 3-5. - Excise tax on sale of distilled spirits at wholesale. 
An excise tax computed at the rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter shall be paid to the city on all distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, sold, displayed or stored in the city. The tax shall be paid to the city by the selling distributor or wholesaler on a month-to-month basis before the tenth of the month following sale of same. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-13, 3-71) 
State Law reference— Local tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 3-6. - Alcohol regulations relative to business hours. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall be applicable to every licensee, agent, servant and employee and any and all other persons affected. 
(b)  Licensees whose only sale of alcoholic beverages consist of beer and/or wine by the package may sell such beverages at any time except between 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday and between 11:30 p.m. and 12:01 a.m. on Monday. 
(c)  The sale of package distilled spirits shall be permitted at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and between 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. No retail dealer or licensee for package sales of distilled spirits shall allow any persons inside the establishment after said hours other than regular employees who are engaged in activities to close, clean or stock the establishment, or if the doors to the establishment are unlocked. The only exception to the above may be caused by emergency repairs to equipment and/or facilities. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall be permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on Sunday between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. provided that at least fifty (50) percent of the total annual gross sales of the licensee is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served or in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(e)  (1)  No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages at any time on Christmas Day. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above, licensees of food and restaurant establishments may rent separate and distinct rooms for private parties to be held on Christmas Day. In such event, the licensee shall not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. Nothing contained in this section shall allow areas commonly regarded as lounges or bars to be open for any reason on Sunday or on Christmas Day. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by Act No. 750 (House Bill No. 247) approved April 10, 1985, amending O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(B), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages (distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages) shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are opened. 
(Ord. No. 86-14, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 2008-31, 11-20-08; Ord. No. 2011-29, 11-22-11) 
Sec. 3-7. - Security cameras required for certain establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Any licensee for the sale of any alcoholic beverage packaged to go is hereby required to install a continuous video recording system dedicated to each register area and at each entrance and exit with cameras and lens of a type, number and location approved by the public safety director or his or her designee. Such camera must be capable of producing a retrievable and identifiable image on VMS tape or electronic media such as CD or DVD that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. 
(b)  Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be in operation at all hours in which such establishment is open for business. The camera shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or his designee along with the person on duty at the time of the inspection and in the event the primary system becomes inoperable, the licensee must have the camera repaired or have availability of a backup camera system within a ten-day period of time. In addition, in the event the camera becomes inoperable, the licensee must immediately notify the police chief or his designee. If a crime occurs or an employee believes a crime has occurred, the police department shall be contacted immediately and the film retrieved by a designated police officer. 
(c)  Violation of any provisions under this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  On a first offense, there shall be a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). In addition to said fine, the judge of the municipal court may impose, at his discretion, a suspension of all city alcoholic beverage licenses at the establishment for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(2)  On the second offense, if within twelve (12) months of the first, there shall be a minimum fine of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). In addition to said fine, the judge of the municipal court may impose, at his discretion, a suspension of all alcoholic beverage licenses at the establishment for a minimum of sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 2008-36, § 1, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 3-8. - Brown bagging. 
(a)  Any establishment holding a license or eligible to hold a license for the retail sale and consumption of beer and wine or distilled spirits by the drink may purchase a daily or an annual permit so as to permit brown bagging on such licensed premises. The establishment location must be zoned to allow the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on site and the applicant must follow the standard application process as required for any alcoholic beverage license request. The fee for a daily permit or an annual permit shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by city council and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained by the city clerk. Brown bagging shall be unlawful at all business establishments that do not obtain a brown bagging permit as provided for in this section. 
(b)  Every establishment obtaining a brown bagging permit and allowing brown bagging at such establishments, in addition to the rules contained in article I of this chapter, shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  No bottle or other container of distilled spirits shall be in the possession or under the control of any owner, licensee, employee or agent of such establishment at any time. Possession of such bottle or container of distilled spirits shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this provision. Bottles or other containers of distilled spirits must remain in the possession of, or under the control of, the person bringing such bottle or container into an establishment permitting brown bagging. 
(2)  Establishments holding brown bagging permits shall not deny or restrict the privilege of brown bagging by patrons or impose any admission charge, cover charge or minimum charge on brown bagging patrons that is not also imposed upon all other patrons during the legal hours of sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Establishments holding brown bagging permits shall comply with the alcohol regulations relative to business hours contained in section 3-6 above. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2, 10-1-96; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 2-19-13) 
Sec. 3-9. - Sale of retail alcoholic beverage business. 
It shall be unlawful (and shall call for immediate revocation of all licenses involved) for any retail alcoholic beverage licensee to sale the retail alcoholic beverage business and for the purchaser to attempt to operate the purchased business with seller's license. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 9-15-97) 
Sec. 3-10. - Transferability of license for the sale of alcoholic beverages; surrender of license upon sale, closing of business; manager change; transfer of license for package sales distilled spirits. 
(a)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable or assignable under the following conditions: 
(1)  Licenses may be transferred to members of the licensee's immediate family provided the transferee has first been approved to hold such license under the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(2)  In the event of the death of a license holder, the holder's heirs or personal representative shall be permitted to operate the establishment or transfer the license to another qualified individual who has first been approved under the terms and conditions contained in this section. 
(3)  In no event shall any license be transferable if there are fees, taxes or other revenue due to the city without a license holder. 
(4)  Any permitted transferees of licenses under this section shall be subject to a transfer fee and/or investigation fee as determined by the mayor and council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(5)  In any other event in which a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender the license to the city clerk. 
(b)  If the alcoholic beverage license was issued in the name of a manager of a licensed business and said manager is replaced, the mayor and council, after investigation of the new manager has been made by the police department, shall have the right to transfer the license to the new manager upon written application for the new manager and provided that the new manager otherwise meets all requirements to be a licensee. If a transfer of the license is allowed, the licensee shall pay any transfer fee required by the mayor and council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 2, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-11. - License fee upon transfer of business or opening of new business after July 1. 
The fee for any alcoholic beverage license obtained after July 1 of each year as a result of a transfer of a business or the opening of a new business shall be one-half (½) of the annual license fee. The seller of a licensed alcoholic beverage business shall not be entitled to any refund of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 3, 9-15-97) 
Sec. 3-12. - Renewal of all alcoholic beverage licenses. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses in this chapter may be renewed by payment of the required fees provided: 
(1)  The licensee and location are the same; and 
(2)  The licensee is still in compliance with the requirements of state and municipal laws and regulations pertaining to the original issuance of the license and pertaining to the operation of the business under the license at the time of application for renewal; but 
(3)  If a complaint is received as the licensee's alleged violation of state or municipal laws or regulation, the license shall not be renewed but shall be referred to the mayor and council for decision as to whether renewal shall be granted as follows: 
a.  The mayor and council shall conduct a hearing after giving the licensee reasonable notice of the time and place of such hearing, as well as the purpose thereof. 
b.  The licensee may remain open for business until a decision by the mayor and council is made and shall have a period of three (3) days following that decision in which to pay the required fees if the decision of the mayor and council is to permit renewal of the license. 
(4)  A license on the premises has not been revoked in the past twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 4, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 3-13. - License expiration date. 
All alcoholic beverages licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which they were issued. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 5, 9-15-97) 
Sec. 3-14. - Persons under twenty-one years of age in poolrooms wherein alcoholic beverages are sold; consumption in poolrooms, etc. 
No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be allowed to be in or on the premises of any poolroom, billiard room or billiard parlor within the city limits or any place operating in connection therewith wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served or allowed to be used. In addition, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of any poolroom, billiard room or billiard parlor within the city limits or any place operating in connection therewith unless such premise or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sale alcoholic beverages and derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross revenue from the sell of products or services other than alcoholic beverages; provided, however, no alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises wherein any poolroom, billiard room or billiard parlor is located may be sold, served or used therein unless the establishment derives at least seventy-five (75) percent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 97-11, § 2, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 2000-28, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-00) 
Sec. 3-15. - Continual use requirement. 
(a)  Each and every holder of an alcoholic beverage license shall be required to keep the licensed premises open for operation a minimum of two (2) days per week throughout the term of the license (except that the licensed premises may be closed for remodeling from time to time and except that the licensed premises may be closed for reasonable periods of time when the operator takes vacation; periods of remodeling shall be an exception so long as remodeling is actively pursued during the period when the licensed premises is closed). 
(b)  Upon violation of section (a) above the license shall be revoked by the city sending notice of revocation in the United States mail with sufficient postage affixed thereto addressed to licensee's last known address or by affixing a copy of the notice of revocation to the door of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 8-4-98) 
Sec. 3-16. - Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches or schools restricted. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus. This subsection shall not apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the measurement in determining the distance shall be made from the nearest two (2) points between the buildings in question. 
(Ord. No. 2001-12, § 2, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 3, 11-6-07) 
Secs. 3-17—3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, adopted Aug. 5, 2003, deleted arts. II—VI in their entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to malt beverages and derived from Code 1966, §§ 3-49—3-51, 3-53, 3-55—3-58 and 11-13; Ord. No. 87-24, adopted Nov. 24, 1987; and Ord. No. 2000-14, § 1, adopted July 18, 2000. The former art. III pertained to wine and derived from Code 1966, §§ 3-31—3-37 and 11-13; Ord. No. 87-24, adopted Nov. 24, 1987; and Ord. No. 2000-14, § 2, adopted July 18, 2000. The former art. IV pertained to package sales of distilled spirits and derived from Code 1966, §§ 3-1—3-8, 3-11—3-15, 3-12(b), 3-13(b), 3-16, 3-18—3-20 and 11-13; Ord. No. 87-2, § 2, adopted June 2, 1987; Ord. No. 87-10, § 2, adopted June 16, 1987; Ord. No. 87-11, § 2, adopted June 16, 1987; Ord. No. 87-22, § 2, adopted Oct. 20, 1987; Ord. No. 87-24, adopted Nov. 24, 1987; and Ord. No. 2000-14, § 3, adopted July 18, 2000, The former art. V pertained to sale by the drink of distilled spirits and derived from Code 1966, §§ 3-60—3-62, 3-64—3-72, 3-74, 3-75 and 11-13; Ord. No. 87-24, adopted Nov. 24, 1987; Ord. No. 2000-14, § 4, adopted July 18, 2000; and Ord. No. 2000-17, adopted Sept. 5, 2000. The former art. VI pertained to alcoholic beverage caterer and derived from Ord. No. 92-7, § 2, adopted Aug. 4, 1992. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-26. - Compliance with federal, state and municipal laws and regulations required. 
In addition to all other rules and regulations, each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license in the city shall comply with all state and federal laws, municipal ordinances and the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, including licensing qualifications. The violation of any such laws shall subject the licensee to the immediate revocation of his or her license and for criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-27. - Inspection of business premises. 
The business premises of the holder of any alcoholic beverage issued under this chapter shall be opened to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Secs. 3-28—3-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 3-40. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all holders of a license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-41. - Required. 
(a)  Every operator of an establishment for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages must obtain a license therefore. 
(b)  A separate retail license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be required for each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-42. - Display. 
Licenses pursuant to this division must be posted in a conspicuous place and in such manner that it can be readily seen. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-43. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail shall be granted until the application, accompanied by a check or cash in the amount required for the license, setting forth the name of the owners, the business and its location, shall have been approved by the chief of police, the fire chief and the building inspector. No person shall sell or attempt to sell alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail until they have received their city and state licenses authorizing to do so. After all department directors named have approved the issuance of the license, it shall be issued by the city clerk. Applications for license shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk. 
(b)  Sworn statements. 
(1)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to this chapter and shall place such statement on file with the clerk before any license is issued; 
(2)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of those qualifications. 
(c)  In person. All applications for license shall be made in person. 
(d)  False information. Any statement on an application for license to sell alcoholic beverages which shall later be found to be false or omission of facts shall subject the applicant to prosecution for perjury under the laws of this state. 
(e)  Copy of state application. An applicant for a city license shall submit a copy of his state application at the time the local application is submitted to the city clerk. 
(f)  [Consent statement.] A consent statement by the applicant that all necessary investigation reports on the applicant and any employees in the applicant's establishment including, but not limited to, credit reports and reports from law enforcement agencies, may be obtained by the city. Any information in such reports may be furnished to the licensor, and the applicant will be responsible for the cost thereof. If so requested, applicants shall also obtain such consent forms from each employee who will be employed in applicant's establishment. The applicant shall furnish the city a complete set of fingerprints. Such sets shall be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation. The city may require photographs of the applicant and/or fingerprinting and/or photographs of the applicant's employees for the purpose of conducting its investigation. 
(g)  The applicant. 
(1)  The applicant for the alcoholic beverage license shall be a citizen of the United States and the owner of the business; or if the owner of the business is a corporation, partnership or other legal entity, the applicant, who must be a citizen of the United States, may be a substantial and major partner or stockholder or the manager of the business responsible for the regular operation of said business on the premises for which the license is issued. The person who will have day-to-day operating responsibility for the business and who shall actively operate the business on a day-to-day basis, either the applicant or person designated by the applicant as the manager, shall reside within thirty (30) miles of the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  The application shall include the name and address of the applicant; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a corporation, names of the officers, the names and addresses of the registered agent for service of process, the name(s) of the manager(s), and the names of all shareholders holding more than twenty (20) percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity have a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city clerk the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within three (3) days of such change. 
(3)  There shall be a fee to defray investigative and administrative costs for the designation of a new manager on an existing license. 
(4)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, photographs, financial responsibility and other records as required by the city clerk to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(5)  All licensed establishments must continuously maintain with the city the name and address of a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of Houston or Peach Counties. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk in such form as he or she may prescribe. 
(6)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the final date of such denial. 
(7)  Each application for license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a separate check or cash to defray investigative and administrative costs. Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for investigative and administrative expenses required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 1, 11-6-07) 
Sec. 3-44. - General eligibility requirements. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any person unless the person is twenty-one (21) years of age prior to filing an application for the license. 
(b)  When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no alcoholic beverage license shall be issued by the city to: 
(1)  Any person as determined by the city, by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, not involving moral turpitude, within ten (10) years next proceeding [preceding] the filing of application for such license. 
(4)  Any person convicted under any federal, state, or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving retail liquor licenses, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
(c)  No retail license required by this division shall be granted to any person if such person retains for the operation of the license establishment an employee who has been convicted of a felony. 
(d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. 
(e)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person when the location for which the license is sought has had a license revoked within the last twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 2, 11-6-07; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 3-45. - Notice hearing etc., on denial. 
If the city has reason to believe that the applicant for a license to sell alcoholic beverages is not entitled to the license for which he has applied, the city shall notify the applicant thereof, and upon request by the applicant, afford him due notice and opportunity for hearing on the application. If the city, after affording such notice and opportunity for hearing, finds the applicant is not entitled to a license hereunder, the applicant shall be advised in writing of the findings upon which such denial is based. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-46. - Building requirements; inspection of business premises. 
No license shall be issued under this division to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and every applicant for a retail license shall attach to his or her application evidence of ownership or a copy of a lease/rental agreement if the applicant is leasing or renting the building. The business premises of a holder of a license issued under this division shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials by authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-47. - Sales or deliveries outside retailer's place of business prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverage licensee shall sell or deliver any distilled spirits to any person except in his place of business except the holder of a alcoholic beverage caterer license which licensee shall comply with the requirements of said license. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-48. - License fees for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The annual fee for a retail license for the sale of alcoholic beverages allowed in this chapter shall be determined by the mayor and council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk in the tax/license department. 
(b)  The fees for any licenses obtained after July 1 of each year shall be one-half (½) of the annual license fee. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 2004-04, § 1, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 3-49. - Sale of other commodities by packaged sales of distilled spirits licensee prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No retailer license for the package sale of distilled spirits shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock at his place of business where distilled spirits are offered for sale, any other products or commodity except the following: 
(1)  Beer or wine, when properly licensed; 
(2)  Beverages containing no alcohol commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; and 
(3)  Food for off-premises consumption. 
(b)  No beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in the place of business of a licensee for package sales of distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-50. - Restriction on number of retail licenses for packaged sale of distilled spirits. 
(a)  The number of retail licenses for the package sale of distilled spirits which may be issued by the city and which may be in operation within the corporate limits of the city at any one time shall be based on and shall be limited to one such license for each two thousand (2,000) or major fraction thereof of population in the city, according to the latest United States decennial census, beginning with the 2000 census. 
(b)  If applications for retail liquor licenses exceed the number of licenses available for issuance, the available licenses shall be issued to the qualified applicants first filing their applications, the day and time of day of receipt of each application to be entered thereon by the clerk of council and, if applications for available licenses are received by the time [of] the issuance of licenses, as to those applications received by the clerk at the same time, shall be determined by lot in the manner prescribed by the city council. Applications for retail liquor licenses will not be kept on file by the clerk for a period longer than three (3) months and, if a license is not issued to the applicant within that period of time, the applicant must file a new application with the clerk in order for it to be considered for issuance of a retail liquor license. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-51. - Additional eligibility requirements for the licenses for alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(a)  Any establishment which obtains and holds all of the required licenses and permits and otherwise complies with the provisions contained in these regulations shall be authorized to sell, transport, deliver and dispense alcoholic beverages for which a license was obtained. 
(b)  In order to qualify as an alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  The caterer must be the holder of either: 
a.  A valid state liquor retailer license; 
b.  A retail consumption dealer license; 
c.  A retail beer dealer license; or 
d.  A retail wine dealer license. 
(2)  The caterer must also be the holder of: 
a.  A valid local alcoholic beverage license; 
b.  A valid local alcoholic beverage catering license; 
c.  A valid local catering event permit issued in accordance with section 3-52. 
(c)  The caterer may only sell alcoholic beverages for which a license has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 2013-23, §§ 1, 2, 9-3-13) 
State Law reference— Local government has authority to issue an off-premises license allowing alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered function, O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-52. - Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer event permits for catered functions; transporting and delivering alcoholic beverages in connection with a catered event. 
In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply to the city for an event permit. The application shall include the name of the caterer, the date, the address, the time of the event, and the alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. In addition to the fee for the alcoholic beverage caterer's license, an event permit fee as outlined in section 3-48 above shall be paid to the city. 
(2)  Maintain a copy of the caterer's valid state alcoholic beverage license, a copy of the caterer's valid local alcoholic beverage catering license and a copy of the caterer's valid local alcoholic beverage catering event permit in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-23, § 3, adopted Sept. 3, 2013, changed the title of § 3-52 from "Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer event permits for catered functions" to "Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer event permits for catered functions; transporting and delivering alcoholic beverages in connection with a catered event." This historical reference has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Secs. 3-53—3-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX 

Sec. 3-91. - Tax to be in addition to other charges. 
The excise tax provided for in this division shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale, within the city. The city shall collect the maximum excise tax allowable by law upon the wholesale of malt beverages, spirituous liquors and wine as prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-80, 3-4-80, 3-6-60, or as hereafter prescribed by subsequent state law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-92. - Payment of taxes. 
The taxes levied in this division shall be paid by the retailer to the wholesaler at the time of delivery of the beverages to the retailer. It shall be the duty of each retailer to pay and it shall be the duty of each wholesaler to receive the proper amount of the tax levied upon each case delivered. It shall further be the duty of all persons, firms or corporations selling these beverages at wholesale or making delivery of them in the city to remit by the tenth of the calendar month all sums collected by the wholesaler during the proceeding calendar month. These remittances shall be made to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-93. - Examination of books and records. 
The books and records of all wholesalers selling or delivering these beverages and all retailers thereof in the city shall be subject to inspection and audit by the agents of the city to ensure compliance herewith. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny to any authorized agent of the city reasonable access to its books and records and shall be the duty of each person to keep accurate records of payments and collections of the case tax and remittances. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-94. - Penalties. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance required shall render a wholesaler liable for a penalty equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total due during the first thirty-day period following the date the report and remittance were due and a further penalty of fifty (50) percent of the amount of this remittance for each successive thirty-day period or any portion thereof during which the report and the remittance were not filed. 
(b)  The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making the report liable to a penalty equal to one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(c)  Any person, wholesaler or retailer that shall violate the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed by the municipal court and may in addition be subject to suspension or revocation of the license to sell such beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-95. - Taxes collected upon delivery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retailer of alcohol beverages to receive and retain these beverages unless he shall have paid the tax thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to sell or deliver these beverages to any retailer thereof unless he shall concurrently with this delivery collect the tax imposed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to fail to remit to the city, when promptly due, the taxes levied, and collected by the wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged as a retailer of these beverages to receive these beverages from another retailer unless tax has been paid. 
(d)  It shall further be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retail these beverages from another retail store, whether the other store shall be owned by the receiving retailer or not, or whether the other store is located within the corporate limits of the city or not, unless the tax shall have been paid and remitted to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-96. - Unpaid taxes. 
Alcoholic beverages on which city taxes have not been paid are subject to seizure and may be destroyed or sold by public sale as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 3-97. - Tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this section and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Perry and, variously, the incorporated area of Perry, wherein the City of Perry is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the City of Perry or designee. 
Due date means the tenth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Licensee means any person holding a license to serve liquor by the drink from the city. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure [venture], association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Tax means the sales tax on liquor by the drink imposed by this article. 
(b)  Imposition; rate of tax. There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three (3) percent on the sale of liquor by the drink in the city. 
(c)  Collection by license. Every licensee shall collect a tax of three (3) percent on the sale of liquor by the drink at his pouring outlet. 
(d)  Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the tenth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(3)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every licensee with the city clerk showing the gross sales of liquor by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(4)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailer and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, as now and hereafter amended. 
(e)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount in proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(f)  Determination of no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of liquor by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (e)(3). 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(g)  Collection of tax by city. 
(1)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(2)  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this section sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(3)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(4)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(h)  Administration of ordinance; recordkeeping. 
(1)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax. 
(2)  Records required from licensees, etc.; form. Every licensee shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all records, receipts, invoices and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. 
(3)  Examination of records, audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(4)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax collection thereon, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(i)  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in City Code section 1-10. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 2004-04, §§ 2, 3, 1-20-04) 
Sec. 3-98. - Tax on malt beverages. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all sales of malt beverage poured in draft form from a tap of six dollars ($6.00) per fifteen (15) gallons. Fractions of the fifteen-gallon unit may be taxed proportionately at forty cents ($0.40) per gallon. A monthly report is required by the twentieth of each month stating gross sales on malt beverage by tap. 
(Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Secs. 3-99, 3-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENT ALCOHOL BEVERAGE PERMIT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-101. - Compliance with state and federal law required. 
In addition to all other rules and regulations, each applicant for a special event alcohol beverage permit license and each special event alcohol beverage permit licensee doing business in the city shall comply with all state and federal laws and the violation of any such laws and these regulations shall subject the licensee to the immediate revocation of his license and to criminal prosecution otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 3-102. - License required; council approval; suspension of enforcement of certain law. 
A special event alcohol beverage permit license is required for all special events that involve the sale and consumption of alcohol. Said license shall not be given without the prior approval of the mayor and council. In the event said license is approved, the enforcement of subsection 17-54(b) shall be suspended in the area designated for the special event during the time of the special event. Provided, however, said suspension shall apply only to the drinking of alcohol beverages sold by the licensee and shall not suspend the enforcement of the remaining provisions of section 17-54. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-103. - Place where permit valid; designation of area; patrons outside area; number of permits annually; adjacent property owners or renters of occupied parcels; notification of owners of property. 
(a)  The special event alcohol beverage permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit and the area where alcohol may be served shall be specifically delineated on the application. In no event shall patrons of the licensee go on to property not delineated on the application. Any suspension of the enforcement of any city ordinance contained herein shall not apply on property not delineated on the application. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for licensees' employees or patrons of licensee to bring into or take outside the delineated area any alcoholic beverage or to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person outside the delineated area. 
(c)  No more than six (6) such permits may be issued to the applicant in any one (1) calendar year. 
(d)  All applicants must provide proof that all adjacent property owners and/or renters of adjacent property have been notified of the application at least ten (10) days prior to the event. 
(e)  The owner of the property where sales are to be made, if not the applicant, shall be notified in writing by the applicant of the application, and proof of said notification shall be attached to the application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-104. - Period of license; business hours. 
(a)  A special event alcohol beverage permit license shall authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only in the designated area for a period not to exceed three (3) days. 
(b)  The special event alcoholic beverage permit shall be subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages including, but not limited to those outlined in section 3-6. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-105. - License fee. 
Each application for a special event alcoholic beverage permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-106. - Application for license; time; review. 
(a)  Special event alcohol beverage permit license applications must be submitted at least 45 days prior to the planned special event. 
(b)  At least ten (10) days prior to the event, the applicant shall meet with the appropriate staff members of the City of Perry as designated by the city manager in the issuance of a permit for the event, the applicant shall sign a statement of understanding of and agreement to the terms and conditions imposed on the event. Such statements shall become a part of the conditions of the permit for the event. Patrons taking alcoholic beverages purchased from the special event alcohol beverage permit licensee outside of the designated area shall be subject to arrest in accordance with subsection 17-54(b). 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-107. - Posting of license and notice; proof of license; employees of licensee. 
(a)  All special event alcohol beverage permit licenses shall be posted at greeting areas or main entrances to the event. 
(b)  Every area where alcoholic beverages are consumed shall be conspicuously posted at all times at each point of entrance/exit with signs stating the following: "the possession of alcoholic beverages beyond this point is prohibited". The letters of such sign shall not be less than three (3) inches in height and one-half (½) inch in width and shall be in black letters on a contrasting light background. 
(c)  City staff may ask event producers or business owners to show proof of license during the event. 
(d)  All employees working for the licensee during the event must be of legal age to drink. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-108. - Brown bagging. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this article or any other commercial establishment to allow customers or any of them to bring their own alcoholic beverages, a practice which is commonly known as BYOB or brown bagging. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-109. - General eligibility requirements. 
All special event alcoholic beverage permit licensees shall meet the general eligibility requirements outlined in section 3-44 and shall be currently licensed by the City of Perry for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises or caterers with an alcoholic beverage use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-110. - Security. 
Licensees shall employ through the department of public safety a minimum of two (2) officers for security at all times during the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-111. - Patrons identification; containers of alcohol; cleanup of site. 
(a)  Licensee must provide some type of acceptable identification tag for patrons and said identification tag shall be worn at all times while the patron is consuming alcohol during the special event. Persons consuming alcohol during the special event without such identification shall be subject to arrest in accordance with subsection 17-54(b). 
(b)  All alcohol sold must be in non-glass containers. 
(c)  Licensee shall be responsible for all clean up of the area designated for the sale and consumption of alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 3-112. - Revocation of license for failure to comply with state rules and regulations. 
Licenses issued under this division shall be revocable in the event the licensee fails to comply with the rules and regulations of the state with the issuance of licenses for special event alcohol beverage permit and the state requirements pertaining to such issuance are hereby referred to and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 6-5-12) 
Secs. 3-113—3-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FARM WINERIES AND WINE TASTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-21, § 2, adopted Oct. 7, 2014, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. III. Inasmuch as there were already provisions designated as Art. III, the provisions have been redesignated as Art. IV at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-121. - Sale by farm wineries; qualifications; license; time of sale. 
(a)  A farm winery may sell its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery licensee at retail in a tasting room on the premises of the winery for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises and to sell its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery licensee at retail for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises in tasting rooms at a location that is one of the locations in the State of Georgia authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(b). 
(b)  The qualifications for a licensee to operate a farm winery tasting room shall be the same as set forth in section 3-44 of the Perry Code, except that a farm winery must be authorized as a special exception in certain zoning districts in accordance with the Perry Land Development Ordinance. In addition to the qualification set forth in section 3-44, an applicant for a farm winery license shall be required to submit at the time of application a farm winery license issued by the commissioner. 
(c)  The applicant for a retail license for the sell of wine and operation of a farm winery tasting room shall pay the annual license fee determined by the mayor and council and on file in the taxes/licenses office of the City of Perry Municipal Building. 
(d)  The license created in accordance with this section shall be limited to farm winery tasting rooms authorized by the State of Georgia in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 et seq., and the licensee shall be permitted to perform only acts allowed in accordance with such statutes. 
(e)  The section shall not be construed so as to authorize a farm winery to sell wine on Sunday on premises that are not located on the property where such farm wine is produced. A farm winery located on the premises where the farm wine is produced that is licensed to sell wine in a tasting room or other licensed farm winery facility for consumption on the premises or in closed packages for consumption off the premises shall be authorized in accordance with the terms hereof to sell its wine in accordance with section 3-6 of the Perry Code in the tasting room or other licensed farm winery facility to the same extent of any other licenses issued in accordance with the terms hereof would otherwise permit. Monday through Sunday the selling or tasting of wine at a farm winery shall occur during those hours allowed under section 3-6 of the Perry Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-21, § 2, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 3-122. - Wine tastings. 
Wine tastings may be conducted at retail package outlets licensed to sell wine and malt beverages, but not distilled spirits, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Wine tastings shall be conducted in a separate room, capable of being rendered completely inaccessible from the remainder of the licensed outlet premises. Such rooms shall be deemed by the city to be a separate premises from the remainder of the licensed outlet. 
(2)  Wine tastings may occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and on Sunday between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(3)  On the day that any wine tasting is to be held, the outlet must, from its opening until its closing, post in a conspicuous location on the outside of the premises a legible written notice stating the following: "A wine tasting pursuant to the City of Perry Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance will occur at this outlet". 
(Ord. No. 2014-21, § 2, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 3-123. - Revocation of state license. 
(a)  When the state revokes a farm winery or license issued under this article, the city license shall be automatically revoked without any action. 
(b)  A copy of the current state license shall accompany all applications and renewals of licenses. Failure to present a valid copy of a current and valid state license will result in a refusal to issue or renew the license. Timely application for renewal is determined by the date on which a complete and proper application has been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-21, § 2, 10-7-14) 
Secs. 3-124—3-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESTAURANT DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, adopted July 3, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as Art. V, § 3-124. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. V, § 3-146. 

Sec. 3-146. - Consumption of alcohol on city streets allowed; limited to restaurant district. 
(a)  There is hereby established a "restaurant district" within the city wherein open containers of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted. 
(b)  The restaurant district shall consist of the area described below and as illustrated on the "restaurant district map" below; 
(1)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Northside Road or its sidewalk on the southern side of the road within the area of the city bounded on the east by Macon Road and on the west by Ball Street; 
(2)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Ball Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the north by Northside Road and on the south by Main Street; 
(3)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Commerce Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the west by Main Street and on the east by Macon Road; 
(4)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Carroll Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the west by Main Street and on the east by Macon Road; 
(5)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Marion Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the south by Main Street and on the north by Commerce Street; 
(6)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Jernigan Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the south by Main Street and on the north by Commerce Street; 
(7)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Washington Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the north by Northside Road and on the south by Main Street; 
(8)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Meeting Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the north by Northside Road and on the south by Commerce Street; 
(9)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Main Street or its sidewalks with the area of the city bounded on the west by General Courtney Hodges Boulevard and on the east by Macon Road on its northern side and by Evergreen Street on its southern side; 
(10)  All sidewalks, rights-of-way, and buildings adjacent to Macon Road or its sidewalk on the western side of the road within the area of the city bounded on the north by Northside Road and on the south by Main Street; and 
(11)  All city parks within the above-described area or appertaining thereto. 
(c)  The following regulations shall apply to this section: 
(1)  Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense alcoholic beverages in a plastic cup, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than one (1) such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises. 
(2)  In accordance with subsection 17-54(b), it shall be unlawful to remove open containers of alcohol from the restaurant district as described in this section. 
(3)  No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed sixteen (16) fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container containing alcohol which exceeds sixteen (16) fluid ounces in size. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(5)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages described in this section shall be limited to the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. (midnight) seven (7) days a week, unless approved by mayor and council for a special event. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverage in the restaurant district, as described in this section, that was not purchased from a licensee or licensed vendor. 
(7)  Subsection (a) above does not apply to schools, churches, daycare facilities or anywhere private property owners or tenants do not allow it. A business may decline to allow an open container of alcoholic beverage on the premises by posting a sign that states, "Outside Drinks Not Allowed." 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink or to transport or attempt to transport any alcoholic beverages in an open container in any part of a motor vehicle within the restaurant district. This section does not limit the enforcement of, nor reduce the penalties for violation of section 17-61. 
(9)  Notwithstanding section 3-47, a retail consumption dealer licensee, as defined in section 3-1, shall have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to patrons seated in public or private outdoor dining areas as part of the operation of the business. No such alcoholic beverages served to patrons shall be removed from such dining areas unless in compliance with this article. Such alcoholic beverage shall be served only by an employee of licensee. Such license holder shall erect a sign notifying patrons of such requirements. 

(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 7-3-18) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  A person is guilty of a misdemeanor when his act, omission or neglect causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death to any living animal. 
(b)  This section does not apply to the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food nor does it apply to any person who hunts wild animals in compliance with the game and fish laws of this state. The killing or injuring of an animal for humane purposes or in the furtherance of medical or scientific research is justifiable. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 4-2. - Poisoning animals. 
No person shall willfully place within reach of any domestic animal, any substance that is harmful to such animal. 
(Code 1966, § 4-2) 
Sec. 4-3. - Killing or injuring domestic animals. 
No person shall willfully kill or injure any domestic animal which is the property of another. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3) 
Sec. 4-4. - Offensive animals. 
No dog or other pet or livestock shall be allowed to be offensive, infected with disease or otherwise become a nuisance, danger or threat to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-4) 
Sec. 4-5. - Livestock running at large. 
Any person owning and keeping within the corporate limits of the city any horses, mules, cattle or other livestock, or whoever having the possession, care or control of any horses, mules, cattle or other livestock within the corporate limits of the city shall knowingly allow any such animals to run at large within the corporate limits of the city, shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 4-5) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to allow livestock to run at large or stray, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-3. 
Sec. 4-6. - Dead animals. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon his premises or upon the premises of any other person, or allow any dead animal to remain upon his premises or any dead animal belonging to him to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of same or causing the same to be properly removed or disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1966, § 4-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-5-3, 4-5-5. 
Sec. 4-7. - Hunting and trapping. 
(a)  No person shall shoot, trap, or in any other manner kill any birds or wild game of any kind within the city unless the property to be hunted has first been inspected by the chief of police and determined to be safe for hunting purposes and present no hazard or risk to surrounding areas, livestock, or people. Before any such hunting is permissible, the property owner must request, in writing, an exception to the hunting prohibition and receive written permission from the chief of police. 
(b)  When permission to hunt is granted, it shall remain in force for one (1) year unless withdrawn by the chief of police for cause. In the event the property owner wishes to continue the hunting use, a new request must be submitted. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7; Ord. No. 89-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-89) 
Sec. 4-8. - Continuous noise by animal. 
No animal owner shall permit any animal to cause annoyance, alarm, or noise disturbance for more than fifteen (15) minutes at any time of the day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the owner's property, where said such owner has been given one (1) warning by law enforcement personnel to control the animal or animals. 
(Ord. No. 2000-21(2), § 1, 6-19-01) 
Sec. 4-9. - Animal adoption. 
(a)  The city's main concerns with respect to adoption of an animal from the animal control shelter are: 
(1)  That the animal be in good health, be registered, be sterilized and not be vicious by nature; and 
(2)  That the animal be assured of a good home under the control of a responsible person. 
The location of residence of the proposed owner is immaterial; however, if it is within the city limits it will be considered subject to checking by a representative of the city or of the society for the prevention of cruelty to animals with respect to suitability of accommodations for the animal adopted. 
(b)  The person adopting an animal from the animal control shelter will be required to pay an amount to be determined by the mayor and council for the costs of feeding and housing the animal in the shelter plus a fee equal to the cost of the registration certificate and tag, the cost of inoculating the animal and the cost for sterilizing the animal. These fees shall be paid prior to the animal being removed from the shelter. A schedule of fees shall be kept on file in the Perry Police Department. 
(c)  The person adopting the animal will take the animal to one of the participating veterinarians within the city within fourteen (14) days for the registration certificate and tag, the inoculation of the animal and the sterilization of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2001-27, 8-21-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-27, adopted Aug. 21, 2001, designated the above provisions as § 4-8. As § 4-8 already existed in the Code, for the purposes of clarity and at the editor's discretion, said provisions were redesignated and included as § 4-9. 
Sec. 4-10. - Dog registration. 
On or before July 1 of each year, each owner or person who has custody of a dog must register the dog with the city clerk. The clerk shall issue a city registration tag at a cost to be determined by the mayor and council. Until the city registration tag is issued, the owner or custodian must furnish the city clerk with a inoculation certificate from a licensed veterinarian. Registration tags must be properly secured to a collar and worn around the neck of the dog at all times. Puppies must be registered after they are twelve (12) weeks of age. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, 9-2-08) 
Secs. 4-11—4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFIED ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 19, 2005, repealed article II, sections 4-21—4-29, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article II, sections 4-21—4-41. Former article II pertained to dogs and derived from the Code of 1966, §§ 4-13, 4-16, 4-18; Ord. No. 89-2, §§ 1, 2, 5, 6, adopted Feb. 7, 1989; Ord. No. 91-5, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 20, 1991; Ord. No. 95-13, § 1, adopted July 11, 1995; Ord. No. 2001-28, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 21, 2001. 

Sec. 4-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
Abandonment means the intentional or complete forsaking of any animal by its owner, without making reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal to be assumed by another person or the failure to return and resume responsibility of an animal at the designated time as arranged with the caregiver. Abandonment also means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate and proper food and water for a period in excess of thirty-six (36) hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
(1)  Adequate food means palatable, noncontaminated and nutritionally adequate food that is appropriate for the species. Adequate food does not include garbage. 
(2)  Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water. 
Adequate shelter means a structure having three (3) sides, a top and bottom which is suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind and rain and other elements. During cold weather, sufficient bedding inside the shelter shall be present. 
Altered means it shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or cat declared by an authority or court of competent jurisdiction to be a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal, to have the animal surgically sterilized. Such sterilization must be performed by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days of a final order of an authority or court of competent jurisdiction declaring the animal to be a potentially dangerous animal, dangerous animal, or vicious animal. 
Animal means any living thing, not a plant, other than man. (Excludes: rodents and insects.) 
Animal control officer means any person assigned to enforce the provisions of this chapter as designated by the chief of the city police department. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the city or in conjunction with the county or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Cruelty means: 
(1)  Every act, omission, or neglect by which death, unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue to any animal when there is a reasonable remedy of relief. 
(2)  Also includes transporting an animal in an unrestrained open-air vehicle or transporting an unrestrained animal in the trunk of any vehicle or leaving an animal unattended in a closed vehicle without proper ventilation or temperature control, where the outside air temperature is eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit or above. 
(3)  Also means allowing or causing any animal to participate in training for or engaging in an animal fight operated for sport, entertainment or gaming purposes. Routine medical procedures by a licensed veterinarian shall not be regarded as cruelty. 
Electronic animal confinement system means a commercially produced, functioning and professionally installed electronic fence which utilizes an invisible electrically generated perimeter in which the animal within the perimeter wears an electronic collar that produces an electric shock when the animal approaches or exceeds the perimeter. 
Fence means any structure of wire, being sixteen (16) gauge or higher, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence shall be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig, or escape from confinement; and shall have slats installed for chain link if it is the only barrier to contain a dangerous/vicious animal. 
Governing authority means the city council in which the legislative powers of the city are vested. 
Guard dog means any trained or untrained dog that is maintained for the purpose of safety or security and which is reasonably expected to attack persons or other animals independently or upon command. 
Humane care of animals means but is not limited to the provision of adequate shelter and wholesome and adequate food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the breed. 
Inhumane care means any act, omission or neglect which causes unjustifiable physical pain suffering or death to any living animal. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health, and administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian. 
Jurisdiction means for the enforcement of this chapter, the incorporated areas of the city. 
Open-air vehicle means the cargo area of any pickup truck that is not covered by a permanent attached utility cover or any convertible vehicle with its top down. 
Owner means any person, partnership or corporation owning, possessing, keeping or harboring one (1) or more animals. A person who continually feeds a stray cat shall be considered its owner. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven (7) or more consecutive days; or, in the case of an animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or persons in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Pen means a padlocked, fenced area within a perimeter fenced area that has secure sides that are buried two (2) feet into the ground or sunken in concrete and a secure top. 
Public nuisance means an animal shall be deemed to be a public nuisance if the animal: 
(1)  Is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of such other property owner or occupant; 
(2)  Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways; 
(3)  Is permitted to cause annoyance, alarm, or noise disturbance for more than fifteen (15) minutes at any time of the day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the owner's property, where said such owner has been given one (1) warning by law enforcement personnel to control the animal or animals. 
(4)  Is repeatedly running at large. 
(5)  Trespasses on school grounds. 
Records of appropriate authority means records of any county or municipal animal control agency, records of any county board or health, records of any federal, state or local courts, or records of an animal control officer provided for in this chapter. 
Restraint means any animal which is: 
(1)  On a hand-held leash; or 
(2)  At heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands while on the owner's real property limits; or 
(3)  Within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the city; or 
(4)  In a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner (in any zoning district except R-Ag); or 
(5)  Within the property limits of an R-Ag zone; or 
(6)  Within a designated off-leash area of the dog park; or 
(7)  Within an electronic animal confinement system and provided they are maintained in good working order and keep the animal contained; and 
a.  Contain permanent and prominently displayed signs around the perimeter of the electronic animal confinement system. The signs shall be clearly visible prior to entering such premise and shall read: "Caution-Electronic Animal Confinement System." 
(8)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint, and that precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of every owner to ensure that the enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended, after being issued a warning or a citation by the dog control officer. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a classified animal to ensure that the animal is securely and humanely enclosed within a proper enclosure as a means of restraint. 
Running at large means any animal which is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2010-24, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2017-08, §§ 1, 2, 5-2-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21. 
Sec. 4-22. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-23. - Citations. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation for any violation to appear in municipal court. Such a citation may be issued by an animal control officer, based upon his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of another person who has witnessed the violation, in which case the witness shall be subpoenaed to testify for the city in the court. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-24. - Joint government services. 
Any county or municipality or any combination of such local governments may contract or enter into agreements with each other for joint animal control services and codes and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment used in provision of such services. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-25. - Designation and powers of animal control officer. 
(a)  The city police chief shall designate an individual to carry out the duties of an animal control officer as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  One (1) animal control agency may carry out the duties of animal control for more than one (1) local government pursuant to a contract or agreement under section 4-24. 
(c)  An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Law enforcement agencies of local governments and the sheriffs of counties shall cooperate with animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Persons carrying out the duties of an animal control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless the person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-26. - Authority to remove abused or neglected animals. 
Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The police chief, assistant police chief or their designee may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the police chief, assistant police chief or their designee shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. The owner or possessor of the animal may be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4 concerning cruelty to animals. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 3, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-27. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any animal control officer in the official performance of their duties as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-28. - Keeping of wild animals, livestock, or fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep or permit to be raised or kept on premises that he owns or controls within the city any wild nondomestic animal, or any cattle, horses, ponies, donkeys, mules, goats, sheep, or fowl, unless permitted by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-29. - Restraint of animals. 
It shall be unlawful to restrain an animal by tethering or any similar use of a chain, cable, rope or other stakeout or tie-out devices. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2010-24, § 2, 10-19-10) 
Sec. 4-30. - Creation of nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-31. - Confinement of female animals in season. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person who has custody or control of a female animal that is in season to fail to keep the female animal confined in such a manner that such female animal cannot come in contact with a male animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-32. - Animal neglect. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide his animals with sufficient and wholesome food and water, with proper shelter and protection from the weather, with veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 4, 5-2-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08, § 4, adopted May 2, 2017, changed the title of § 4-32 from "Animal care" to "Animal neglect." This historic notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 4-33. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit acts of cruelty toward any animal; and 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cock fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 5, 5-2-17) 
State Law reference— Dog fighting unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160. 
Sec. 4-34. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-35. - Exposure of poisons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the substance is liable to be eaten by any animal; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with raw vegetable substances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-36. - Removal of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to: 
(1)  Fail to immediately remove any excrement deposited by his animal on public property, walks, recreation areas or private property not owned or controlled by the owner of the animal. 
(2)  Fail to remove any excrement from their property and dispose of this waste on a daily basis. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-37. - Confinement and quarantine of biting animals. 
It shall be unlawful for an animal that is known to have bitten a person not to be confined for the purpose of quarantine by a method to be determined by the county health department for a period of not less than ten (10) days. All expenses incurred for such confinement and observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4. 
Sec. 4-38. - Rabies inoculation for dogs, cats and ferrets. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or ferret housed, kept or boarded past three (3) months of age within the incorporated limits of the city to fail to have the animal(s) inoculated against rabies, and to have a rabies tag attached to animal's collar. The owner shall be liable for the inoculation of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 6, 5-2-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-19 and the Georgia Rabies Control Manual. 
Sec. 4-39. - Number of dogs and cats per residential lot. 
It shall be unlawful for there to be more than six (6) animals on any residential lot subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Pet owners in compliance with any prior ordinance limiting the number of animals shall be allowed to continue to keep said number of animals. 
(2)  A litter of puppies or kittens will be permitted to remain on property for a period of twelve (12) weeks after their birth. 
(3)  Limitation does not apply to licensed foster home operators, breeders or other individuals who have been granted a waiver by the mayor and council consistent with the procedures and criteria outlined in section 4-40. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-40. - Waiver to animal limitations. 
(a)  Upon application to and approval by the mayor and council, a citizen may keep animals in greater numbers than provided in section 4-39 of this chapter, provided that the council finds that: 
(1)  There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances existing such that a waiver should be granted; 
(2)  Granting the waiver would not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to others; 
(3)  The waiver will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the neighborhood; and 
(4)  The applicant can demonstrate a special use or need to house animals in greater numbers than provided in section 4-39. This item shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, participation in a licensed animal rescue organization, use of animals for therapeutic or other purposes, emergency care of pets owned by other persons, or other circumstances which are specified in the application for waiver. 
(b)  The person making the application for such a waiver shall submit, with his/her application a fee as determined by the mayor and council of the city. A sign containing information as to the proposed waiver, and the date and time at which the application will be considered by the council shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(c)  The application shall be sent to the mayor and council for review, public hearing and approval/denial thereof. The mayor and council shall have thirty (30) days in which to make a decision. 
(d)  Any waiver approved by the mayor and council may be revoked upon the applicant being found in violation of the nuisance provisions of this article. 
(e)  The waiver shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a waiver, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 7, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-41. - Tethering. 
It shall be unlawful to restrain an animal by tethering or any similar use of chain, cable, rope, runner or other stakeout or tie-out device. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 8, 5-2-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08, § 8, adopted May 2, 2017, repealed § 4-41 in its entirety and enacted a new § 4-41 to read as set out herein. Former § 4-41 pertained to warning notice on premises using guard dogs and derived from Ord. No. 2005-25, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 18, 2005. 
Sec. 4-42. - Limiting ownership. 
Any person convicted of cruelty, neglect or abandonment of an animal shall not be allowed to adopt an animal from an animal shelter or rescue for at least three (3) years after the date of conviction, without written waiver from the city council; and any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect or abandonment of animal as provided in the code and has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of said animal, shall not be allowed to own a pet in their household for at least three (3) years from the date of conviction; and person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on owner's property as provided in this Code and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, shall not be allowed to own a pet in their household for three at least (3) years from the date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 9, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-43. - Aggressive dogs. 
No person shall in any area zoned for residential use engage in the business of training dogs to attack humans or maintain dogs which are being trained to attack humans unless such use is expressly permitted under the applicable zoning regulations in effect for such residential area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 10, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-44. - Dead animals. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon public property, their premises or upon the premises of any other person, or allow any dead animal to remain upon public property, their premises or any dead animal belonging to them to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of same or causing the same to be properly removed or disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 11, 5-2-17) 
Secs. 4-45—4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, adopted July 19, 2005, renumbered former article III, sections 4-41—4-48 as new article III, sections 4-51—4-58. 

Sec. 4-51. - Identification and control of cats. 
Every person residing in the city and owning or having in their possession any cat shall have said cat bear identification either by tag or other suitable means of identification. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-52. - Disease control. 
All persons residing in the city and owning or having in their possession any cat shall be required to have said cat inoculated for rabies, distemper or other dangerous disease. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-53. - Cats injuring or destroying property of others. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, or allow to be in or upon any premises occupied by him or her or under his or her charge or control, any cat that in any manner injures or destroys any real or personal property of any description belonging to another. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 13, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-54. - Licensing and fees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or permit to remain about the premises any cat more than five (5) months of age for which no license exists. The fee for said license shall be set by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-55. - Release upon payment. 
Any owner or person having custody of a cat impounded for violation of any section contained in this article may reclaim said cat by paying a penalty as set by the mayor and council together with the cost of maintenance of such cat while so impounded if claimed within seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-56. - Applications. 
Applications for licenses shall be made to the city treasurer and shall include name and address of applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee, information whether the animal is spade or neutered, and a rabies certificate or tag issued by a licensed veterinarian or an anti-rabies clinic. Application for said required cat license shall be obtained by the last day of July of each year, except the year in which the cat obtains five (5) months of age and then within thirty (30) days from the date such cat becomes five (5) months old. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2000-25, §§ 1, 2, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-57. - Public nuisance. 
No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her cat or cats to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-58. - Penalty. 
A violation of any section in this article shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment provided under the City Charter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 3, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-59. - Feeding of stray (feral) cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed stray and/or feral cats, where such feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or businesses, or creates a condition contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 12, 5-2-17) 
Secs. 4-60—4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-71. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this article, whether or not the animal is on private or public property, may be impounded by the animal control officer in accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 4, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-72. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the owner, if the owner is known or can be reasonably ascertained, of every animal impounded, by telephone, if possible, or by mail, within two (2) working days of the impoundment. The owner of any animal impounded may claim and take custody of the animal within four (4) working days of such impoundment by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus the boarding fee and providing proof of rabies inoculation. If the animal is not current on rabies inoculation, the animal may be released to the owner and the owner shall have the animal inoculated within five (5) working days and provide a copy of the rabies certificate to the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 4, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-73. - Impoundment fee. 
All fees for impoundment under this article shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council of the city. Impoundment fees are separate and distinct from penalties for violations of any part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 4, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-74. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
The animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of any animal impounded under this article in as humane and painless a manner as possible, or to donate any animal to a public or nonprofit institution or agency, if such animal has remained unclaimed for the prescribed period of time or if it has been injured and is suffering or in great pain and such animal does not display an identification tag and no determination of the owner can be made from a reasonable investigation. The disposal of any animal as provided in this section does not relieve the owner of any liability for any violation of this chapter. If the owner of any animal is known or ascertainable, but for a valid reason cannot be reached within the four-working day period, the animal control officer shall be authorized to hold the animal until such time as the owner can be reached. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 4, 7-19-05) 
Secs. 4-75—4-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESPONSIBLE DOG OWNERSHIP[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08, §§ 14—16, adopted May 2, 2017, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. V, §§ 4-101—4-111, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-16, adopted Aug. 7, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-20, §§ 1—6, adopted Sept. 18, 2012. 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20, et seq. 

Sec. 4-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Altered means it shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or cat declared by an authority or court of competent jurisdiction to be a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal, to have the animal surgically sterilized. Such sterilization must be performed by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days of a final order of an authority or court of competent jurisdiction declaring the animal to be a potentially dangerous animal, dangerous animal, or vicious animal. 
Classified animal means any animal that has been classified as either dangerous or vicious animal pursuant to this article. Classifications are permanent until the death of the animal. 
Dangerous animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; or 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the animal posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog; where certain conditions apply, see section 40-102; or 
(4)  Has previously been found to be a potentially dangerous animal and has repeated the same behavior under potentially dangerous animal subsection (1), (2) or (3). 
Fence means any structure of wire, being sixteen (16) gauge or lower, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence shall be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig, or escape from confinement; and shall have slats installed for chain link if it is the only barrier to contain a dangerous animal. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or care or control of an animal. In the case of an animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Pen means a padlocked, fenced area within a perimeter fenced area that has secure sides that are buried two (2) feet into the ground or sunken in concrete and a secure top. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Without provocation, endangers the safety of humans; or 
(2)  An animal that bites or attacks a person or pet animal without causing injury; or 
(3)  An animal that has been found "running at large more than one (1) time in a six-month period; or 
(4)  Which, because of temperament, conditions, or training, has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, or injure humans or other animals without provocation. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping: 
(1)  A potentially dangerous animal, while on the owner's property, securely and locked confined indoors or in a securely enclosed padlocked fenced in area. Such enclosure shall be suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. All sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
(2)  A dangerous animal, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or inside an enclosed and locked pen constructed with a fence of sixteen (16) gauge or lower, or inside a fence of sixteen (16) gauge or lower with slats inserted, if said fence is the only barrier to maintain said dangerous animal and maintained and suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
(3)  A vicious animal, while on the owner's property, securely confined and enclosed in a locked pen, with fence sixteen (16) gauge or higher, and shall be separate from the chain link fencing and it shall have slats, and such structure shall be suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top and a secure bottom. The pen shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Residential lot. The lot with a dwelling located thereon, exclusive of any vacant lots adjacent thereto under the same ownership. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsion; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the animal's attack; or 
(2)  In the opinion of a judge, presents a threat of serious harm to other animals or humans; or 
(3)  Has previously attacked or bitten a human or injured a pet animal and has attacked or bitten a human or pet animal for second time; or 
(4)  Has been previously classified as a dangerous animal and has attacked or bitten a human or pet animal for second time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 14, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-102. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  No dog shall be classified as a potentially dangerous dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a potentially dangerous dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(b)  Training, hunting, herding exemption from dangerous dog restraint/leash requirement: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements otherwise specified by this Code section and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29(a)(3), the person training the dog(s) must be the owner thereof, and must be in compliance with all department of natural resources requirements including without limitation: 
a.  A valid hunting license on his/her persons; and 
b.  Has the consent of the property owner where he/she is hunting 
c.  Training, hunting, herding and/or predator control cannot take place off the property of the owner thereof, unless with the express written permission and acknowledgment of dangerousness of the dog granted by the owner of the land being used; and 
d.  Only with a dog that will instantly respond to the verbal commands of the dog's owner, including without limitation a command to immediately heel and/or return to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 15, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-103. - Violation of article. 
Except as otherwise specified in this article, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous or vicious animal to leave said animal: 
(1)  Unattended with minors. 
(2)  A person who violates subsection (1) of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous or vicious animal to leave said animal unattended with other pets. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-104. - Animal control board. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby establish an animal control board to hold hearings as provided by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. 
(b)  This board is created in conjunction with the cities of Warner Robins, Centerville, and Perry, and shall be comprised of one (1) representative each from the Houston County Board of Commissioners and the cities of Chesterville, Perry and Warner Robins. 
(c)  No member of the animal control board may participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the animal at issue. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-105. - Investigation; notice to owner. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term: 
(1)  Authority means a court of competent jurisdiction, an animal control board or local board of health, as determined by the governing authority of a local government; provided, however, that if an authority has not been established for the jurisdiction, the owner shall be informed of the right to request a hearing from the probate court for such jurisdiction where the dog was found or confiscated within five (5) days after the date shown on the notice. 
(2)  Mail means to send by certified parcel mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report of a animal believed to be subject to classification as a: 
(1)  Potentially dangerous animal within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such animal is subject to classification as a potentially dangerous animal. 
a.  Dog control officer shall mail a dated notice within seventy-two (72) hours. 
b.  Notice shall include dog control officer's determination and shall state what qualifications/regulations the owner must be in accordance with. 
c.  Shall have no appeal process under potentially dangerous classification. 
d.  If it is determined that the potentially dangerous animal shall be classified as dangerous animal, the owner shall comply with the requirements under section for dangerous animal. 
(2)  Dangerous animal or vicious animal within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such animal is subject to classification as a dangerous animal or vicious animal. 
a.  When a dog control officer determines that an animal is subject to classification as a dangerous animal or vicious animal, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the animal's owner within seventy-two (72) hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the authority on the dog control officer's determination within five (5) business days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
b.  When a hearing is requested by an animal owner in accordance with subsection a. of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within fifteen (15) days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the authority or probate court for good cause shown. At least five (5) days prior to the hearing, the authority or probate court conducting the hearing shall mail to the animal owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the animal owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the authority or probate court conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify which only means to upgrade or downgrade classification, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
c.  Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the authority or probate court which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the animal owner of its determination on the matter. If the determination is that the animal is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
d.  Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. Judicial review of a probate court's final decision shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 5-3-2 and costs shall be paid as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-3-22. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-106. - Duties of owner; registration fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a potentially dangerous animal, or classified animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. No more than one (1) certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous animal shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained a proper enclosure for a potentially dangerous animal; and 
(2)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the animal; and owner must provide verifiable proof of registration to the dog control officer within five (5) business days and shall be kept up to date; and 
(3)  The animal has been altered and owner must provide verifiable proof to the dog control officer within thirty (30) days from date of classification; and 
(4)  The animal is current on rabies inoculations and the owner must provide proof and keep attached rabies tag to animal's collar at all times; and 
(5)  The owner nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing, is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal; and no certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of this article; and no person shall be the owner of more than one (1) potentially dangerous, or classified animal; and 
(6)  Owner or lessor of said property, where owner of animal resides, must give written consent granting approval and knowledge that the resident owns a potentially dangerous animal. 
(7)  The owner must notify dog control officer upon the animal being sold, transferred ownership, died or attacked a human or pet animal with twenty-four (24) hours or owner has moved. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous animal shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner had maintained a proper enclosure designed for a dangerous animal; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at or on all entrances to the pen and posted at the entrance to the premises where the animal resides; and 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the animal; and owner must provide verifiable proof of registration to the dog control officer within five (5) business days; and registration must be kept up to date; and 
(4)  The animal has been altered and owner must provide verifiable proof to the dog control officer within thirty (30) days from classification or date of hearing; and 
(5)  The animal is current on rabies inoculations and the owner provides proof and keeps attached a rabies tag to animal's collar at all times; and 
(6)  The owner nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing, is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal, or any person who has been convicted or two (2) or more violations of this section; and no person shall be the owner of more than one (1) potentially dangerous, or classified animal; and 
(7)  The owner shall maintain and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous animal again liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the animal; and 
(8)  No owner can keep/house a classified animal within two hundred (200) yards of any structure or manmade improvement that is an aquatic center, church, convenience store, daycare, grocery store, hospital, humane society, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, skilled nursing unit, or walking trail, due in part to these areas being frequented by children and senior citizens, and in some cases having food present; and 
(9)  Owner or lessor of said property, where owner of animal resides, must give written consent granting approval and knowledge that resident owns a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal; and 
(10)  Owner of a dangerous animal shall be charged an annual registration fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(d)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a vicious animal shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the animal on the owner's property in a securely padlocked and enclosed pen; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at or on all entrances to the pen and posted at the entrance to the premises where the animal resides; and 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the animal; and owner must provide verifiable proof of registration to the dog control officer within five (5) business days, and said registration shall be kept up to date; and 
(4)  The animal has been altered and owner must provide verifiable proof to the dog control officer within thirty (30) days of classification or date of hearing; and 
(5)  The animal is current on rabies inoculations and the owner must provide proof and keep attached a rabies tag to animal's collar at all times; and 
(6)  The owner nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing, is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal, or any person who has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of this section; and no person shall be the owner of more than one (1) potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal; and 
(7)  Owner or lessor of said property, where owner of animal resides, must give written consent granting approval and knowledge that resident owns a vicious animal. 
(8)  The owner shall maintain and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious animal against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the animal; and 
(9)  No owner can keep/house a classified animal within two hundred (200) yards of any structure or manmade improvement that is an aquatic center, church, convenience store, daycare, grocery store, hospital, human society, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, skilled nursing unit, or walking trail, due in part to these areas being frequented by children and senior citizens, and in some cases having food present. 
(10)  Owner of a vicious animal shall be charged an annual registration fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(e)  No certificate shall be issued to the owner of more than one (1) potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal nor any occupant of such residence, where said owner is residing is already in possession of a potentially dangerous or classified animal, or any person who has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of this section. 
(f)  No person shall be the owner of more than one (1) potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal. 
(g)  No certificate or registration for a vicious animal shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6-1; 
(2)  The felony of dog fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two (2) years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(h)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten (10) days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(i)  The owner of a classified animal shall notify the dog control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the animal is on the loose or has attacked a human or attacked a pet animal and shall notify the dog control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the animal has died or has been euthanized. 
(j)  A vicious animal shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(k)  The owner of a potentially dangerous animal or classified animal who moves from one (1) jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia shall register the potentially dangerous or classified animal in the new jurisdiction within ten (10) days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified animal who moves into this state shall register the animal as required in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 within thirty (30) days of becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-107. - Confinement. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a: 
(1)  Potentially dangerous animal to allow that animal outside of a proper enclosure unless that animal is: 
a.  On a leash less than four (4) feet; and 
b.  Is under the immediate control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; and 
c.  Flexi-leashes are not allowed. 
(2)  Dangerous animal or vicious animal to allow that animal outside of a proper enclosure unless that animal is: 
a.  On a leash less than four (4) feet; and 
b.  Is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; and 
c.  Shall have on a wire basket muzzle at all times; and 
d.  Flexi-leashes are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-108. - Confiscation of dogs. 
(a)  A potentially dangerous animal, dangerous animal or vicious animal shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any animal that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such animal upon payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article, unless such confiscation is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer, an authority as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23, or a probate court. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the animal. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the animal. 
(c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within fourteen (14) days of the date the dog was confiscated, such animal shall be released to an animal shelter, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, or euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-109. - Liability. 
Under no circumstances shall Houston County, the City of Perry or its employees or officials be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by an animal as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 4-110. - Reclassification. 
(a)  (1)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a potentially dangerous dog shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. 
(2)  Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. 
(b)  The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (a) of this Code section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 16, 5-2-17) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and development, Ch. 21; land development ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); State minimum construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 99-01, adopted May 18, 1999, deleted §§ 5-1—5-5 and section 2 enacted similar provisions to read as set out in §§ 5-1—5-5. Former §§ 5-1—5-5 derived from the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 88-7, adopted May 3, 1988; Ord. No. 88-13, adopted July 19, 1988; and Ord. No. 91-1, adopted Mar. 5, 1991. 

Sec. 5-1. - Technical codes adopted. 
(a)  The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced by the city: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014 Prescriptive Deck Details). 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments. 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(10)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(11)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments. 
(b)  All of the following appendixes of said codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Building Code: Appendix A, D. 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code: Appendix. 
(3)  Standard Gas Code: Appendix A, E. 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendix B, C, 6. 
(5)  Standard Fire Prevention Code: Appendix. 
(6)  National Electrical Code: Appendix. 
(7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code: Appendix. 
(c)  All of the following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, including: 
Chapter 1, Administration 
(2)  Standard Housing Code, including: 
Chapter 1, Administration and Appendix 
(3)  Standard Swimming Pool Code, including: 
Chapter 1, Administration 
(4)  Standard Existing Building Code, including: 
Chapter 1, Administration and Appendix 
(5)  Standard Amusement Device Code, including: 
Chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix 
(d)  The procedures as hereinafter set out in the following sections shall be the procedures that govern the administration and enforcement process of the above referenced Building, Gas, Mechanical, Plumbing, Fire Prevention and CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Codes. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 2014-18, §§ 1, 2, 7-15-14) 
Charter reference— Adoption of technical codes by reference, § 2.25. 
Sec. 5-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as allowed heretofore adopted. Hereinafter all of the codes heretofore shall be referred to as the "technical codes," as may by adopted by the state or local jurisdiction. 
(b)  Code remedial. 
(1)  General. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulation the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code except as it relates to the purpose stated herein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city not any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Scope. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirements shall be applicable. 
b.  Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except one- and two-family dwellings. 
c.  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliance, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
d.  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
e.  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
f.  Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
g.  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
h.  Energy. The provisions of the Georgia State Energy Code shall regulate the design of buildings envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
i.  CABO one- and two-family dwelling. The provisions of the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- and two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
j.  The unsafe building abatement code. The provisions of this Code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(2)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this Code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(3)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(4)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(5)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing services. 
(d)  Building department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building inspector. The qualifications for the building inspector and other code enforcement personnel to be established by the governing body. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(2)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(e)  Existing buildings. 
(1)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(2)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(f)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 5-18-99) 
Sec. 5-3. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 5-18-99) 
Sec. 5-4. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
1.  Any portable heating appliance; 
2.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Any portable cooling unit; 
4.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code; 
5.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as my be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. As application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
EXCEPTION: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistant integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site of lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer access, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazardous classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building officer shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alternation of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, ally or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in Chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(e)  Contractor's responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work. The contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be preformed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance. If the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned this shall not invalidate the permit. Provided, however, when the work is restarted, the contractor must abide by all current code requirements and must have all appropriate inspections. If the work is not commenced within six (6) months after a building permit has been issued, one (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more that ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions must be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans reviewed for code compliance. One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas system, etc. has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, etc., before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be undersigned on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (6). He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
BUILDING 
1.  Foundation Inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
2.  Frame Inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
3.  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
ELECTRICAL 
1.  Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
PLUMBING 
1.  Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See Section 417 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
MECHANICAL 
1.  Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
GAS 
1.  Rough Piping Inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures of gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final Piping Inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final Inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
ENERGY 
1.  Foundation Inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations. 
2.  Frame Inspections: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior wall insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three (3) inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Tests. The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, of his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(j)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two (2) sets of detailed drawing, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connection from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate as immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(k)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each and every story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 2009-10, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-09) 
Sec. 5-5. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 5-18-99) 
Sec. 5-6. - Curb cuts; permit fee. 
(a)  It is hereby required that a contractor owner/developer obtain a curb cut permit for any tie into a city street or proposed street. 
(b)  The curb cut shall be made in accordance with standards and specifications as determined by the public works superintendent of the city. 
(c)  The contractor owner/developer is responsible for contacting the public works department or the building inspection department prior to the placement of any concrete or plant bituminous material in order to ensure compliance. 
(d)  In the event driveway pipe is needed, the size, type and costs will be determined by the public works superintendent. 
(e)  The fee for a curb cut permit will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus the costs of driveway pipe if needed, as determined by the public works superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, 1-19-88) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 5-7. - Water conservation requirements relative to building construction. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
(2)  Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
(3)  Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)  On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building or any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1991; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (b)(1) through (5) of this section. 
(d)  The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(e)  Exemptions: 
(1)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section when: 
a.  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; or 
b.  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; or 
c.  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
d.  Units to be installed are: 
(i)  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
(ii)  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
(iii)  Toilets for juveniles. 
(2)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subparagraphs (a) through (d) of paragraph (1) of this subsection (e) shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. 
(f)  Enforcement; penalty: 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(2)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days as set out in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2, 3-5-91) 
Sec. 5-8. - Prohibition of self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in section 3 of house bill 1221 passed by the Georgia General Assembly with an effective date of April 25, 1996, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers of utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 7-16-96) 
Sec. 5-9. - Conflict with other laws. 
Any matters in the technical codes adopted in section 5-1 above, the administrative and enforcement provisions procedures adopted in section 5-2 or any other provisions of this Ordinance which are contrary to existing sections of the Perry Code shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 3, 5-18-99) 
Secs. 5-10—5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 3.11. 

Sec. 5-26. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Code 1966, § 5-18) 
Sec. 5-27. - Members. 
(a)  The board of adjustments and appeals shall consist of seven (7) members. Three (3) members shall be either an architect, contractor or engineer. 
(b)  The members of the board of adjustments and appeals shall be appointed by the mayor and council with the mayor and each council person appointing one (1) member. At the first meeting in January of 1986, the council persons representing District 1, Post 2, and District 2, Post 2 shall appoint one (1) member for a two-year term. At the first meeting in January of 1987, the council persons representing District 1, Post 1, and District 3, Post 1 shall each appoint one (1) member for a two-year term. At the first meeting in January of 1988, the mayor shall appoint a member for a one-year term, and the council persons representing District 1, Post 2, District 2, Post 2, and District 3, Post 2 shall each appoint one (1) member for a two-year term. At the first meeting in January of 1989, the mayor and the council persons representing District 1, Post 1, District 2, Post 1, and District 3, Post 1 shall appoint one (1) member for a two-year term. Thereafter, the mayor and each council person will appoint a member at the beginning of his term, for a term to run concurrently with his term. 
(c)  Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by the mayor or council person who made the original appointment. 
(Code 1966, §§ 5-18, 5-18.1, 5-18.2) 
Sec. 5-28. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board of adjustments and appeals shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the technical codes adopted by the city. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of the technical codes adopted by the city or in modifying an order of the building official, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than four (4) affirmative votes shall be required. A board member shall not act in any case of which he has a personal interest. 
(c)  The building official shall act as secretary to the board of adjustments and appeals and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Code 1966, §§ 5-18.3—5-18.5) 
Sec. 5-29. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist. 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this Code do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulation thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to an[d] after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this technical code or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(d)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Code 1966, §§ 5-18.6—5-18.8; Ord. No. 99-01, § 4, 5-18-99) 
Sec. 5-30. - Decisions. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 4, 5-18-99) 
ARTICLE III. - EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS 

Sec. 5-31. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meaning shown in this section, except where the contexts clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Basement is that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Code official is the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative. 
Dwelling unit is a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Exterior property is the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination is the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as the food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
Infestation is the presence, within or contiguous to any structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
Occupancy is the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilize or occupied. 
Occupant is any individual living or sleeping in a building or having possession of a space within a building. 
Operator is any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner is any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Premises is a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Rooming unit is any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
Structure is that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof including but not limited to dwelling buildings, commercial buildings, garages, storage buildings, out buildings, fences and signs. 
Tenant is a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
Workmanlike means executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
Yard is an open space on the same lot with a structure. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, § 2, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 5-32. - In general. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures and exterior property. 
(b)  The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this Code. 
(c)  All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(d)  If any of the minimum conditions and responsibilities contained in this article conflict with the technical codes adopted in section 5-1, the more restrictive conditions and responsibilities shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 5-33. - Exterior structure. 
(a)  The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
(c)  All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(d)  All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
(e)  All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(f)  The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and down spouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(g)  All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort. 
(h)  Operable windows located in whole or in part within six (6) feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with window sash locking devices. 
(i)  Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 5-34. - Penalties. 
A violation of any section in this article shall submit the violator to the maximum penalty under section 1-10 of the City Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2006-61, § 1, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 2016-07, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 2018-20, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 5-35. - Enforcement; collection of costs. 
The enforcement and collection of costs for violations of this article shall be as outlined in sections 19-80 and 19-85 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-61, § 1, 12-5-06) 
Secs. 5-36—5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXTERMINATION 

Sec. 5-41. - Infestation. 
All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 5-42. - Owner. 
The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 5-43. - Single occupant. 
The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 5-44. - Multiple occupancy. 
The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 5-45. - Occupant. 
The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. Provided, however, where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 5-46. - Penalties. 
A violation of any section in this article shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment provided under the City Charter. A separate offence shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2006-61, § 3, 12-5-06) 
Sec. 5-47. - Enforcement; collection of costs. 
The enforcement and collection of costs for violations of this article shall be as outlined in sections 19-80 and 19-85 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-61, § 3, 12-5-06) 
Secs. 5-48—5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 5-51. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the city limits of the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use, and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life, safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city or general nuisance law, and which constitutes a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, building, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use, which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist, in the city, dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business, uses due to dilapidation; which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed; and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this section shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or fire safety code; and 
(3)  Any building codes or minimum standard codes, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure, or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Perry, Georgia, the legislative body charged with governing this municipality. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit of burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Municipality means the City of Perry, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the city and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-53. - Appointment of public officer. 
The public officer designated and appointed to exercise the powers prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and this article shall be the city manager or the building inspector or the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-54. - Determination by public officer that dwelling, building, or structure is unfit or vacant, dilapidated, and/or being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes. 
(a)  The public officer may determine under existing ordinances that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of such county or municipality. Such conditions may include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; 
(7)  Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; 
(8)  Any means of egress, or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or non-working condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic; 
(9)  The stress in any material, member, or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load exceeds the stresses allowed in any code or ordinance for new buildings adopted by the city; 
(10)  The dwelling, building, or structure, or portion thereof, has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building is less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum established by any code or ordinance adopted by the city for new buildings; 
(11)  Any exterior appendage, or portion of the building or structure, is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by any code or ordinance adopted by the city for new buildings; 
(12)  If for any reason the building, structure, or portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used; 
(13)  The building, structure or portion thereof as a result of the decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse; 
(14)  The building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in a violation of a specific requirement of any code or ordinance of the city; 
(15)  It is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance; 
(16)  It is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine under existing ordinances that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, or being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-55. - Powers of public officer in regard to unfit buildings or structures. 
The public officer heretofore appointed to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and this article shall have the following powers in addition to others herein granted to: 
(1)  Investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, or being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 
(3)  Enter upon the premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)  Delegate any of the functions and powers granted under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-56. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this article as adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 shall be served in the following manner. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-57. - Procedure for declaring dwelling unfit. 
(a)  (1)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection [with] the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference, identify the interested parties, state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint, and to appear in person or by attorney, and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(2)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations, cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
c.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or section 5-58 of this article, or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
d.  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
e.  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(b)  (1)  The lien provided for in subsection e. [above] shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c) and subsection 5-56(c) of this article. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to the article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county or municipality whose lien is being collected. 
(3)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(4)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(c)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(d)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(e)  In addition to the procedures and remedies in this chapter, a governing authority may provide by ordinance that designated public officers may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-58. - Injunctions against order to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
Any person affected by any order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order. The court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present the petition to the court within fifteen (15) days of the posting and service of the order by the public officer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-59. - Authority to use revenues, grants, and donations to repair, close, or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city, being specifically authorized by statute and this article, may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article adopted in connection with the exercise of the powers granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 5-60. - Construction with municipal local enabling act, charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or any department of the municipality to enforce any provision of its local enabling act, its charter or its ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 2-16-10) 
Secs. 5-61—5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 

Sec. 5-71. - Purpose. 
The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including, but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this mayor and council, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 61, Urban Redevelopment, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2014-25, 11-18-14) 
Sec. 5-72. - Definitions. 
(a)  Blighted property, blighted, or blight means any urbanized or developed property which: 
(1)  Presents two (2) or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this article shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one (1) year after written notice of the code violation to its owner. 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
(b)  Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(c)  Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
(d)  Governing authority means the city council of the City of Perry, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
(e)  Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(f)  Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
(g)  Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-25, 11-18-14) 
Sec. 5-73. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one (1) or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. No. 2014-25, 11-18-14) 
Sec. 5-74. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five (5) residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance, or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five (5) years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel or property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Houston County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with a payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination that the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before a hearing officer appointed by the mayor and council for such hearings. Written request for a hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be dated stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the hearing officer appointed by the mayor and council and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the mayor and council shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten (10) business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the Houston Home Journal, or other designated legal organ[ization] in Houston County, at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the hearing officer upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The hearing officer shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the hearing officer shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the hearing officer shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the tax commissioner of Houston County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city in the event the determination by the public officer is affirmed by the hearing officer. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the mayor and council affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Houston County for a writ of certiorari within thirty (30) days of issuance of the mayor and council's written determination. 
(Ord. No. 2014-25, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 2014-28, §§ 1—4, 12-16-14) 
Sec. 5-75. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8, Unfit Buildings or Structures. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax commissioner of Houston County. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five (5) acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. No. 2014-25, 11-18-14) 
Sec. 5-76. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 5-75 of this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or portion thereof equaling one (1) year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four (4) successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-25, 11-18-14) 
Sec. 5-77. - Notice to tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the tax commissioner of Houston County in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Houston County Tax Assessor's office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-25, 11-18-14) 
Chapter 5A - FIRE PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5A-l. - Definitions. 
Terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Credit means a reduction in the amount of a customer's fire protection fee charge in recognition of a customer's efforts to mitigate the response burden imposed on the Perry Fire Department (PFD), and the fire protection utility's cost of providing fire protection and/or emergency management services. 
Customers of the fire protection utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefitting from the services provided by the city's fire department and the fire protection utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the utility's administration, management, and operation of fire protection systems for the purposes of fire protection. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a structure, regardless of the type or method of construction, which contains one or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and cooking facilities, designed for occupancy by one or more person(s) regardless of relationship, living as a single-family unit. 
Emergency management services fall under the jurisdictional control of the Perry Fire Department and its fire chief. 
Fire chief means the person appointed by the city manager to administer and oversee the fire department operations and the provisions of this article. 
Fire protection services mean all services provided by the city which directly or indirectly relate to the following: 
(1)  Fire safety prevention and protection; 
(2)  Management and operation of the fire protection program; 
(3)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing fire protection facilities and equipment; 
(4)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional fire protection facilities to meet the current and anticipated future needs; 
(5)  Emergency management services; 
(6)  Regulation and enforcement of fire safety prevention and protection services and facilities; and 
(7)  Compliance with applicable state and federal fire protection regulations and permit requirements. 
Fire protection services and facilities means all personnel, equipment, physical works, and properties which are used to provide fire protection services. 
Fire protection service fee means the periodic service fee charge imposed pursuant to this article, and other applicable articles, by the Perry Fire Protection Utility for providing fire protection services. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners of particular properties for services of facilities related to fire protection, including, but not limited to, charges for fire inspections for which a corresponding fee may be collected for the service rendered. 
Manufactured home park means a common development (with a single property owner or entity) of more than one factory-built or pre-fabricated housing structure that has been partially or entirely assembled at another location and moved into the development. 
Non-single-family residential (NSFR) customer shall mean a utility customer whose property meets the definition of NSFR whether such customer is the owner of the parcel or a tenant of the owner. 
Non-single-family residential (NSFR) property shall mean a developed parcel of land that consists of various nonresidential land uses including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Multifamily, commercial (including mixed commercial and residential), office/institutional, public, transportation, industrial, manufacturing and storage buildings and facilities; 
(2)  Any other form of use not specifically defined as single-family residential property (SFR). 
Perry Fire Utility Service Area means the entire land area within the defined Perry municipal limits. 
Residential equivalent unit (REU) means the fire protection fee charge billing increment related to single-family residential property. 
Single-family residential (SFR) customer means a utility customer of the city residing in a dwelling unit whether such customer is the owner of the dwelling unit, a tenant of the owner of the dwelling unit, or a resident of the dwelling unit. 
Single-family residential property (or SFR) means developed property containing one residential structure with no more than two (2) dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. Improved property may be classified as SFR even if supplemental accessory structures are present such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers' quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence. SFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes; manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes; residential condominium developments with more than two (2) units; or vacant/undeveloped property. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition. 
The fire protection program level of service assessment and financing analysis documents entitled: Perry Fire Department Fire Protection User Fee Charge Report, (latest version); the Insurance Services Office (ISO) Manual, and other applicable supporting, project-related documents are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Secs. 5A-2—5A-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PROTECTION UTILITY ENTERPRISE FUND 

Sec. 5A-11. - Purpose. 
This article establishes the Perry Fire Protection Utility and sets up the fire protection utility enterprise fund. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-12. - Findings of fact. 
The mayor and the city council of the City of Perry make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The City of Perry is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI thereof, to create special service districts for the provision of the services within such districts, and to levy and collect within such districts fees and assessments to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. 
(2)  The City of Perry, Georgia, is authorized by its Charter to fix and establish fire protection service area limits and to extend, enlarge or restrict same from time to time to ensure effective delivery of such services. 
(3)  In promulgating the provisions contained in this article, Perry is acting pursuant to its authority as granted by the Georgia Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia and its City Charter, to provide fire protection and emergency management services to all properties within the city's service area. Fire protection and emergency management services are needed and provide benefits to all properties within the city's service area. For the purposes of this article, fire protection services shall be inclusive of emergency management services. 
(4)  The cost of managing, operating and maintaining the Perry Fire Department, and the funding necessary for equipment, personnel and facilities thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in reasonable relationship to the services received by the public from the city's fire department and the fire protection program. 
(5)  The operational and financing analysis prepared by the city properly assesses and defines the city's fire protection program service delivery needs, goals, priorities as well as the city fire department's funding strategy for delivery of those services. 
(6)  Given the city's fire protection program service delivery needs, goals, priorities and the funding strategy identified in the aforementioned financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of fire protection services, systems and facilities within the city in concert with other resource management programs. 
(7)  Fire protection services are applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, one service area encompassing all lands within the designated Perry Fire Protection Utility Service Area is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(8)  It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of fire protection among the owners and/or occupants of all properties in proportion to the demands the properties impose on the city's fire department which result in services being rendered to such properties and the owners and/or occupants thereof. The fair and equitable apportionment of costs via the service fee charge should be based on a reasonable correlation to the fire protection services made available and provided to all properties. 
(9)  The fire protection needs of the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of fire protection services renders and/or results in both a service and a benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents to the city. 
(10)  A fire protection program provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering fire protection services throughout the city, and the most equitable means to implement the defined level of service for fire protection within the city are through fire protection service fee charges and other funding mechanisms. 
(11)  A schedule of fire protection service fee charges based on average heated square footage. The fire protection fees for customers are based on a residential equivalent unit (REU) basis as this methodology is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of fire protection services throughout the city. 
(12)  Fire protection service fee charges may be supplemented by other types of fees and charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, general fund revenues, special assessments, use of proceeds from special purpose location option sales taxes (SPLOST) and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the mayor or city council. 
(13)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site fire protection/suppression facilities or systems which reduce, or otherwise mitigate, the response burden imposed on the fire department, and the fire protection utility's cost of providing fire protection services, should be taken into account with regard [to] a potential reduction to the service fee charge on that property in the form of a service fee charge reduction or a credit, and such credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such facilities in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the fire protection utility. Credits for privately owned and maintained fire protection/suppression facilities, systems and/or programs shall be generally proportional to the effect that such facilities, systems and programs have on reduction and/or mitigation of the fire risk and incident response burden associated with the property and the reduction in cost associated with provision of fire protection services related to that property. 
(14)  It is imperative that the revenue from all service fee charges for fire protection services, systems, or facilities be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such service fee charge revenues shall therefore be deposited into the city fire protection utility enterprise fund and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for fire protection capital and operations costs, or for other indebtedness for fire protection services. 
(15)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of Perry hereby concludes a fire protection utility, funded by a dedicated fire protection utility enterprise fund, is warranted as the best available means of addressing the community's fire protection service delivery needs. By separate ordinance, the city will enact a service charge rate structure to establish service fees for the provision of fire protection services to all properties within the defined Perry Fire Protection Utility Service Area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-13. - Fire protection utility enterprise fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a fire protection utility to be known as the Perry Fire Protection Utility which shall be responsible for fire protection services throughout the Perry Fire Utility Service Area, and which shall provide for the management and operations associated with the city's fire protection facilities and services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a fire protection utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting the designated funding applicable for the purposes and responsibilities of the Perry Fire Department and Fire Protection Utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the Perry Fire Protection Utility. 
(c)  All revenues and receipts of the fire protection utility shall be placed in the fire protection utility enterprise fund in trust, to be extended solely for the provision of fire protection services; provided, however, that the city may allocate other revenues and/or resources not accounted for in the fire protection utility enterprise fund to fund fire protection services as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(d)  The city shall place responsibility with the city manager, or his designee, for the management and operation of the fire protection utility and fire protection program services performed by Perry, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties upon which fire protection facilities are located, as well as certain equipment used for the provision of fire protection services. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-14. - Fire protection utility service area. 
There shall be one fire protection utility service area for the city which shall encompass the defined municipal limits of the Perry Fire Protection Utility Service Area. In that all properties within such service area shall receive and benefit from city fire protection services, a fire protection service fee charge shall be generated and billed to each property. A copy of the Perry Fire Protection Utility Service Area shall be maintained on file at city hall for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-15. - Scope of responsibility for fire protection services. 
It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the municipal boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-16. - Fire protection service fees. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city that service fees for fire protection services be provided by the fire protection utility in the designated service area shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the cost of the fire department to provide the defined fire protection level of service required to protect all persons, property and structures within the city. Fire protection fee charge rates shall be adopted via a rate ordinance and shall be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant service fees shall bear a reasonable connection, or rational nexus, to the cost of providing fire protection services. A service fee shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for fire safety prevention and protection within the incorporated areas of the city as defined herein. 
(b)  To the extent practicable, credits against fire protection service fees shall be provided for on-site fire protection/suppression facilities, systems and/or programs that are properly constructed, operated, and maintained and perform to the city's standards and which mitigate the fire risk and/or reduce the cost burden on the fire department related to the provision of fire protection services. All public and private property owners/customers are eligible to secure credits provided they meet applicable criteria established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Secs. 5A-17—5A-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PROTECTION FEE RATE STRUCTURE AND BILLING RATE 

Sec. 5A-31. - Purpose. 
This article shall service the purpose of establishment and set up of the fire protection fee rate structure and billing rate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-32. - Fire protection utility customer classes. 
(a)  The fire protection utility shall establish specified customer classes within the defined Perry Fire Protection Utility Service Area to reflect differences in building structure and contents; needed fire flow; fire protection and emergency management services provided by the PFD to the fire protection utility customers; and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the PFD operations and equipment and fire protection and emergency management services. For the purposes of this article, fire protection services shall be inclusive of emergency management services. 
(b)  The fire protection utility classes will encompass all developed and undeveloped properties within the city and are defined as follows: 
(1)  The single-family residential (SFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as SFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(2)  The non-single-family residential (NSFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as NSFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(c)  Documentation pertaining to the fire protection utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-33. - Fire protection fee charge rates. 
(a)  The fire protection utility shall impose a fire protection fee on all properties within the service area in a fair and equitable manner. All state, federal, and county properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties. The fire protection utility shall apportion the cost of delivering fire protection services to all properties based on the demand the property places on the PFD and the fire protection services provided. 
(b)  Fire protection fee charge rates shall be set and may be modified from time to time by the governing body of the city. A schedule of said rates shall be on file in the office of the city clerk of Perry. In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of the city to establish rates that are fair, equitable and reasonable, and together with other funding sources available to the Perry Fire Protection Utility for services, systems, and/or facilities related to fire protection services are sufficient to support the cost of the PFD, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, nonoperating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  The basis for calculation of the fire protection fee charge to all properties within the city is established in this article. The city shall assign or determine the customer class, heated square footage, and other pertinent factors as may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the costs to deliver fire protection services and to calculate the fire protection fee charges for all properties in the city. 
(d)  Fire protection fee charges shall be based upon the total number of REUs associated with a property located in the city. Each REU shall correspond to one thousand seven hundred forty-three (1,743) square feet of heated space. 
(e)  Calculation of charges. The periodic fire protection fee charges imposed on all properties shall be as adopted by the council in the City of Perry Fee Schedule. 
The number of REUs that will be utilized to calculate the user fee charge shall be in general accordance with the following: 
(1)  SFR customer class: Each SFR customer account shall be charged 1.0 REU per month except as noted herein. 
(2)  NSFR customer class: Each NSFR customer shall be charged 1.0 REU for each one thousand seven hundred forty-three (1,743) square feet of heated space to establish the total number of REUs for billing. Fractional REUs will be rounded to the nearest 0.1 REU. 
(f)  Fire protection user fee charges shall be billed on the customer's monthly public utility bill (except as stipulated below) starting with the first billing cycle in July, 2014 as provided in this article and the fire protection utility enterprise fund ordinance. 
(1)  Customers that do not receive a monthly public utility bill from the city shall be billed for fire protection services via another method and frequency established by the city. 
(2)  The property owner will be charged for the total square footage for residential customer accounts that are part of a larger common development such as multifamily complexes or manufactured home parks. 
(3)  The city may bill the property owner's tenant for the fire protection fee charge in situations where the tenant has opened an account with the city for public utility services (i.e., water, sewer, and/or sanitation) as a courtesy to the property owner. The property owner shall remain ultimately liable for payment of the fire protection fee charge imposed on the property. The city shall be authorized to bill the landlord or property owner for fire protection services where accurate and equitable apportionment of the fire protection fee charges to multiple accounts on a site is not practical as determined by the city, and/or facilitate efficient billing and collection of fire protection fee charges. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-34. - Fire protection fee charge exemptions. 
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no developed public or private property located in the fire protection utility service area shall be exempt from the fire protection fee charge. The fire protection fee charge is not a tax and no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in the fire protection fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion, disability, or other condition unrelated to the fire protection utility's cost of providing fire protection services and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-35. - Fire protection fee charge credits. 
(a)  The fire chief shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the Fire Protection Fee Credit Manual (credit manual), which is incorporated into this article by reference and made a part thereof. Copies of the credit manual will be maintained by and made available from the fire chief. 
(1)  Customers may apply for credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(2)  A fire protection fee credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the fire protection fee, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. 
(3)  Any credit allowed against the fire protection fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the customer. The fire chief may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual of this article. 
(4)  In order to obtain a credit, the customer must make application to the city on forms provided by the fire chief for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format described in the credit manual. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to review and approval of a fire protection fee credit application by the city. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the fire chief, he/she shall have thirty (30) days from the date the complete application is received to approve the credit in whole, approve the credit in part, or deny the credit. The fire chiefs decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, or delivered in another manner that adequately communicates the city's decision. Credits applied for by the customer and approved in whole or in part, shall apply to all fire protection fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-36. - Fire protection fee charge billing, delinquencies, collections, adjustments. 
The property owner or utility customer account holder, as identified from city public utility billing database information, tax digest and other public records of Houston County, shall be obligated to pay the applicable fire protection fee charge. 
(1)  Billing. 
a.  Fire protection fees shall begin to accrue July, 2014, and shall be billed prospectively. A bill for fire protection fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the fire protection utility customer of the following items (as a minimum): the fire protection fee charge amount (less any approved credits), the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. 
b.  Unless otherwise billed directly to the property owner, the fire protection fee charge will be billed and collected on a common statement and collected along with other city utility services from the person in whose name such services have been placed on account with the city. If and when the account is closed or becomes delinquent, the bills for unpaid previous service as well as for current and future service shall be sent to the property owner. 
c.  Frequency of the billing of fire protection fee charges shall be specified by the city. 
d.  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each property subject to fire protection fee charges shall be ultimately obligated to pay fire protection fee charges and any interest at the rate of eighteen (18) percent per annum on delinquent fire protection fee charge payments. 
e.  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of property, the fire protection utility may back bill for a period of up to three (3) years, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any delinquency charges during the back-billed period. 
(2)  Delinquencies and collections. 
a.  Unpaid fire protection fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner or the property. 
b.  A late charge shall be assessed against the customer for the unpaid balance of any fire protection fee charge that becomes delinquent in accordance with applicable state law and city ordinance provisions. In addition, the city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the property owner and/or the customer. 
(3)  Adjustments. 
a.  The fire chief shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the fire protection fee charge. 
1.  If a customer believes his fire protection fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the fire protection fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the fire chief and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an adjustment request by the city. 
2.  Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide accurate information to the fire chief, including, but not limited to, inspection reports from a certified fire protection professional or building construction plans certified by a registered architect or a professional engineer. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city information. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the fire chief, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the customer's adjustment request. 
3.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the fire chief, the fire chief shall within thirty (30) calendar days render a written decision. 
4.  In considering an adjustment request, the fire chief shall consider whether the calculation of the fire protection fee charge for the property is correct. 
5.  The fire chief's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
6.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next fire protection fee charge bill. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5A-37. - Appeals and hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal to the city manager may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the fire chief. The appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days of the decision of the fire chief by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the fire chief shall forthwith transmit to the city manager all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearings. The city manager shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The city manager shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the fire chief after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the fire chief is reversed in whole or in part resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner or customer, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may petition the Superior Court of Houston County for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 6-3-14) 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IMPOSITION OF CURFEW DURING PERIODS OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 

Sec. 6-1. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the city. 
(b)  All of the territory of the incorporated city limits shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Curfew. A curfew is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
(b)  Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, exempt individuals include elected city officials and those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military service, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to article IV of this chapter, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
(c)  State of emergency. As defined by Official Code of Georgia Annotated, 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his or her judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-3. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the incorporated city limits of Perry during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-4. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-5. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not effect the remainder of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Secs. 6-6—6-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND OTHER FORMALITIES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 6-11. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two (2) members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four (4) weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where: (a) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; (b) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (c) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the city building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-12. - Definitions. 
(a)  Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. Fees shall not include those fees collected by the city on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the city pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
(b)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his or her judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)  Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six (6) months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of The city. 
(d)  Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-13. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void by any competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Secs. 6-14—6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITION OF OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 6-21. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the city has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(b)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his or her judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery" period is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six (6) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-9, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-23. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-24. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not affect the remainder of the article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Secs. 6-25—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENT FOR REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 6-31. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business, in whole or in part, within the incorporated areas of the city, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the city and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-32. - Definitions. 
(a)  Building contractor. As used in this article the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair or renovation; clearing real property of trees, vegetation or debris; or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
(b)  Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be doing business subject to the requirements of this article if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the incorporated areas of the city, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the incorporated areas of the city expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
(c)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5) as a condition declared by the governor when, in his or her judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened of caused thereby. 
(d)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six (6) months after the governor has terminated the emergency declaration. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-33. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the incorporated areas of the city during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the city or such other person designated by the governing authority at the city hall or such other place or places designated by the city. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the city governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-34. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees during the state of emergency or subsequent recovery period are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-35. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the city as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days. Each day a building contractor does business in the incorporated areas of the city without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-36. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the city or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-37. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-38. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The city governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other city, county, state or federal law. If, after issuance of a certification, the city desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-39. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not affect the remainder to the article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-21-02) 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, § 5.10 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-1. - Qualifications of electors; registration of electors for municipal elections. 
Any person who is a resident of the city who is registered with the board of registrars of the county shall be eligible to vote in municipal elections. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1) 
State Law reference— Registration of voters generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq. 
Sec. 9-2. - Conduct of elections by Houston County. 
(a)  All municipal elections shall be conducted by Houston County. 
(b)  The designee of the board of commissioners of Houston County shall perform all duties as superintendent of any municipal election. 
(c)  The city shall enter into a contract with Houston County for the conduct of each municipal election. The city will pay the county all costs incurred in conducting the election. Each contract shall be approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 97-5, § 1, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 9-3. - Type of voting equipment. 
The type of voting equipment used for voting at each polling location shall be direct recording electronic (DRE) units. 
(Ord. No. 2003-22, § 1, 4-15-03) 
Sec. 9-4. - Counting of absentee ballots. 
Absentee ballots will be counted using optical scan (AccuVote-OS). 
(Ord. No. 2003-22, § 2, 4-15-03) 
Chapter 9A - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 9A-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, 5-15-12) 
Sec. 9A-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the City of Perry. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than thirty (30) days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city governing authority may, by resolution and in accordance with the City Charter, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the Governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The mayor or the Director of the Houston County Emergency Management Agency and/or his/her designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the mayor or the director (see subsection 9A-2(a)(4)a.1.) or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The mayor and or director (see subsection 9A-2(a)(4)a.1.) is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city governing authority. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 9A-5 (overcharging prohibited), section 9A-6 (registration of building and repair service and section 9A-7 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city governing authority is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 9A-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The mayor and or director (see subsection 9A-2(a)(4)a.1.) shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters. 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide welfare benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the City of Perry Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor of the City of Perry, there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Perry, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1) That the local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2) That the following sections of the City of Perry, Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 9A-5, Overcharging; Section 9A-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section 9A-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3) That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 9A-2(a)(4)c, d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE]. 
[Signed] 
Mayor, City of Perry 
(c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, 5-15-12) 
Sec. 9A-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the mayor and or director (see subsection 9A-2(a)(4)a. 1.) or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any Code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the mayor and/or director (see subsection 9A-2(a)(4)a. 1.) or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the mayor and or director (see subsection 9A-2(a)(4)a.1.) is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, Code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, 5-15-12) 
Sec. 9A-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city governing authority shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two (2) members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four (4) weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city governing authority may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, 5-15-12) 
Sec. 9A-5. - Overcharging prohibited. 
To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least twenty-five (25) percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least twenty-five (25) percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a twenty-five-percent-or-greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed three (3) months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city governing authority. 
(2)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the governing authority of the city, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, 5-15-12) 
Sec. 9A-6. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security Number or Federal Employer Identification Number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past twelve (12) months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city governing authority, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, 5-15-12) 
Sec. 9A-7. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, and the chief of police as provided through the EOC. (see subsection 9A-2(a)(4)a.1.). 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, 5-15-12) 
Chapter 10 - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipality has authority to grant franchises or make contract with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); Limitation on municipality's authority to withhold or condition utility franchises, O.C.G.A. § 46-3-14(b). 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED IN THIS CHAPTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-18, adopted Sept. 5, 2000, deleted Art. I in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. I pertained to cable and other telecommunications services, and derived from Ord. No. 98-05, adopted Nov. 3, 1998. Similar provisions are now codified as Arts. II and III of this chapter. 

Sec. 10-1. - General. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes an individual or association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. The word "shall" is mandatory, not merely directive. The word "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-2. - Specific definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended: 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; 
(2)  Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; 
(3)  Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and 
(4)  Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant. 
Provided that, "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
City means the City of Perry. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the telecommunications system in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five (5) percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services or cable services through a cable system or open video system. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to: 
(1)  Furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; 
(2)  Provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; 
(3)  Transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city; or 
(4)  Furnish, supply and distribute cable services to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
Open video system means "open video system" as defined by section 76.1500(a) of Part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Ordinance means this ordinance [Ord. No. 2000-18] and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 10-10 of this chapter. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, 9-5-2000) 
Secs. 10-3—10-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES, FRANCHISES AND LICENSES 

Sec. 10-10. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or private telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this article to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: 
(1)  May be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services; or 
(2)  Shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed five hundred (500) linear feet; or 
(3)  Shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. 
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this section, then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses to persons providing telecommunications services by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-11. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity; 
d.  For purposes of determining whether an applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law, a detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for any conclusions by such lending institution or funding source regarding the applicant's financial ability to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city; and 
e.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system in compliance with the policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiaries, and the areas served by such systems. 
(c)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a detailed description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
(2)  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; and 
(3)  For purposes of assisting the city in determining whether the telecommunications system will be constructed in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets, a detailed statement setting forth the provisions in any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to such person, firm, or corporation constructing, or assisting the applicant with the construction of, the telecommunications system in the streets; and 
(d)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-12. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. 
No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(a)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(b)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Perry, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Perry. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city may reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-13. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-14. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-15. - Evaluation criteria. 
An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors and such terms, conditions and other factors as the city council deems appropriate and not prohibited by applicable law: 
(a)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any in-kind facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(b)  The financial and technical ability of the applicant to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or federal communications commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(c)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(d)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, the public health, safety and welfare, and the city's management of streets; and 
(e)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services and in accordance with applicable law, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-16. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this article and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 10-15 of this article. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-17. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five (5) years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five (5) years; 
(2)  The franchise area under the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the grantee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise or revocable license; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise or revocable license; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-18. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than five hundred (500) linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-19. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-20. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-21. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems or to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of this article, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-22. - Applicability of other ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-23. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon its passage [September 5, 2000]. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 9-5-2000) 
Secs. 10-24—10-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISING. 

Sec. 10-30. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any cable services or operate a cable system or open video system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of cable services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Cable Act, as amended, governing cable television system and open video system franchises and the renewals of cable television system franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-31. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or Social Security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems and open video systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable system(s) and open video system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(c)  Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Perry. In the event that the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-32. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-33. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-34. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(a)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and cable services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(b)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(c)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(d)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services to be provided, including the type of cable services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(e)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(f)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-35. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider any application(s), the city council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-36. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the grantee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-37. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-38. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-39. - Retroactivity. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services existing on the effective date of this article, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-40. - Applicability of other ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 10-41. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon its passage [September 5, 2000]. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, 9-5-2000) 
Secs. 10-42—10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NATURAL GAS SERVICES FRANCHISING 

Sec. 10-50. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets, alleyways or any other public rights-of-way to provide natural gas within the City of Perry corporate limits without a franchise granted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council or by written agreement with the city and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of natural gas. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law governing the distribution and provision of natural gas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-51. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or Social Security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed natural gas system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed natural gas system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of customers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other natural gas franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised natural gas system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the natural gas services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications; 
d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any customer of the natural gas services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing, between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility; and 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(c)  Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees . The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee . The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Perry. In the event that the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-52. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-53. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-54. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and natural gas services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the natural gas services to be provided, including the type of natural gas services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-55. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider any application(s), the city council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-56. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the natural gas services which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the grantee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-57. - Natural gas franchise fee. 
The franchise fee for any franchise granted under this article IV shall be five (5) percent of the retrial sales. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-58. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-59. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-60. - Applicability of other ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 10-61. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon its passage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Chapter 11 - ETHICS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-32, adopted Dec. 7, 2010, repealed ch. 11 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 11 as set out herein. The former ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§ 11-1—11-12, and derived from Ord. No. 2001-10, adopted April 17, 2001. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for governing service generally, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This chapter shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-3. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest of a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five (5) percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous twelve (12) months either equal or exceed: (a) five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten (10) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-4. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any propose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Perry nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of Perry on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Perry. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-5. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the above or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-6. - Board of ethics. 
The Municipal Court of the City of Perry shall act as the board of ethics and shall hear and render decisions on all properly verified complaints filed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-7. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the clerk of the Municipal Court of the City of Perry. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court clerk shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven (7) calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The judge of the municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to slate facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the judge shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the municipal court is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the judge of the municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the judge shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The municipal court is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The municipal court is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the municipal court shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results have been certified. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-8. - Service of complaint. 
The city clerk or the clerk of the municipal court shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven (7) calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) calendar days after filing of the complaint. The judge of the municipal court shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations he or she establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the municipal court shall be rendered to the mayor and council within seven (7) calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the municipal court, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven (7) calendar days before the first healing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of [the] time deadlines in this section of the chapter shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way effect the power or jurisdiction of the municipal court or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-9. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the municipal court may obtain judicial review of such decisions as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Houston County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the municipal court. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 11-10. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, 12-7-10) 
Chapter 13 - IMPACT FEES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1—13-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 13-31. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Perry Development Impact Fee Ordinance". 
(b)  The city has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to the "Home Rule" provisions of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, delineated in the Official Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 71. 
(c)  This article shall apply to all land and property developed within the incorporated areas of the City of Perry effective with the dates specified at the ratification of this article by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-32. - Intents and purposes. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the city's comprehensive land use plan, adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 70, and pursuant to the standards and procedures established by state agencies where applicable. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements necessary to provide facilities and infrastructure needed to serve an increased population from new developments within the city and the surrounding areas. 
It is specifically acknowledged that this article has approached the problem of determining such proportionate share in a conservative and reasonable manner, in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 71. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-33. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of providing necessary facilities and infrastructure to insure the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for", "maintained for", or "occupied for". 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(6)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and", "or", or "either … or", the conjunction shall interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly but not in combination. 
c.  "Either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(7)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(8)  Any road, street, water or wastewater facility, easement or right-of-way used to define development impact fee district boundaries may be considered to be within any district it bounds for the purposes of the assessment and utilization of these fees. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-34. - Definitions. 
Building permit means the document issued by the city authorizing the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure, or authorizing the installation of a mobile home or recreational vehicle. For the purposes of this article, a building permit also means a change of use permit. 
Capital improvement means any property, facility, or structure constructed, installed or purchased or any improvement, expansion or enhancement made to an existing property, facility or structure with a useful life of ten (10) years or more. 
Capital improvement element means that portion of the city's comprehensive land use plan which sets out projected needs for system improvements during a planning horizon established that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
City means Perry, Georgia, but may also be interchangeable with the city council as the context requires. 
Comprehensive plan means the Comprehensive Land Use Plan for the City of Perry, Georgia. 
Developer means any individual, corporation, partnership, association or any other similar entity who engages in development activity. 
Development activity means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, any change in the use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
Development impact fee district means a geographic area identified by the city in which a defined city-provided service is provided. 
Director means the city director of community development and/or the official(s) designated to administer the various provisions of this article. 
Economic development means any development activity determined by the City of Perry as extraordinary economic development which is hereby construed as revitalization effort or as a positive catalyst in shaping Perry's economic stability. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract, resolution or otherwise commit to use by appropriation by an official act of the city. 
Facilities and/or infrastructure means any land, buildings, fixtures, furnishings and any other related items used in providing services by the City of Perry to the general citizenry. 
Feepayor means that person who pays a development impact fee or his/her successor in interest with the right of entitlement to any refund of a previously paid development impact fee which is required by this article and which has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an expressed transfer or assignment of the right of entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fee right of entitlement shall be not be deemed to "run with the land." 
Individual fee calculation study means an engineering and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor to allow determination of the development impact fee other than by use of the fee schedule established by the city. 
Individual fee determination means the development impact fee determined by the director on the basis of an individual fee calculation study. 
Level of service means a measure or estimate of facilities and/or infrastructure provided to the general citizenry based on customary business practices by the city, consistent with the demands related to all land uses and consistent with state and federal regulations and prudent engineering and operating practices. 
Methodology report means a report prepared which provides an analysis and methodology for the determination of the development impact fee and the impact of development activity on the needs and cost of additional facilities and/or infrastructure. 
Present value means the discounted cash flow of past, present or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money; also may be stated as "current value." 
Project or development project means a particular development on an identified parcel of land. 
Project improvement means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project and are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control the determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the demands and needs of a project. 
Replacement value means the cost of replacing facilities and/or infrastructure at current market prices. 
System improvement means facilities and/or infrastructure, provided by the city that are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to a project improvement. 
System improvement cost means cost incurred to provide additional facilities and/or infrastructure needed to serve developments or new construction within the service area of the city, including, but not limited to, the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition cost, court cost, attorney and expert witness fees, and expenses incurred for qualified staff, engineer planner, architect or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element, and administrative cost equal to three (3) percent of the total amount of such costs. 
System improvement cost shall also include interest charges and other finance costs related to the issuance of bonds, notes or other financial obligations incurred by the city to finance capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-35. - Imposition of development impact fee. 
(a)  Any person who after July 1, 2009, engages in development activity shall pay a development impact fee in the manner set forth in this article. 
(b)  No building permit for any development activity thereby required to pay a development impact fee pursuant to this article shall be issued by the city unless and until the required development impact fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-36. - Computation of development impact fee. 
(a)  (1)  At the option of the developer, the amount of the development impact fee may be as per the provisions of subsection (2) below or may be determined from the fee schedule established by the city as follows: 

 
(2)  If a building permit is requested for a building with mixed uses, the fee shall be determined according to the fee schedule established by the city by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the fee schedule. If the type of development activity for which a building permit is applied for is not specified on the fee schedule, the director shall use the fee applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land use on the fee schedule. The director shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the reports and studies done by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and/or the state, and/or the city department of public works, and/or professional organizations such as the American Society of Civil Engineers. 
In the case of change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use which requires the issuance of a building permit, the development impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. The director shall be guided in this determination by the above-named sources. 
(b)  If a developer elects not to have the development impact fee determined according to subsection (a), above, then the developer may apply for an individual fee determination. A developer applying for an individual fee determination shall prepare and submit to the director an individual fee calculation study for the development activity for which a building permit is sought. The individual fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats for the study established by the director, or, subject to the prior approval of the director, such other professionally accepted methodology that identifies a project's proportionate share. The developer shall attend a pre-application meeting with the director and no agreement or understanding in regard to data, assumptions or methodology shall be binding upon the city unless provided to the developer in writing. The service demand documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the individual fee calculation was made, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Documentation demonstrating the impact of the proposed development activity on the following city-provided services: 
a.  Public safety: 
1.  Fire. 
b.  Parks. 
(2)  Engineering or any other suitable report(s), study or documentation depicting service demands or city-provided services appropriate for the proposed development activity. 
(3)  Cost documentation studies including documentation of the cost per unit of impact for construction and documentation credits attributable to the development activity which can be expected to be available to replace the portion of the service volume/demand generated by the development activity. 
This documentation shall be prepared and presented by qualified professionals in their respective fields and shall follow best professional practices and methodologies. The following formula, as explained in the methodology report, shall be used by the director to determine the development impact fee per unit of development based on the type of land use: 
[Unit Cost x Demand] - Credit = Proportionate Share 
Whereby: 
Unit cost = The average cost per unit of capacity to provide infrastructure or facilities within the service district. 
Demand = The average volume/capacity or demand expected to be utilized by a given land use on an annual basis. 
Credit = The average present value of future payments by a land use towards the retirement of debt incurred to construct facilities and infrastructure. 
The director shall provide the developer with a written individual fee determination within thirty (30) days after presentation of the individual fee calculation study. 
(c)  (1)  Upon application to the director, any person engaging in development activity requiring payment of a development impact fee may apply for and shall receive from the director a certification of the application of the development impact fee schedule to a particular development activity proposal or a certification of an individual fee determination for a particular development proposal. 
(2)  Applications for certification shall include the following information items: 
a.  A full and complete description of the project; 
b.  A full and complete description of the proposed land use and the particular proposed development activity; 
c.  A statement as to whether the applicant seeks a certification of the development impact fee schedule as applied to that particular development proposal or a certification of an individual fee determination; and 
d.  If the applicant seeks a certification of an individual fee determination, an individual fee calculation study complying with the requirements of subsection (b) above. 
(3)  The director shall provide an applicant with a written certification of the application of the development impact fee schedule to a particular proposed development activity within five (5) days after the director's receipt of a completed application. The written certification of the director shall establish the development impact fee for a particular proposed development activity for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of certification. The director shall provide the applicant with a written certification of an individual fee determination within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed application. The individual fee determination certified by the director shall establish the development impact fee for the one hundred eighty-day period immediately following the date of such certification. Notwithstanding the issuance of any such certification, any changes in or additions to the proposed development activity different from the particular proposed development activity identified in the original application shall be subject to increased or additional development impact fees to the extent that such changes or additions require capital improvements or facilities expansions. The additional development impact fees shall be based upon the most current development impact fee schedule in effect on the date of the issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, prior to engaging in development activity generating demand and impacting city-provided services, and in addition to any other applicable requirements, the developer shall certify in writing to the director: 
(1)  A full and complete description of the project; 
(2)  A full and complete description of the proposed land use or uses; and 
(3)  A statement of the gross square footage applicable to each category of land use. 
Prior to the completion of the project, and as a condition of final inspection, the developer shall recertify in writing to the director the actual land use or uses of the project, and shall present an architect's certificate of the actual gross square footage attributable to each use. In the event that the actual use or uses and/or the actual gross square footage applicable to the actual use or uses differs from that originally certified, and in the event that the development impact fee was previously paid, the developer shall be required to pay the amount of the excess as a condition of final inspection. The amount of the excess shall be based upon the most current development impact fee schedule in effect on the date of final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 2, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 13-37. - Payment of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any person required to pay a development impact fee pursuant to this article shall pay such fees to the director prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  All funds collected pursuant to this article shall be identified by the development impact fee district from which it was collected and promptly transferred for deposit into the appropriate development impact fee trust fund to be held in separate accounts as provided in section 13-43. Funds shall be used solely for the purposes specified in this article. 
(c)  In lieu of all or part of the development impact fee, the city may accept an offer to provide the items and/or services specified in subsection 13-09(2), below. Any such offer must comply with the requirements of section 13-39. The portion of the fee represented by the facility and/or infrastructure improvements shall be deemed paid when the construction is completed and accepted by the city for maintenance or when the person claiming such credit posts security for the cost of construction as provided in subsection 13-39(2)e., below. That portion of the fee represented by land dedication shall be deemed paid when the title to such land has been accepted by the city. 
Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the city may issue a building permit prior to accepting title to land if the refusal to issue the permit will result in an exceptional hardship to the developer and the city is otherwise reasonably assured that title will be conveyed and accepted within a reasonable time thereafter. For the purposes of this subsection, an exceptional hardship shall not include a hardship solely created by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-38. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Funds collected as development impact fees shall be used for system improvements. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance or for any purpose not in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Development impact fees shall be used exclusively for system improvements in the development impact fee district in which the project for which the fees were paid is located. 
(c)  Funds shall be construed as being expended in the order in which they were collected. 
(d)  At the end of each fiscal period the director will submit to the mayor and city council an annual report describing the amount of development impact fees collected, encumbered, and expended during the preceding year by category of development impact fee districts. Monies, including any accrued interest, not encumbered in any fiscal period, shall be retained in the same development impact fee trust fund(s) until the next fiscal period except as provided in section 13-41. 
(e)  The city shall be entitled to retain up to three (3) percent of all development impact fees collected as an administrative fee to offset the cost of administering this article. 
(f)  Development impact fees may be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance the construction or expansion facilities and/or infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-39. - Credits. 
Credits against development impact fees shall be given as follows: 
(1)  No credit shall be given for project improvements. 
(2)  Credit shall be given for the present value of the construction of improvements or contribution or dedication of land or money by a developer subsequent to July 1, 2009, required or accepted by the city from the developer or his predecessor in title for system improvements. 
a.  A person claiming credits shall submit to the director a project description in sufficient detail to allow the mayor and council to prepare an engineering and construction cost estimate. A person proposing credit for improvements shall present cost estimates and property appraisals prepared by qualified professionals to be used by the mayor and council in determining the amount of the credit. 
All construction must be carried out in accordance with applicable city or state development and design standards. A person proposing credits for land dedication shall present the mayor and council with property appraisals prepared by qualified professionals and a certified copy of the most recent assessment of the property for tax purposes to be used by the mayor and council in determining the amount of credit. However, the mayor and council retain the right to determine the amount to be credited by preparing engineering and construction cost estimates and/or property appraisals for those improvements and/or property dedications. 
b.  Credits must be claimed at the time of the application for a building permit. Any credit not so claimed shall be deemed invalid. 
c.  In the event a developer contracts with the city to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements so that the amount of the credit created by such construction, funding, or contribution is in excess of the development impact fee which would have been otherwise due and owing, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction, funding, or contribution from development impact fees paid by the development projects located in the development impact fee district which has benefited by such improvements. 
d.  In the event a building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of any development impact fees for the same parcel of land paid upon issuance of such building permit. A building permit shall be deemed abandoned if no construction has commenced prior to the expiration of the building permit. 
e.  Security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow agreement shall be posted with the city, made payable to the city in the amount approved by the mayor and council equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the full cost of the construction of such facility and/or infrastructure improvements. If facility and/or infrastructure improvements or construction project will not be constructed within one (1) year of the acceptance of the offer by the city, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten (10) percent compounded, for each year of the life of the security. The security shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney's office prior to the acceptance of the security by the city. 
(3)  Credits are transferable from one developer to another and from one project to another, provided that such credits may not be transferred to a project in a different development impact fee district. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-40. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempted from payment of development impact fees: 
(1)  Alteration or expansion of an existing building or use of land where no additional living units are created, where the use is not changed, and whereby no additional demands for services will be created over and above those demands produced by the existing use. 
(2)  The construction of accessory and/or temporary buildings or structures which will not produce additional service demands over and above those produced by the principal building or the current use of the land. 
(3)  The replacement of a building, mobile home or structure that was in place on July 1, 2009, or the replacement of a building, mobile home or structure that was constructed subsequent thereto and for which appropriate development impact fees had been paid or otherwise provided for, with a new building, mobile home or structure of the same use, provided that no additional service demands will be produced over and above those produced by the original use of the land. 
(b)  A person claiming exemption(s) pursuant to subsections (a)(1), (2), or (3), above, shall submit to the director information and documentation sufficient to permit the director to determine whether such exemption claimed is proper, and, if so, the extent of such exemption. 
(c)  All or part of a particular project determined by the mayor and council as constituting economic development, as defined herein. 
(d)  Exemptions must be applied for at the time of the application for a building permit. Any exemptions not so applied for shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-41. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon application to the director by the feepayor, the city shall refund ninety-seven (97) percent of the development impact fee paid if service capacity is available and the building permit is rescinded, or in the event development construction is otherwise denied. The city shall retain three (3) percent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. 
(b)  (1)  Upon application to the director by the feepayor, the city shall refund ninety-seven (97) percent of the development impact fee paid and not expended or encumbered if the city, if after collecting the fee when service is not available, has failed to encumber the fee or commence construction within six (6) years from the date the development impact fee was paid. The city shall retain three (3) percent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. In determining whether development impact fees have been expended or encumbered, all fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(2)  When the right to a refund exists due to the city's failure to encumber development impact fees, the city shall provide written notice of entitlement of a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval, or to a feepayor's successor in interest who has given the city notice of the transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to a refund and who has provided the city with a mailing address. The city shall publish notice within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the six-year period from the development impact fee payment date. Such published notice shall contain the heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund". 
(c)  A refund application shall be made to the director within one (1) year from the date such refund becomes payable under subsections (a) and (b) above, or within one (1) year from the date of the publication of the notice of entitlement a refund under subsection (b) above, whichever is later. Any refund not applied for within such time period shall be deemed waived. 
(d)  A refund application shall include information and documentation sufficient to permit the director to determine whether the refund claimed is proper and, if so, the amount of such refund. A refund shall include a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess development impact fee paid. 
(e)  All refunds shall be paid within sixty (60) days after the director determines that such refund is due. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-42. - Development impact fee district established. 
As of July 1, 2009 there is hereby established an initial development impact fee district which shall be contemporaneous with the present and future incorporated limits or service area of the City of Perry, excluding any parcels in the City of Perry as of January 1, 2000, more particularly shown on Exhibit A hereby made part of the ordinance from which this section derives, and is specifically delineated on the City of Perry Development Impact Fee Map, maintained in the office of the department of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 13-43. - Development impact fee account established. 
(a)  As of July 1, 2009, there is hereby established a development impact fee account for the initial development impact fee district established in section 13-42. Such account shall be interest-bearing. All development impact fees collected shall be deposited into this account. 
(b)  Interest earned on funds shall be funds of the account on which it is earned and is subject to all restrictions imposed or placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(c)  Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be in accordance with section 13-38 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-44. - Review of fee schedule. 
The development impact fee schedule shall be reviewed by the mayor and city council at least annually; provided, however, the failure to review such fee structure shall not invalidate this article. Following such review, if changes in the fee schedule are deemed necessary, such changes may be implemented administratively, without formal amendment to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-45. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Any person directly aggrieved by a decision of the director, with respect to any of the following determinations shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and city council: 
(1)  The imposition of a development impact fee; 
(2)  The amount of a development impact fee; 
(3)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of credits to a development impact fee; 
(4)  The entitlement to an exemption from a development impact fee; and 
(5)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of a refund of a development impact fee. 
(b)  Prior to any appeal to the mayor and city council, the aggrieved party shall file a written request for reconsideration with the director, who shall act upon the request within fifteen (15) days following the receipt of such request. 
(c)  All appeals shall be taken within fifteen (15) days of the director's decision on the request for reconsideration by filing with the director a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The director shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and city council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. The mayor and city council shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable period of time following the hearing. Any party taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present testimony and evidence and may be represented by legal counsel. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mayor and city council may pursue the appeal to the Superior Court of Houston County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the mayor and city council is rendered. 
(d)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest in order to obtain a building permit, and by making such payment shall not be prohibited from: 
(1)  Exercising the right of appeal provided in this section; or 
(2)  Receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 13-46. - Penalty and enforcement provisions. 
A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to the laws of the state; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue for relief in civil court to enforce the provisions of this article. Knowingly furnishing false information to the director on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute a violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 6-26-08) 
Chapter 15 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, § 6.10 et seq. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; vehicles for hire, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Business license tax on insurance companies. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Perry, Georgia, in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 2, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Perry, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of twenty-six dollars and 25/100 ($26.25) per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) above. 
(d)  There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in Subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this subsection shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) above. 
(e)  License fees imposed in subsection (a) and (b) above shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(f)  The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this section to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within forty-five (45) days of its enactment. 
(g)  This section shall become effective November 1, 2011. 
(h)  In the event any portion of this section or its subsections shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the City Council of the City of Perry, Georgia, that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this section which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional subsection, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally a part of the section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, 10-18-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-24, adopted Oct. 18, 2011, repealed § 15-1 in its entirety and enacted a new § 15-1 to read as set out herein. Former § 15-1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1966, § 11-14; Ord. No. 2011-09, adopted May 17, 2011. 
State Law reference— Local tax authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8, 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 15-2. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of one-fourth of one (0.25) percent of the gross receipts of the institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(b)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1966, § 11-15) 
Sec. 15-3. - Revocation of licenses issued under this chapter. 
(a)  No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued under any article of this chapter shall be revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined. 
(b)  Failure to pay city taxes, fees or other revenue due to the city within thirty (30) days of the due date shall constitute grounds for revocation. 
(c)  Conviction of the licensee or any employee of same of any violation of federal or state law or city ordinance involving the operation of the licensed business shall constitute grounds for revocation. 
(d)  An initial license may be denied if the applicant has been convicted of such violations at other locations in the past or in the event the applicant has unpaid city taxes, fees or other revenues due to the city. For the purpose of this section, applicant includes the individual applying for the license or, if the applicant is a partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other legal entity, all persons who have not less than a twenty (20) percent interest in said legal entity. 
(e)  At the option of mayor and council, a violation as set forth in subsection (c) hereof, as evidenced by a certified copy of the conviction, shall constitute grounds for refusal to renew said license rather than to revoke the current license. In such event, the licensee may apply, by written request, for a hearing before the mayor and council within thirty (30) days of such refusal to renew. 
(f)  In the event mayor and council desire to revoke a current license based on a violation set out herein, they shall cause notice to be served upon the licensee, by registered or certified mail addressed to licensee's establishment, requiring the licensee to appear before the mayor and council and show cause why the license should not be revoked. This hearing shall not be held sooner than five (5) days from the mailing of the notice, and the notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing as well as the ground which could, if sustained, result in the revocation of the license. 
(g)  The mayor and council shall notify the licensee of their decision within a reasonable time after the hearing in the same manner as provided above for service of notice of hearing. If such decision is to revoke the license, no rebate shall be made on any portion of the license fee paid. 
(h)  In lieu of revocation, the mayor and council may, in their discretion, suspend the license for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation or impose other conditions on the continued holding of the license. 
(i)  The licensee may remain open for business after the hearing until a decision is reached and three (3) days have elapsed since the mailing of the decision to licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2, 12-4-07; Ord. No. 2010-20, 8-17-10) 
Secs. 15-4—15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 94-8, adopted Oct. 4, 1994, effective Jan. 1, 1995, repealed Ch. 15, Art. II, §§ 15-26—15-38 and added a new Ch. 15, Art. II to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15, Art. II pertained to occupational licenses and derived from Code 1966, §§ 11-1—11-13; Ord. No. 87-24, adopted Nov. 24, 1987 and Ord. No. 88-16, adopted Oct. 4, 1988. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to levy occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 

Sec. 15-26. - Occupational tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings with the city. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupational tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the code enforcement officer or his designee or to any police officer of the city upon his or their request. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-27. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "City of Perry" is used herein, such terms shall be construed to mean "Perry, Georgia"; wherever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean "Perry, Georgia." 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Full-time employee is one who normally works forty (40) hours or more per week. 
Full-time equivalent employee are part-time employees whose work hours, totaled together, equal forty (40) or more hours per week. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than forty (40) hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by forty (40) to produce full-time position equivalence. 
Location or office shall not include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person wherever used in this article shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of business organizations, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize fifty (50) percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined in Paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs of conditions of zoning or land developments are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 95-22 §§ 1, 2, 10-3-95) 
Sec. 15-28. - Administrative processing fee and occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An administrative processing fee shall be paid by each business, trade, profession or occupation, to cover the processing and enforcement of the occupational tax. 
(b)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those business and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the full-time equivalent employees of the business or profession. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule: Reference the City of Perry Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 2000-14, §§ 5—7, 7-18-2000) 
Sec. 15-28.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-13, adopted June 1, 2010, deleted § 15-28.1, which pertained to prohibition of fortunetelling and derived from Ord. No. 95-06, adopted Mar. 21, 1995. 
Sec. 15-29. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-30. - The number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-31. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), Paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by December 1 of each year. 
Sec. 15-32. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, State of Georgia, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the State of Georgia or a municipality or county in the State of Georgia, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-33. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-34. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
Each such occupation tax shall be due for the calendar year 2019 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable March 31 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 30 of each year and shall be subject to a ten (10) percent penalty. Thereafter, any occupation tax that remains delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) percent per month. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city in 2019 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the tax clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, and of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon the conviction of the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code, and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 2016-22, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2018-11, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-35. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated by state or local authorities or by non-profit organizations. 
No occupation tax, regulatory fee shall be levied against state or local authorities or against non-profit organizations. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 95-22 § 3, 10-3-95) 
Sec. 15-36. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-37. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a business registration by the city, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-38. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-39. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 1 of each year, and on the second day of March of each year thereafter. Any person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required for commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the provisions in section 15-40. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the tax clerk, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-40. - Penalty of article violation; interest on delinquent occupation taxes, regulatory fees, and administrative fees. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of the City Code, and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, interest on delinquent occupation taxes, regulatory fees, and administrative fees shall be charged at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 95-22 § 4, 10-3-95) 
Sec. 15-41. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  The businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agriculture products, and not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  The sale of alcoholic beverages governed by O.C.G.A. tit. 3. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-42. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established business. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees to be employed. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-43. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) place or where the business includes more than one (1) line, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and each different line of business will have the number of employees of that line of business identified on a form to be furnished by the business license department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-44. - Filing of return showing number of employees. 
On or before November 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the tax clerk of the city, on a form furnished by the tax clerk, a signed return setting forth the average number of yearly employees (full-time or full-time equivalent) of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-45. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case, the mayor and council of the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The tax clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city and upon demand of the mayor and council, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within thirty (30) days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the mayor and council at their discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of one (1) percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed for the period of delinquency. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-46. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, any business type tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation herein provided for is at that time unpaid. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-47. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or appeal, in whole, or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or appeal shall be construed to deny the right of the mayor and council of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-48. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The mayor and council of the city shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation taxes set forth in the article. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-49. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of business or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or for attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of a regular meeting of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-50. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
Sec. 15-50.1. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article is applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional such individuality shall not be construed to effect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, 10-4-94) 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2017, repealed Art. III in its entirety and enacted a new Art. III to read as set out herein. Former Art. III, §§ 15-51—15-63, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-21, adopted Sept. 19, 2000; Ord. No. 2005-15, adopted May 3, 2005; Ord. No. 2009-18, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 16, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-11, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 18, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-23, §§ 1—5, adopted Oct. 19, 2010; Ord. No. 2015-07, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 7, 2015; Ord. No. 2017-01, §§ 1—4, adopted Jan. 17, 2017. 
State Law reference— Transient occupancy tax, O.C.G.A § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 15-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Perry and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. 48-13-50, et seq. 
City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk of the city or his designee. 
Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guestroom. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, timeshare or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guestroom in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guestroom. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than thirty (30) continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this ordinance, as provided for the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., specifically 48-13-51(a)(1)(A). 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-52. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of seven (7) percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 15-54. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-53. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of seven (7) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 15-54. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-54. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been rendered uninhabitable by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality or either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-55. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-56. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for one (l) month or less; and an additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest monthly, or fraction thereof, until paid at the rate set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41 relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43 relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the State. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in any three (3) consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than fifty (50) percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for a longer period than twelve (12) consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred (100) percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten (10) days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate set forth in O.C.G.A § 48-2-40. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-57. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One (l) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 15-56. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of determination. The notice maybe served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-58. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 15-57(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of determination, as provided by section 15-56. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-59. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At anytime within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest, or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three (3) years from the dale of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant my request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-60. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guestrooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guestrooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-61. - Violation. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 15-53 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 15-56, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 15-62. - Effective date. 
This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2017-24, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Secs. 15-63—15-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXEMPTIONS FROM AD VALOREM TAXATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40 et seq. 

Sec. 15-76. - Goods in process of manufacture and production. 
The city shall exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, the inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production, which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for herein shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(Code 1966, § 19½-34) 
Sec. 15-77. - Goods manufactured in state and held by manufacturer. 
The city shall exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, the inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(Code 1966, §19½-35) 
Sec. 15-78. - Finished goods to be shipped outside of state. 
The city shall exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, the inventory of finished goods which, on the first day of January, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months from the date such property is stored in this state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this section shall be designated as being "in transit" upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, where such property is being stored. Such official books and records shall contain a full, true and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such "in transit property" shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(Code 1966, § 19½-36) 
Sec. 15-79. - Homestead exemption for persons sixty-two years of age or over or disabled. 
(a)  Each resident of the city who is sixty-two (62) years of age or over or who is disabled is hereby granted an exemption from all city ad valorem taxes, including ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and retire bonded indebtedness, in the amount of eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) on a homestead owned and occupied by him or her as a residence if his or her adjusted gross income, together with the adjusted gross income of his or her spouse, who also occupies and resides at such homestead, does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the immediately proceeding taxable year. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "adjusted gross income" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as now or hereafter amended, except that adjusted gross income shall not include income or benefits which are received as retirement, survivor or disability benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, or under any other public or private retirement, disability or pension system, except such income or benefits which are in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be received by an individual and his or her spouse under the Federal Social Security Act, as now or hereafter amended. The value of the residence in excess of the above exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(b)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for herein as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than two physicians licensed to practice medicine under the laws of Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(c)  Any such owner shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he or she or his or her agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Houston County, giving his or her age, or if disabled the certificate or certificates provided for herein, and the amount of income which he or she and his or her spouse received during the last taxable year for income tax purposes, and such additional information relative to receiving the benefits of such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owners are entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. Such applications shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for homestead exemption, and the provisions of law applicable to the processing of homestead exemptions, as the same may exist or hereinafter be amended, shall apply thereto. Provided, that after any such owner has filed the proper affidavit, and certificate or certificates if disabled, as provided above, and has been allowed the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he or she make application and file the said affidavit and certificate thereafter for any year and the said exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any such owner, however, to notify the tax commissioner in the event he or she becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2003-34, 6-3-03) 
Secs. 15-80—15-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE SALES, GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES, ETC.[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; Prohibition against false advertising, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-420 et seq. 

Sec. 15-101. - License, etc., for persons in business for ninety days. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who has been a bona fide merchant in business within the city, for a period of ninety (90) days next preceding the sale hereinafter referred to, to advertise or conduct any sale of goods, wares, or merchandise at retail that is represented as bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, adjuster, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, wholesaler, jobber, manufacturer, closing out, liquidation, closing stock, fire or water-damage sale, or any other sale which is by representation or advertisement intended to lead the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out or closing out the goods, wares or merchandise of any business for less than the current or going retail price thereof in the city, without first filing with the city clerk an inventory and obtaining a closing-out sale license. 
(b)  The fee for such license shall be as shown in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The inventory required by this section shall contain a complete and accurate list of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at any sale for which a license is hereby required together with the wholesale price thereof. The inventory or list shall be signed by the person seeking the license, or by a resident agent there-unto authorized, and by affidavit at the foot thereof he or such agent shall swear or affirm that the information therein given is full and true, and known by him or such agent to be so. 
(Code 1966, §§ 15-11, 15-12; Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-102. - License, etc., for persons in business less than ninety days. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who has not been a bona fide merchant, or has not been in business bona fide within the city for a period of ninety (90) days to advertise or conduct any sale of goods, wares or merchandise at retail that is represented as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, adjustor, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, wholesaler, jobber, manufacturer, closing out, liquidation, closing stock, fire or water-damage sale, or any other sale which is by representation or advertisement intended to lead the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out or closing out the goods, wares, or merchandise of any business for less than the current price or retail price thereof in the city, without first filing with the city clerk the inventory hereinafter provided for and obtaining from the clerk a closing-out sale license. 
(b)  The fee for such license shall be, and the same is hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  For a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, four hundred dollars ($400.00); 
(2)  For a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, eight hundred dollars ($800.00); 
(3)  For a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00). 
Only one (1) such license shall be issued to any one (1) person within a twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days. 
(c)  The inventory required by this section shall contain a complete and accurate list of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at any sale for which a license is hereby required together with the wholesale price thereof. The inventory or list shall be signed by the person seeking the license, or by a resident agent there-unto authorized, and by affidavit at the foot thereof he or such agent shall affirm or swear that the information therein given is full and true, and known by him or such agent to be so. 
(Code 1966, §§ 15-14, 15-15) 
Sec. 15-103. - Additions to inventory, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer to expose for sale at any sale referred to in this article, or to list on the required inventory, any goods, wares or merchandise which are not the regular stock of the store or other place, the business of which is to be closed out by such sale, or to make any replenishments or additions to such stock for the sale, or during the time thereof, or to fail or neglect or refuse to keep accurate records of the articles or things sold, from which records the city clerk or license inspector may ascertain the kind and quality of number sold. 
(b)  Additions and replenishments may be added to the regular stock offered for sale if the person conducting such sale shall thoroughly advertise and inform the public that not only regular stock is to be sold, but that also other goods, wares and merchandise shall be added to the regular stock and that these additions or replenishments shall be offered for sale in connection with the regular stock. 
(c)  When the additions or replenishments are to be sold in connection with the regular stock the person conducting such sale shall first pay the fee shown on the city fee schedule. 
(d)  Whenever additions or replenishments are added to the regular stock to be sold, the person conducting such sale shall make a complete inventory of the additions or replenishments containing an accurate list of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold as additions or replenishments, and such list shall contain the purchase price of each article which is to be offered for sale, and also the price at which such article is to be offered for sale. 
(e)  Such inventory or list shall be signed by the person conducting such sale, and an affidavit shall accompany the list, and the person conducting the sale shall swear to the accuracy of such list. 
(Code 1966, §§ 15-13, 15-16; Ord. No. 2018-15, § 2, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-104. - Merchandise to be marked. 
(a)  The person conducting a sale under this article shall mark each article of merchandise plainly where it can be thoroughly understood by the public that the article of goods, wares or merchandise is a part of the regular stock or a part of the additions or replenishments. 
(b)  The articles offered for sale shall have the following words marked thereon "additions" or "regular stock" and each article offered for sale shall have the purchase price marked thereon, and the price at which it is offered for sale shall also be marked thereon. 
(Code 1966, § 15-17) 
Sec. 15-105. - Oral misrepresentations concerning sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale to represent by word or mouth any advertisement or in any way, that he is closing out his business, when as a matter of fact, he is not closing out his business. 
(Code 1966, § 15-18) 
Sec. 15-106. - Oral misrepresentation concerning quality, prices or stock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale to misrepresent by word or mouth, advertisement or in any other way the quality or price of any article offered for sale. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to represent by word of mouth, or advertisement or in any other way, that the articles offered for sale were a part of the regular stock of the store or place, when as a matter of fact, such articles were additions or replenishments which had been added to the regular stock. 
(Code 1966, § 15-19) 
Sec. 15-107. - Inspection of books. 
The person conducting a sale under this article shall at all times permit the city clerk or license inspector or the chief of police to inspect his books, records, invoices, or any other paper or writing connected with the quality, quantity, prices, or kinds of goods, wares, or merchandise offered for sale. 
(Code 1966, § 15-20) 
Sec. 15-108. - Fraudulent price marking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, adjustor, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, wholesaler, manufacturer, closing out, liquidation, closing stock, fire or water damage sale, or any sale which is intended to lead the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out, or closing out the goods, wares or merchandise of any business for less than the current or going retail price, or any other sale, whether it is a closing out sale or not, to mark the prices of articles of merchandise, goods, wares or merchandise up at a higher level than such articles had previously sold, and then mark the prices on such articles down for the purpose of impressing the public that such articles were being offered for sale at a lower price than such articles were intricately worth. 
(Code 1966, § 15-21) 
Secs. 15-109—15-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchant Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-126. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the "City of Perry Transient Merchant Ordinance." 
(Code 1966, § 11-35) 
Sec. 15-127. - "Transient merchant" defined. 
As used in this article, the term "transient merchant" means any person, firm, or corporation, as principal or agent, or both, which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in the city, but rather one (1) who displays samples, model goods, wares or merchandise in or upon any lot, building, room or structure of any kind, whether fixed or mobile, for the purpose of securing orders for the retail sale of such items of like kind or quality for immediate or future delivery. The term "transient merchant" shall not include any person who: 
(1)  Sells harvested but unprocessed agricultural or forestry products; 
(2)  Makes house-to-house or personal calls for the purpose of displaying samples or taking orders for shipment directly from a manufacturer; 
(3)  Conducts business at any industry or association trade show; 
(4)  Holds a yard sale from the home of a resident of the city, provided such business activity otherwise complies with city ordinances; or 
(5)  Sells items from the home of a resident of the city, provided such business activity otherwise complies with city ordinances; or 
(6)  Sells items at an organized show or exhibition held within the corporate limits of the city by a person who has first obtained from the city a license for the purpose of conducting such show or exhibition. 
(7)  Sells items in the downtown district on property owned or leased by the individual or organization holding the sale, provided permission for such sale has been obtained from the council, and provided such business activity otherwise complies with city ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 11-36; Ord. No. 2011-17, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 15-128. - Compliance with state law. 
No transient merchant shall engage in business in the city without complying with all applicable provisions of state law. 
(Code 1966, § 11-37(a); Ord. No. 95-17 § 1, 9-5-95) 
Sec. 15-129. - Registered agents for receipt of process, notice or demands generally; serving process, notice or demands on registered agent. 
(a)  No transient merchant shall engage in business in the city until he has filed the name and permanent address of his registered agent with the city clerk. 
(b)  Such registered agent shall be a resident of the city and shall be the landowner upon whose property the transient merchant is intending to transact his business, if such landowner is also a resident of the city. If the landowner is not a resident of the city, then such registered agent shall be any other bona fide resident of the city who is over the age of eighteen (18) and sui juris. Such agent may be served with any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law to be served upon the transient merchant, in the same manner provided by law for the service of a summons and complaint. 
(c)  Such registered agent shall agree in writing to act as such agent and a copy of the agreement shall be filed with the license application. 
(d)  The city clerk shall maintain an alphabetical record of all transient merchants and the names and addresses of their registered agents. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall limit or affect the right to serve any process, notice or demand in any other manner permitted by law. 
(Code 1966, §§ 11-37, 11-39) 
Sec. 15-130. - Soliciting orders for goods, subscriptions, etc.; hours prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or take, or cause or instigate the solicitation or taking of subscriptions or orders for, sell, or cause or instigate the sale of subscriptions, goods, wares or merchandise within the corporate limits of the city between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1966, § 12-36) 
Sec. 15-131. - Restrictions; permitted locations; size of operation; etc. 
No transient merchant having been approved under the terms of this article shall operate such business without strict compliance with the following: 
(1)  Permitted locations. Transient merchants shall be allowed only in the following described area: 
a.  Sam Nunn Boulevard, beginning at the intersection of Sam Nunn Boulevard and Interstate I-75, and extending along both sides of Sam Nunn Boulevard in a northwest direction to the intersection of Mason Terrace and Sam Nunn Boulevard. 
(2)  Size and safety of operation. No transient merchant shall occupy more than four hundred (400) square feet of area on any lot nor erect or set up any structures or apparatus which in total exceeds two hundred (200) square feet. 
Any and all structures and apparatus used in conjunction with such a business shall be of substantial construction and material as determined by the building official so as not to constitute a nuisance or hazard to the general public. Such structures and apparatus shall not be vacated nor remain on any property unattended for more than seventy-two (72) hours and shall be permanently removed upon the expiration date specified in the application. 
(3)  Any and all structures, apparatus and signage must be set back ten (10) feet from established rights-of-way. 
(4)  Signage shall not exceed a total of ten (10) square feet per business. 
(5)  Applicant must verify to the zoning enforcement officer that adequate parking will be provided without reducing the required parking of any permanent business located on the same lot. Such parking shall be arranged so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1966, § 11-37, Ord. No. 95-17, § 2, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2003-42, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 2009-21, 9-15-09) 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION TO TRANSFER BUSINESS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 95-17, adopted Sept. 5, 1995, repealed Ch. 15, Art. VI, Div. 2, §§ 15-132—15-134 and added a new Ch. 15, Art. VI, Div. 2 to read as herein set out.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, adopted April 19, 2011, changed the title of Div. 2 from "Occupational license; application to transfer business" to "Application to transfer business." 

Sec. 15-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, adopted April 19, 2011, repealed § 15-132 in its entirety which pertained to occupational tax required and derived from Ord. No. 95-17, § 3, adopted Sept. 5, 1995. 
Sec. 15-133. - Application. 
(a)  Any transient merchant desiring to transact business within the city shall file with the city clerk an application prior to the transaction of any such business. Such application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and permanent address of the transient merchant; 
(2)  The name and permanent address of the transient merchant's registered agent or office; 
(3)  The type of business to be conducted; 
(4)  The date and state of incorporation, if incorporated; 
(5)  If a foreign corporation, the date the corporation became qualified to transact business in this state; 
(6)  The number of days during which the sale is to be conducted; 
(7)  Evidence of either ownership of the property by the transient merchant or a written lease or written permission from the owner of the property to the transient merchant regarding the property upon which the sale is to be conducted; and 
(8)  The location where the sale is to be conducted. 
(b)  No person shall make any false statements in any application in order to conduct a transient merchant's business. 
(Ord. No. 95-17 § 3, 9-5-95) 
Sec. 15-134. - Regulatory fee; change in location. 
(a)  There should be a regulatory fee payable in lieu of an occupational tax upon submittal of an approved application. Such fee shall be established by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Change in locations or renewals of existing locations will require a new application subject to the established regulatory fee. 
(Ord. No. 95-17 § 3, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2011-06, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 15-134.1. - Issuance; term; etc. 
After the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this division, a transient business application shall be approved. Such approval is not transferable, is valid only within the territorial limits of the city, is valid only for the business stated on the application, and shall expire on the last day named therein on which the sale is to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 95-17 § 3, 9-5-95) 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally and municipal supervision of same, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 15-135. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms, as used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively ascribed to them: 
Pawnbroker. Any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in connection with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Precious or semiprecious metals or stones. Metals such as, but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, and pewter; and stones such as, but not limited to, alexandrite, diamonds, emeralds, garnets, opals, rubies, sapphires, and topaz. For the purpose of this section, ivory, coral, pearls, jade, and such other minerals, stones or gems as are customarily regarded as precious or semiprecious are deemed to be precious or semiprecious. 
Secondhand dealer. Any person whose business is that of engaging in the sale or trade of secondhand property, or whose business is selling new goods, but who buys or sells secondhand articles, goods, wares or merchandise of the same type or class as the new goods, sold. The term does not include: (i) a person selling or trading secondhand property at a "garbage sale/yard sale" as defined in the zoning regulations for the city; (ii) a person or organization selling or trading secondhand property at an exhibit or show which is intended to display a particular commodity or class of products, including, but not limited to, antique exhibitions, firearm exhibitions, home and garden shows, and recreational vehicle shows; excluding, however, precious or semiprecious metals, stones, gold or silver shows; (iii) a person or organization which is charitable, nonprofit, recreational, fraternal, or political in nature or which is exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
Secondhand property means the following items of tangible personal property sold or traded by secondhand dealer: 
(1)  Cameras, camera lenses, slide or movie projector screens, flashguns, enlargers, tripods, binoculars, telescopes, and microscopes; 
(2)  Televisions, phonographs, tape recorders, video recorders, compact disc players, radios, tuners, speakers, turntables, amplifiers, record changers, citizens band broadcasting units and receivers, and video games; 
(3)  Golf clubs, guns, jewelry, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, coins, luggage, boots, furs, clothing, and rugs; 
(4)  Typewriters, adding machines, calculators, computers, portable air conditioners, cash registers, copying machines, dictating machines, automatic telephone answering machines, and sewing machines; 
(5)  Bicycles, bicycle frames, bicycle derailleur assemblies, bicycle hand-brake assemblies, and other bicycle components; 
(6)  Ranges, stoves, dishwashers, refrigerators, garbage disposals, boats, airplanes, clothes washers, clothes driers, freezers, furniture, as well as any other restaurant and household items or appliances; 
(7)  Auto accessories, including, but not limited to, wheels and hub caps, but not including core charges for automobiles parts which are not rebuilt on premises; and 
(8)  Any item of tangible personal property which is marked with a serial or identification number. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, 6-21-88) 
Sec. 15-136. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer without having first obtained a business license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, 6-21-88) 
Sec. 15-137. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection by police. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer will deliver to the city police department, on a weekly basis, by 6:00 p.m. on Mondays, daily reports on forms provided by the city police department of all tangible property accepted during the previous week, whether such purchases were unconditional or with the privilege of redeeming the property on the part of the seller. Said report shall give the date of the transaction, the full description of all articles, including any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name or other identifying marks, and the name of the pawner, vendor or person from whom such goods were obtained, and his address. 
(b)  Any police officer who exhibits a written order from the chief of police or his designee shall be authorized to inspect all records required to be retained under state law, as well as all goods on the premises. The proprietors of all such establishments shall give all assistance in their power to enable the police to identify stolen goods. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 89-3, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-89) 
Sec. 15-138. - Persons under seventeen years of age. 
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall receive any article in pawn, or purchase any article for resale, from any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, 6-21-88) 
Sec. 15-139. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the maximum punishment as provided in the city charter. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this article who holds a city business license shall be subject to a revocation of the license for a violation of any provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, 6-21-88) 
Sec. 15-140. - Severability. 
If any provisions of this article shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any of the other provisions which can be given effect without the invalid provision, and, to this end, the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, 6-21-88) 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 97-12, adopted Nov. 18, 1997, deleted Art. VIII, §§ 15-141—15-162, in its entirety. Section 3 of Ord. No. 97-12 adopted similar provisions as herein set out. Former §§ 15-141—15-162 derived from Ord. No. 95-11, adopted June 20, 1995. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; Establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes declared a nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

Sec. 15-141. - Introduction. 
Based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties, including, but not limited to, Peach County, Georgia, Austin, Texas and Garden Grove, California, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by citizens and an expert in economic development at a public hearing in which the mayor and council of the city participated in on January 6, 1997; and based on documentary evidence submitted to the city council, the city council takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the finding of the city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, other adult businesses have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and other adult businesses are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and other adult businesses are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The city council finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city as well. 
The city council therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and playgrounds to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult business establishments. Therefore, the city council finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult business establishment. The city council finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-142. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section and unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions are adopted: 
Adult business means any business that: 
(1)  Has as a substantial or significant purpose the sale or rental of merchandise that is intended for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that emphasizes matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Provides entertainment where the emphasis is on performances, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Provides services that are intended to provide sexual stimulation or gratification or that allow observation of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas ancillary to other pursuits, or allow participation in specified sexual activities ancillary to other pursuits; or 
(4)  The definition of "adult business" includes but is not limited to any and all of the following specific adult businesses, as defined herein: 
a.  Businesses that offer merchandise for sale or rent. 
1.  Adult media outlet means a business engaging in the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures, films or other media, if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that a "substantial or significant" portion of a business is devoted to the sale or rental of such items if any one or more of the following criteria are satisfied: 
i.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the sales, measured in dollars over any consecutive ninety-day period, is derived from such items; 
ii.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the number of sales transactions, measured over any consecutive ninety-day period, is of such items; 
iii.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to such items; 
iv.  Fifty (50) percent or more of all inventory consists of such items at any time; 
v.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of such items at any time; 
vi.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the stock in trade consists of such items at any time; 
vii.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bath rooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to such items at any time. 
This presumption shall be rebuttable. 
2.  Adult newsrack means any coin- or card-operated device that offers for sale by dispensing printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
3.  Adult retail establishment means a business which offers for sale or rent instruments, devises, gifts or paraphernalia which are designed or marketed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, clothing that graphically depicts specified anatomical areas or any of the materials sold or rented in an "adult media outlet" as defined above, if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." For purposes of this subsection, the presumptions relative to what constitutes a "substantial or significant" portion of a business set forth in the definition of "adult media outlet" shall apply hereto. In determining whether an item is "designed or marketed for use" in connection with specified sexual activities, the following guidelines may be considered: 
i.  Expert testimony as to the principle use of the item. 
ii.  Evidence concerning the total business of a person or business establishment and the type of merchandise involved in the business. 
iii.  National and local advertising concerning the use of the item. 
iv.  Evidence of advertising concerning the nature of the business establishment. 
v.  Instructions, graphics or other material contained on the item itself or on the packaging materials for the item. 
vi.  The physical or structural characteristics of the item. 
vii.  The manner in which the item is displayed, including its proximity to the other regulated merchandise or signage relating to items in a display area. 
Any person may request an interpretive ruling from the chief of police, or his or her designee, as to whether a particular item is considered by the city to be "designed or marketed for use" in connection with specified sexual activities. An application for an interpretive ruling shall be made in writing to the chief of police, and shall be accompanied by such other information as may reasonably be requested under the circumstances pertaining to the specific item about which a ruling is requested. The chief of police shall issue a written interpretive ruling within ten (10) business days following submission of a completed application. The decision of the chief of police may be appealed to the city council within fifteen (15) days following the interpretive ruling by submitting a written notice of appeal to the city manager. Thereafter, the city council will deny or uphold the appeal within forty-five (45) days from the date the appeal is received by the city manager. 
b.  Businesses that provide entertainment. 
1.  Adult entertainment business means any business to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted, and where "adult entertainment, " as defined herein is provided. The definition of "adult entertainment business" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise eighty (80) percent of all performances or showings. 
2.  The definition of "adult entertainment business" includes, but is not limited to, any and all of the following specific adult entertainment businesses, as defined herein: 
i.  Adult motion picture theater means an establishment with a screen or projection areas which exhibits to patrons films, videotapes or motion pictures which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the patrons and which are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
ii.  Adult theater means an establishment which provides the live performance of activities depicting or simulating specified sexual activities or the exhibition of specified anatomical areas of live performers, for observation by patrons. 
iii.  Adult entertainment cabaret means an establishment which provides adult entertainment featuring live performances of dancers, strippers, or male or female impersonators. 
iv.  Adult entertainment studio (includes the terms "rap studio," "exotic dance studio," "sensitivity studio" or encounter studio") means an establishment whose premises are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises, and which provides adult entertainment featuring live performances or materials characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
v.  Adult encounter parlor means an establishment which provides premises where patrons congregate, associate, or consort with employees, performers and/or other patrons or private contractors who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such patrons, with the intent of providing sexual gratification or stimulation to such patrons. 
vi.  Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas, or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities. 
vii.  Any commercial establishment that provides live entertainment where any person appears nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas, or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities. 
c.  Businesses that provide services. 
1.  Bath house means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
2.  Adult motel means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering public accommodations for the purpose of viewing closed-circuit television transmissions, films, movies, motion pictures, video cassettes, video tapes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which rents room accommodations for less than six (6) hours at a time. 
3.  It shall be presumed that the sale, lease or rental of certain items or services constitutes a "regular and substantial" portion of a business if any one of the following is satisfied: 
i.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the sales, measured in dollars over any consecutive ninety-day period is derived from such sales, leases and rentals; 
ii.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the number of sales, leases and rentals measured over any consecutive ninety-day period; 
iii.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the floor area of the business (not including any portion of the business not open to customers or patrons of the business) is devoted to such sales, leases or rentals. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Contagious and communicable diseases means any communicable or infectious disease that can be transmitted by specified sexual activity. 
Employee means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult business. 
Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult business, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment. 
Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any person of any activity at any adult business. 
Minor means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Operate means to own, conduct or maintain the affairs of an adult business. 
Operator means any person owning, operating, conducting or maintaining an adult business. 
Patron means any person who enters an adult business without regard to whether a purchase is made from the adult business or compensation is paid to the adult business or any employee of the adult business for merchandise, entertainment or service, provided that the term patron shall not include persons who enter an adult business for the sole purpose of providing service or merchandise to the adult business and who do not remain in the adult business after the purpose has been accomplished including, but not limited to, persons performing construction, repair or maintenance on the premises or delivering goods or merchandise to the adult business and any such similar activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons, however organized. 
Server means any person who serves food or drink at an adult entertainment business. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall mean sexual conduct, including actual or simulated acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts involving animals or any objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-143. - License required for adult business. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult business in the city unless the owner thereof has obtained an adult business license from the city, or to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment related to the operation of an unlicensed adult business. 
(c)  The failure to post an adult business license in the manner required herein shall be prima facie evidence that an adult business has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in an adult business in which an adult business license is not posted in the manner required herein had knowledge that such business is not licensed. 
(d)  Any business that engages in the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures, films or other media, if such business is not open to the public in general but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection by those officials of only those business records necessary for the limited purpose of determining whether such business enterprise is an "adult business" as defined herein. This entry and inspection shall take place during hours when such business is open to the public, unless otherwise requested by the business, and shall not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of such business. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-144. - License required for managers, servers and entertainers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult business without first obtaining a license to do so from the city, or to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult business after such person's license to do so has been revoked, suspended or has expired. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-145. - License, classification and fees. 
(a)  The license year for all fees required herein shall be from each January 1 through December 31. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated herein by cash, certified or cashier's check or money order, and no application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid. 
(b)  All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nontransferable, and license fees shall be nonrefundable; provided, however, that the license fee shall be refunded if no license is issued. 
(c)  The classification of licenses and fees for each shall be as shown on the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 2018-15, § 3, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-146. - License limited to one identifiable type of adult use. 
Any adult business licenses shall be issued only for the one adult business use listed on the application. Any change in the type of adult use shall invalidate the adult business license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use. A separate license is required for each adult use. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-147. - License applications. 
(a)  Adult business license. All persons desiring to operate an adult business shall make a verified application with the city manager. All applications shall be submitted by the person who owns the adult business. The application shall be signed by the applicant and submitted with the fee shown on the city fee schedule. The application fee shall be paid in cash, by certified or cashier's check or money order. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by its president or chief executive officer. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a general partner. The city manager may require proof of authorization before accepting an application. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city manager and shall require all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The tax identification number and registered agent if the owner is required to have a tax identification number or registered agent. 
(3)  The name of the adult business, a description of the type of adult business to be performed on the licensed premises, and the name and address of the owner of the premises where the adult business will be located. 
(4)  The names, residence addresses, social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership or limited liability partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the same information for each: 
a.  Corporate officer and director; and 
b.  Stockholder or member in the corporation who holds at least twenty (20) percent of the shares of the corporation. 
(5)  A statement from the applicant whether the applicant, or any corporate officer or director, or stockholder, partner or member in previously operating in this or another city, county or state, has had an adult business license or permit of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity subjected to the suspension or revocation. 
(6)  A statement whether the business, or any interest in the business, is held in trust, for the benefit of, or on behalf of another person, and the name, residence address and telephone number of any such person. 
(7)  A statement from the applicant, and any person required to be identified in subsections 15-147(a)(4) and (a)(6) that each person has: 
a.  Not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony, whichever event is later, within five (5) years immediately proceeding the application, or has not been convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography or related offenses, or controlled substances, alcohol or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses; and 
b.  Not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years immediately preceding the application where such municipal article violation involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances, alcohol or illegal drugs or narcotics or a crime of moral turpitude. 
(8)  On applications requesting a license to operate a bath house the applicant shall provide for each employee, a health certificate from a duly licensed Georgia physician stating that within ninety (90) days prior thereto, the applicant and all other persons working on the premises have been examined and found free of any contagious or communicable disease as defined herein. This shall be a continuing requirement. For each person who is employed, the above described health certificate shall be submitted to the city manager within forty-eight (48) hours of the time such person begins employment. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a current certificate of registration issued by the Georgia Secretary of State. 
(10)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this ordinance regulating adult businesses. 
(11)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches (2″ × 2″) taken within the last six (6) months. 
(12)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult business is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(13)  A statement of all business and financial relationships among the owner of the real property on which the adult business will be located, the lessor of the property on which the adult business will be located, and the owner of the adult business. 
Failure to provide the information and documentation required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The city manager shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within ten (10) working days of the date the application is received by the city manager. 
(b)  Manager, server or entertainer license. Each person desiring to be a manager, server or entertainer in or for an adult business shall make a verified application with the city manager and submit the fee shown on the city fee schedule. The application fee shall be paid in cash, by certified or cashier's check or money order. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be a manager, server or entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city manager and shall require all of the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, Social Security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining. 
(2)  If applicable, the name and address of each adult business where the applicant intends to work as a manager, server or entertainer. 
(3)  A statement from the applicant that the applicant: 
a.  Has not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony, whichever event is later, within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography and related offenses, or controlled substances or alcohol or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses or a crime or moral turpitude; and 
b.  Has not been convicted of a municipal article violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years immediately preceding the application where such municipal article violation involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or alcohol or illegal drugs or narcotics or a crime of moral turpitude. 
(4)  The applicant shall present to the city manager, who shall copy, documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; or 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America. 
(5)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches (2″ × 2″) taken within the last six (6) months. 
Failure to provide the information required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The city manager shall notify the applicant in writing at the home address set forth in the application whether or not the application is complete within ten (10) working days of the date the application was received by the city manager. 
(c)  Application processing. Upon receipt of an application, license fee and application fee for an adult business, manager, server or entertainer license, the city manager shall immediately transmit one copy of the application to the chief of police for investigation of the application. In addition, the city manager shall transmit a copy of the application to the building official. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such application to determine whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the application meets the requirements herein for issuance of the license for which the application is made. The chief of police shall report the results of the investigation to the city manager not later than twenty (20) working days from the date the application is received by the city manager. It shall be the duty of the building official to determine whether the structure where the adult business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance articles of the city. The building official shall report the results of his investigation to the city manager not later than twenty (20) working days from the date the application is received by the city manager. Upon receipt of the reports from the chief of police and the building official, the city manager shall schedule the application for consideration by the city council at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting, provided the license application for an adult business, server, manager or entertainer license shall be approved or disapproved within forty-five (45) days from the date when the city council will consider the application and shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at that meeting. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 2018-15, §§ 4, 5, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 15-148. - Examination of application, issuance of license, disapproval. 
(a)  The city council shall examine an application for an adult business license, or a manager, server, or entertainer license within forty-five (45) days of the date such application was received by the city manager. After such examination, the city council shall approve the issuance of a license if the appropriate license fee has been paid, the applicant is qualified, and all the applicable requirements set forth herein are met. No license shall be approved for any person ineligible pursuant to the provisions herein. All incomplete applications shall be denied. 
(b)  The record of the city council shall show the action taken on the application, and if the license is granted, the city council shall direct the city clerk to issue the proper license. The adult business license and all manager, server and entertainer licenses shall state that it is not transferrable to other persons or entities in the calendar year for which it is issued. If the city council has not approved or disapproved an application for a license within forty-five (45) days from the date such application was received by the city clerk, then on the expiration of the forty-fifth day: 
(1)  The application shall be approved and the city clerk shall immediately issue the license for which the application was made; and 
(2)  The applicant shall have the right to begin operating in the manner allowed by the license for which application was made. 
(c)  If an application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be notified within five (5) working days by registered or certified mail to the applicant's last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 2010-18, §§ 1, 2, 7-20-10) 
Sec. 15-149. - License ineligibility and disqualification. 
No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to: 
(a)  An applicant for an adult business license if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The premises does not meet the requirements contained in section 110 of the Perry Land Development Ordinance; 
(2)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
(3)  The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(4)  The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the city, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration by the city council; 
(5)  The applicant or any person identified in subsections 15-147(a)(4) and (a)(6) has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein in subsection 15-147(a)(7) during the time period set forth herein; 
(6)  The applicant or any person identified in subsections 15-147(a)(4) and (a)(6) has had an adult business license or comparable license revoked or suspended by this or any other governmental body during the past five (5) years; 
(7)  If the applicant is applying for a license to operate a bath house and applicant has not produced a health certificate as required herein for all persons working on the premises; or 
(8)  The applicant is merely a surrogate or nominee acting on behalf of one who would otherwise not be eligible for a license. 
(b)  An applicant for a manager, server or entertainer license if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein in subsection 15-147(b)(3) during the time period set forth herein; 
(2)  The applicant failed to provide all of the information required on the application; 
(3)  The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(4)  The applicant has had a manager, server or entertainer license revoked or suspended by this or any other governmental body during the past five (5) years; or 
(5)  The applicant is applying for a license for a manager, server or entertainer in a bath house and has not produced a health certificate as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-150. - Standards of conduct. 
The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all adult businesses, their employees and all managers, servers and entertainers and patrons of adult businesses, while on or about the premises of the business: 
(a)  Identification cards. All or any manager, server or entertainer issued a license by the city under the provisions contained herein shall, at all times when working in an adult business, have in their possession a valid identification card issued by the city, bearing the license number, the employee's physical description and a photograph of such employee. Such identification cards shall be laminated to prevent alteration. 
(b)  Age restriction. Only persons eighteen (18) years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of any adult business. 
(c)  Exterior observation. The premises of all adult businesses will be so constructed as to insure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with an anteroom or foyer will be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building. 
(d)  Exterior display. No adult business will be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of live performers engaged in an erotic depiction or dance featuring or displaying specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
(e)  Certain acts prohibited. 
(1)  No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron shall perform any specified sexual activities as defined herein, wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict any specified sexual activities or participate in any acts of prostitution as prohibited by state law or municipal ordinance while on the premises of an adult business. 
(2)  No employee, server, entertainer or patron of an adult business while on the premises of an adult business shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of such employee, server, entertainer or patron, whether such specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed. 
(3)  No employee, manager, server or entertainer of an adult business shall be visible from the exterior of the adult business while such person is nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any specified anatomical area. 
(4)  No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or gratuity from any patron for any act prohibited herein and while on the premises of an adult business and no entertainer shall receive any payment or gratuity from any patron for any entertainment except as follows: 
a.  While such entertainer is on the stage a patron may place such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage; or 
b.  While such entertainer is not on the stage but while on the premises of an adult business and is clothed so as to not expose to view any specified anatomical area, a patron may either place such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand, or under a leg garter worn by such entertainer at least four (4) inches below the bottom of the pubic region. 
(5)  No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of an adult business shall: 
a.  Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages or wine to be brought upon, sold or consumed on the premises; 
b.  Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or narcotic on the premises; 
c.  Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to be in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment business; 
d.  Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution on the premises, as prohibited by state law or municipal article; or 
e.  Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this article or any other city article provision or state law. 
(f)  Signs required. All adult entertainment businesses that provide live entertainment shall conspicuously display in the common area at the principal entrance to the premises, a sign, on which uppercase letters shall be at least two (2) inches high, and lowercase letters at least one inch high, which shall read as follows: 
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS IS REGULATED  AND LICENSED BY THE CITY OF PERRY 
ENTERTAINERS ARE: 
•  Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct or prostitution on the premises or to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, patron or other entertainer or to permit any employee, patron or other entertainer to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of said entertainer. 
•  Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any customer for entertainment except as follows: 
While such entertainer is on the stage, by placing such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage; or 
While such entertainer is not on the stage, by either placing such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand, or under the entertainer's leg garter. 
CUSTOMERS ARE: 
•  Not permitted to be upon the stage at any time. 
•  Not permitted to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any server, entertainer or patron or in solicitation for prostitution. 
(g)  Lighting required. The premises of all adult businesses shall be equipped with overhead lighting of every place to which patrons are permitted access, at an illumination of not less than three and five-tenths (3.5) foot-candle per square feet, as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any patron is present in or on the premises. 
(h)  Closed booths or rooms prohibited. The premises of all adult businesses shall be physically arranged in such manner that the entire interior portion of any booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls is visible from a common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. 
(i)  Ventilation and sanitation requirements. The premises of all adult businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition. Except as otherwise provided herein, separate dressing rooms and rest rooms for men and women shall at all times be maintained and kept in a sanitary condition. 
(j)  Hours of operation. An adult business may be open or in use only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Friday and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(k)  Facilities necessary. No adult business license to conduct a bath house shall be issued unless an inspection by the building official, or his/her authorized representative reveals that the premises on which the applicant intends to conduct such business complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given or showers taken. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt, or refuse. All equipment used in the business' operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen, and items for personal use of operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths, and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for every patron. No activity related to an adult business shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within any permitted establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(2)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(3)  Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
The building official shall certify that the proposed business establishment complies with all of the requirements of this section and shall give or send such certification to the city manager. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of state, county or city statutes or articles concerning the installation and maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. The appropriate city official may recommend the issuance of a license contingent upon the compliance with any requirements in this section. 
(l)  All dancing performances or entertainment by entertainers at adult businesses shall occur on a platform intended exclusively for the purpose which is raised at least twenty-four (24) inches from the level at the floor and no dancing shall occur closer than four (4) feet to any patron. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-151. - License posting or display. 
(a)  Every person licensed as an adult business shall post such license in a conspicuous place and manner on the adult business premises. 
(b)  Every person holding a server, manager or entertainer license shall post his or her license in his or her work area on the adult business premises so it shall be readily available for inspection by city authorities responsible for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-152. - Manager on premises. 
(a)  A manager shall be on duty at all adult businesses at all times the premises are open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any person who provides adult entertainment or works as a server within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer or server's license and that such licenses are prominently posted. It shall also be the responsibility of the manager to insure minors do not enter upon the premises of an adult entertainment business. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-153. - Inspectors and inspections. 
All adult businesses shall permit representative of the police department or any other city official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-154. - License suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal. 
Whenever the city manager has information that: 
(a)  The owner or operator of an adult business or a holder of a manager, server or entertainer license has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this article; or 
(b)  There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this article that have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or operator of an adult business knew or should have known that such violations were committed; or 
(c)  The adult business license or the manager, server or entertainer license was knowingly obtained through false statements in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or 
(d)  The adult business licensee or the manager, server or entertainer licensee knowingly failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or 
(e)  The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director of an adult business, or a shareholder owning twenty (20) percent or more of the stock in a corporation that owns an adult business, has become more disqualified by a conviction as provided herein; or 
(f)  The holder of a manager, server or entertainer license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided herein. 
(g)  The city manager shall make this information known to the city council, which, upon five (5) day's written notice to the person holding the license at the licensee's last known address, shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked. The city council may pass a resolution setting forth the procedures for the conduct of such hearings. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine witnesses, with or without legal counsel. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the city council may take any of the following actions: 
(1)  Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days; 
(2)  Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year; or 
(3)  Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one (1) year, on the condition that no further violations of the ordinance occur during the period of probation. If a violation does occur and after a hearing the violation is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year. 
The city council shall make its decision within ten (10) working days of the hearing and should promptly notify the licensee in writing. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-155. - Renewal. 
A license may be renewed by making application to the city manager on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year, and current expiration of such license shall not be affected, and a new application shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-156. - Judicial review. 
Following the entry of an order by the city manager suspending or revoking a license issued pursuant to this article, or disapproving the renewal application for a license, such licensee or applicant may seek judicial review in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-157. - Penalty. 
Any person knowingly violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the maximum punishment as provided in the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-158. - Regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power to promulgate regulations as may be necessary and feasible for the carrying out of the duties of his/her office and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Sec. 15-159. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, cause or phrase in this article, or the application thereof to any circumstances, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 11-18-97) 
Secs. 15-160—15-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FRUIT STANDS, VEGETABLE STANDS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 95-17, adopted Sept. 5, 1995, added provisions designated as a new Ch. 15, Art. VIII, §§ 15-141—15-146. Inasmuch as there existed a Ch. 15, Art. VIII, such provisions have been redesignated as a new Ch. 15, Art. IX, §§ 15-171—15-176. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-171. - Definitions. 
This article shall apply to any person, firm or corporation, as principal or agent, or both, which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in the city, but rather one who displays harvested but unprocessed agricultural or forestry products in or upon any lot, building, room or structure of any kind whether fixed or mobile for the purpose of selling to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 4, 9-5-95) 
Sec. 15-172. - Occupational tax. 
It shall be unlawful for any merchant meeting the terms of this article to engage in business without first paying the occupational tax required under article II of this chapter. Provided, however, a merchant selling from a pick-up truck that does not exceed three-fourths (¾) ton does not need but one license annually to sell in multiple permitted locations. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 4, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 1, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 15-173. - Restrictions; permitted locations; size of operation; etc. 
No merchant meeting the terms of this article shall operate such business without strict compliance with the following: 
(1)  Permitted locations. Such merchants shall be allowed only in the following described areas: 
a.  Sam Nunn Boulevard beginning at the junction of Ball Street and Washington Street and extending along both sides of Sam Nunn Boulevard in a northwest direction to the intersection of Mason Terrace and Sam Nunn Boulevard. 
b.  Courtney Hodges Boulevard beginning at the junction of Commerce and Carroll Street and extending the full length of General Courtney Hodges Boulevard along both sides of said street. 
c.  Larry Walker Parkway beginning at the intersection of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and Larry Walker Parkway and extending along Larry Walker Parkway on both sides of said street to the intersection of Larry Walker Parkway and General Courtney Hodges Boulevard. 
d.  Marshallville Highway beginning at the intersection of General Courtney Hodges Boulevard and Marshallville Highway and extending along both sides of Marshallville Highway to the intersection of Marshallville Highway and U.S. Interstate 75. 
e.  Macon Road beginning at the intersection of Macon Road and Main Street and extending north along both sides of Macon Road to the intersection of Macon Road and Perimeter Road. 
f.  Any commercially zoned location by exception with mayor and council approval. 
(2)  Size, safety of operations, surfaces, etc. No such merchant shall occupy more than four hundred (400) square feet of area on any lot or erect or set up any structures or apparatus which in total exceeds two hundred (200) square feet with the exception of property used for the sale of Christmas trees. 
Any and all structures and apparatus used in conjunction with such a business shall be of substantial construction and material as determined by the building official so as not to constitute a nuisance or hazard to the general public. Exposed wood and/or unpainted surfaces are prohibited. The structures and apparatus shall be painted a neutral or earthtone color. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors. Such structures and apparatus shall not be vacated nor remain on any property unattended for more than seventy-two (72) hours and shall be permanently removed upon the expiration date specified in the application. 
(3)  Any and all structures, apparatus and signage must be set back ten (10) feet from established rights-of-way. 
(4)  Signage shall not exceed a total of ten (10) square feet per business. Said signage shall be stenciled. Hand-painted or spray painted signage is specifically prohibited. 
(5)  Applicant must verify to the zoning enforcement officer that adequate parking will be provided without reducing the required parking of any permanent business located on the same lot. Such parking shall be arranged so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 4, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 2, 8-2-11; Ord. No. 2012-21, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-12; Ord. No. 2013-18, 7-16-13) 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 15-174. - Application. 
(a)  Any merchant desiring to transact business within the city shall file with the city clerk an application prior to the transaction of any such business. Such application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and permanent address of the merchant; 
(2)  The type of business to be conducted; 
(3)  The number of days during which the sale is to be conducted; 
(4)  Evidence of either ownership of the property by the merchant or written lease or written permission from the owner of the property to the merchant regarding the property upon which the sale is to be conducted; 
(5)  The location where the sale is to be conducted. 
(b)  No person shall make any false statements in any application in order to conduct a merchant's business. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 4, 9-5-95) 
Sec. 15-175. - Regulatory fee; change in location. 
(a)  There shall be a regulatory fee payable in conjunction with the occupational tax upon submittal of an approved application. Such fee shall be established by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Change in locations or renewals of existing locations will require new application subject to the established regulatory fee. Provided, however, a merchant selling from a pick-up truck that does not exceed three-fourths (¾) ton shall be required to pay only one (1) regulatory fee annually for multiple permitted locations and make only one (1) application. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 4, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 2, 5-4-04) 
Sec. 15-176. - Issuance; term; etc. 
After the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this division, a business application shall be approved. Such approval is not transferable, is valid only within the territorial limits of the city, is valid only for the business stated on the application, and shall expire on the last day named therein on which the sale is to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 4, 9-5-95) 
Secs. 15-177—15-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SECURITY CAMERAS FOR RETAIL OR HOSPITALITY BUSINESSES 

Sec. 15-180. - Security. 
(a)  Every grocery store, convenience store, department store, pawn shop, motel, hotel and those restaurants open for business at any time between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be equipped with the following security devices and standards: 
(1)  A security camera system to assist in offender identification and apprehension; 
(2)  A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of at least two (2) footcandles per square foot at eighteen (18) inches above the surface; 
(3)  Window signage that allows a clear and unobstructed view from outside the building and in a normal line of sight of the cash register and sales transaction area; 
(4)  A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at all times after 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  Said businesses shall not have window tinting that reduces exterior or interior view in a normal line of sight. 
(c)  The camera required in subsection (a)(1) above, shall have a continuous video recording system dedicated to each register area with cameras and lens of the type, number and location approved by the public safety director or his or her designee. Such cameras must be capable of producing a retrievable and identifiable image on VHS tape or electronic media such as CD or DVD that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. Said cameras shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be operational at all times. In the event the camera becomes inoperable, the licensee must have the camera repaired or have availability of a back-up camera system within a ten-day period of time. In addition, in the event the camera becomes inoperable, the licensee must immediately notify the public service director or his or her designee. If a crime occurs or an employee believes a crime has occurred, the police department shall be contacted immediately and the file retrieved by a designated police officer. 
(d)  The retrievable footage on VHS tape or electronic media must be maintained and available for a minimum of fourteen (14) days. 
(Ord. No. 2001-09, 4-3-01; Ord. No. 2008-36, § 3, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-03, §§ 1, 2, 2-3-09) 
Sec. 15-181. - Exemption from the provisions of this article. 
Any establishment governed by this article and having three (3) or more employees and/or a security guard on duty between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is hereby exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-09, 4-3-01) 
Sec. 15-182. - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision under this article shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punished by a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and, at the discretion of the judge at the municipal court, a suspension of all business licenses at the establishment until the licensee comes into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-09, 4-3-01) 
Secs. 15-183—15-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - BINGO[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of bingo, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-50 et seq. 

Sec. 15-191. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(a)  Bingo game or nonprofit bingo game means a game of chance played on cards with numbered squares in which counters or indicators are placed on numbers chosen by lot and won by covering a previously specified number or order of numbered squares. Such words, terms, or phrases, as used in this article, shall be strictly construed to include only the series of acts generally defined as bingo and shall exclude all other activity. 
(b)  Bingo session means a time period during which bingo games are played. 
(c)  City council means the mayor and council members of the City of Perry. 
(d)  Operate, operated, or operating means the direction, supervision, management, operation, control, or guidance of activity. 
(e)  Recreational bingo means a bingo session operated by any person or entity at no charge to participants in which the prizes for each bingo game during the bingo session shall be noncash prizes and the total for such prizes for each such game shall not exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00). No such noncash prize awarded in recreational bingo shall be exchanged or redeemed for money or for any other prize with a value in excess of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Recreational bingo shall also include a bingo session operated by a nonprofit, tax-exempt licensed operator of bingo games at no charge to participants in which the participants are senior citizens attending a function at a facility of the tax-exempt licensed organization or are residents of nursing homes, retirement homes, senior centers, or hospitals and in which the prizes for each bingo game during the bingo session shall be nominal cash prizes not to exceed five dollars ($5.00) for any single prize and the total of such prizes for each such game shall not exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00). Recreational bingo shall also include a bingo session operated by an employer with ten (10) or more full-time employees for the purposes of providing a safe work place incentive and in which the prizes are determined by the employer; provided, however, that no monetary considerations is required by any participant other than the employer and the employer expressly prohibits any monetary consideration from any employee. Recreational bingo shall not be considered a lottery as defined in paragraph (4) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 or a form of gambling as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-21. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 15-192. - License required to operate bingo game; recreational bingo exception. 
(a)  Except for subsection (b) of this section, no nonprofit, tax-exempt organization shall be permitted to operate a bingo game until the city council issues a license to the organization authorizing it to do so. In the event of any controversy concerning whether or not certain activity constitutes bingo for which a license may be issued, the decision of the city council share control. The license described in this section is in addition to and not in lieu of any other licenses which may be required by the state or federal government, and no bingo game shall be operated until such time as all requisite licenses have been obtained. 
(b)  Recreational bingo is a nonprofit bingo game or a bingo game operated by an employer with ten (10) or more full-time employees for the purposes of providing a safe work place incentive and shall not be subject to the licensing requirements and regulations provided in this part applicable to bingo games not considered recreational bingo and operated by nonprofit, tax-exempt organizations. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 15-193. - Licensing procedure; fee; renewal. 
(a)  Any nonprofit, tax-exempt organization desiring to obtain a license to operate bingo games shall make application to the city council on forms prescribed by the city council and shall pay an annual fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. No license shall be issued to any nonprofit, tax-exempt organization unless the organization has been in existence for twenty-four (24) months immediately prior to the issuance of the license. The license will expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 following the granting of the license. Renewal applications for each calendar year shall be filed with the city council prior to January 1 of each year and shall be on a form prescribed by the city council. 
(b)  Each application for a license and each application for renewal of a license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and home address of the applicant and, if the applicant is a corporation, association, or other similar of legal entity, the names and home addresses of each of the officers of the organization as well as the names and addresses of the directors, or other persons similarly situated, of the organization; 
(2)  The names and home addresses of each of the persons who will be operating, advertising, or promoting the bingo game; 
(3)  The names and home addresses of any persons, organizations, or other legal entities that will act as surety for the applicant or to which the applicant is financially indebted or to which any financial obligation is owed by the applicant; 
(4)  A determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service certifying that the applicant is an organization exempt under federal tax law; 
(5)  A determination letter from the Georgia Department of Revenue certifying that the applicant is exempt under tax laws of this state; 
(6)  The location at which the applicant will conduct the bingo games and, if the premises on which the games are to be conducted is to be leased, a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(7)  A statement showing the convictions, if any, for criminal offenses other than minor traffic offenses of each of the persons listed in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection; and 
(8)  Any other necessary and reasonable information which the city council may require. 
(c)  The city council shall refuse to grant a bingo license to any applicant who fails to provide fully the information required by this section. 
(d)  When a nonprofit, tax-exempt organization which operates or intends to operate bingo games for residents and patients of a retirement home, nursing home, or hospital operated by that organization at which gross receipts are or will be limited to one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less during each bingo session and pays or will pay prizes having a value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less during each bingo session, then, notwithstanding any other provision of this section, neither the applicant nor any of the persons whose names and addresses are required in the paragraph (1) and (2) of subsection (b) of this section shall be required to submit or provide fingerprints or photographs as a condition of being granted a license. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2003-43, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 15-194. - Revocation of licenses; access to premises by law enforcement agencies. 
(a)  The city council shall have the specific authority to suspend or revoke any license for any violation of any state or federal laws. 
(b)  By making application for a license under this article, every applicant consents that the city police chief as well as any detectives and/or officers of the city police department, may come upon the premises of any licensee or upon any premises on which any licensee is conducting a bingo game for the purpose of examining the accounts and records of the licensee to determine if a violation of this article has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 15-195. - Issuance of annual one-day license to nonprofit, tax-exempt school; application. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, the city council, upon receiving written application therefore, shall be authorized to issue a one-time license to a nonprofit, tax-exempt school which will allow it to operate a bingo game one day annually. In such cases, the city council shall have the power to waive the license fee provided for in section 15-193 above. This section does not waive any license fee required by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 15-196. - Restrictions as to ownership of premises utilized. 
Bingo games shall be operated only on premises owned by the nonprofit, tax-exempt organization operating the bingo game, on property leased by the nonprofit, tax-exempt organization and used regularly by that organization for purposes other than the operation of a bingo game, or on property leased by the nonprofit, tax-exempt organization operating the bingo game from another nonprofit, tax-exempt organization. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 15-197. - Age restrictions. 
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo conducted pursuant to any license issued under this article unless accompanied by an adult. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to conduct or assist in the conducting of any game of bingo conducted pursuant to any license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 15-198. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  A licensee shall: 
(1)  Own all equipment used to conduct a bingo game or lease such equipment from an organization that is also licensed to conduct a bingo game; 
(2)  Display its bingo license conspicuously at the location where the bingo game is conducted; 
(3)  Conduct bingo games only at the single location specified in the licensee's application; and 
(4)  Not conduct more than one (1) bingo session during any one (1) calendar day, which session shall not exceed five (5) hours. 
(b)  No nonprofit, tax-exempt organization shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm, association, or corporation to have such individual, firm, association, or corporation operate bingo games or concessions on behalf of the nonprofit, tax-exempt organization. 
(c)  A nonprofit, tax-exempt organization shall not lend its name or allow its identity to be used by any individual, firm, association, or corporation in the operating or advertising of a bingo game in which said nonprofit, tax-exempt organization is not directly and solely operating the bingo game. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more nonprofit, tax-exempt organizations which are properly licensed pursuant to this article to operate bingo games jointly or to operate bingo games upon the same premises during any eighteen-hour period. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to award prizes in excess of eleven hundred dollars ($1,100.00) in cash or gifts of equivalent value during any calendar day or twenty-two hundred dollars ($2,200.00) in cash or gifts of equivalent value during any calendar week. It shall be unlawful to exceed such limits at any combination of locations operated by a single licensee or his agents or employees. It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more licensees to pyramid the valuation of prizes in such manner as to exceed the limits contained in this article. The term "equivalent value" shall mean the fair market value of the gift on the date the gift is given as the prize in a bingo game. 
(f)  No person or organization by whatever name or composition thereof shall take any salary, expense money, or fees for the operation of any bingo game, except that not more than thirty dollars ($30.00) per day may be paid to one (1) or more individuals for assisting in the conduct of such games on such day. 
(g)  No person shall pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in relation to the operation or conduct of a bingo game. 
(h)  A person who is a member of more than one (1) nonprofit, tax-exempt organization shall be permitted to participate in the bingo operations of only two (2) organizations of which such person is a member; provided, however, that such person shall not receive more than thirty dollars ($30.00) per day for assisting in the conduct of bingo games regardless of whether such person assists both organizations in the same day. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 15-199. - Penalties. 
In the event a bingo licensee doing business in the city fails to comply with the regulations contained in this article or with state and federal laws, the licensee shall be subject to immediate revocation of his license and for penalties provided by state and federal law including, but not limited to, those penalties outlined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-62. 
(Ord. No. 2003-30, 5-6-03) 
ARTICLE XII. - FIREWORKS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-39, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 15, 2006, repealed article XII, sections 15-200—15-208, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article XII, sections 15-200, 15-201. Former article XII pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 2005-18, adopted June 21, 2005. 
State Law reference— Regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 15-200. - Definitions. 
"Fireworks" shall have the meaning as set out in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1. 
(Ord. No. 2006-39, §§ 1—3, 8-15-06) 
Sec. 15-201. - Fireworks displays. 
Firework displays shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any person desiring to conduct a public exhibition or display of fireworks shall first comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-4 and show proof of such compliance by submitting to the public safety director for the city a copy of the fireworks exhibition permit issued by the judge of the probate court of the county. 
(2)  Written notification must be given to the public safety director for the city for a fireworks exhibition within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled event. Accompanying said notification shall be a copy of the permit issued by the judge of the county probate court; and proof of liability insurance as required under state law. 
(3)  The site of the fireworks and the equipment to be used shall be inspected by the fire department of the city prior to the time of the fireworks display. 
(Ord. No. 2006-39, §§ 1—3, 8-15-06) 
Secs. 15-202—15-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 21, 2015, repealed Art. XIII in its entirety and enacted a new Art. XIII to read as set out herein. Former Art. XIII, §§ 15-2000—15-2010, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-59, §§ 1—3, 5—7, 9—11, adopted Nov. 21, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-24, adopted May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 2009-14, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 19, 2009. 
State Law reference— Regulation and taxation of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 15-210. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Perry Coin Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-211. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2), are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(a)—(k). 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-212. - Gambling places prohibited. 
Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-213. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Purchase machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skeet-ball machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Roll down machines; 
(18)  Trivia machines; 
(19)  Laser games; 
(20)  Simulator games; 
(21)  Virtual reality machines; 
(22)  Maze games; 
(23)  Racing games; 
(24)  Coin operated pool table or coin operated billiard table as defined in O.C.G.A. 43-8-1 (3); and 
(25)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. The term "coin operated amusement machine" does not including the following: 
a.  Coin operated washing machines or dryers; 
b.  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
c.  Gas and electric meters; 
d.  Pay telephones; 
e.  Pay toilets; 
f.  Cigarette vending machines; 
g.  Coin operated vending machines; 
h.  Coin operated scales; 
i.  Coin operated gumball machines; 
j.  Coin operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
k.  Coin operated massage beds; and 
l.  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses and the entire office or area of the business in any one (1) location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in the O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-214. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained an amusement game room license, without obtaining an occupational tax certificate required under this article. A separate amusement game room license must be obtained for each location in the jurisdiction which bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-215. - Issuance of license. 
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of this article. The city shall not require a fee for an amusement game room license or registration. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-216. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate application form, paying the required occupational tax and obtaining an occupational tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-217. - Minimum distance requirements. 
Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. This section shall not apply at any location for which a license has previously been issued and, during the term of such license, a church building, school building, education building, school grounds, college campus, alcoholic treatment center, or housing authority property was subsequently acquired, constructed, or began operation within the proscribed distance(s), nor to the renewal of such license by the same licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-218. - Number of bona fide coin operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than six (6) class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-219. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin operated amusement machines and from business. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the class B amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. 
(b)  Any location owner or location operator subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(1) is hereby required to provide a monthly report to the city clerk's office. Such report shall indicate the monthly gross retail receipts for each business location located within the jurisdiction of the city and shall be due by the twentieth day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(c)  No location owner or location operator may derive more than fifty (50) percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the class B machines are situated from such class B machines and any location owner or location operator found in violation of such provision may be fined and may have any city issued license suspended or revoked as allowed under this article. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the fifty (50) percent of gross retail receipts requirement. Any violations of this provision shall be reported to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-220. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-221. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 (a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or § 50-27-78. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-222. - License suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The city may suspend or revoke the city issued license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by the municipality as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(c)  The suspension or revocation of licenses under this Code section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  No license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(2)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
b.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
c.  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
d.  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
e.  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
f.  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttable presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(3)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to the municipality. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(4)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city council. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. 
(5)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross-examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(6)  The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten (10) business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Revocation of the license; 
b.  Suspension of the license for not less than fifteen (15) days and no more than twelve (12) months; 
c.  Imposition of a probationary period not to exceed twelve (12) months; 
d.  Civil monetary penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and/or 
e.  Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation. 
Where the remaining term of the license is less than twelve (12) months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three (3) separate and unrelated violations within twenty-four (24) months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(7)  The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten (10) business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(8)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the mayor, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and non-appealable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-223. - Criminal penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, or other court of competent jurisdiction are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum penalty: Fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 
(2)  Maximum penalty: Fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three (3) months, imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or a combination of the aforementioned. 
(b)  The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city, or the judge of any other court of competent jurisdiction. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city may be imposed by the mayor and council after a public hearing as described in section 15-222 of this article. 
(c)  Offering one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-224. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
The municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin operated amusement machines: 
(1)  Minimum penalty: Fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 
(2)  Maximum penalty: Fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. 
The municipal court of the city shall have authority to place any person sentenced under this section on probation for the payment of fines for a period up to one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-225. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All bona fide coin operated amusement machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police or his designee may inspect or cause the inspection of any location in which any such bona fide coin operated amusement machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and may inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any location owner or location operator to open the location to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(4)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance of the peace, as defined by law; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
e.  Shirt and shoes required. All location owners and location operators shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their location. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-226. - Security cameras required. 
Any party holding a license pursuant to this article is required to install a continuous video recording system dedicated to each register area with cameras and lens of a type, number and location approved by the chief of policy or designee. Such camera(s) must be capable of producing a retrievable and identifiable image on film or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be in operation during all hours in which such establishment is opened for business. The camera shall be subject to monthly inspection by the chief of police or designee, and establishments must have immediate availability of a back-up camera system in the event the primary system becomes inoperable. If a crime occurs or any employee believes a crime has occurred, the police department shall be contacted immediately and the film retrieved by a designated police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-227. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current amusement game room license and occupational tax certificate issued by the city. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 15-228. - Enforcing officer. 
The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 7-21-15) 
Secs. 15-229—15-2019. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-2020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charge, either directly or indirectly, refers to a salary, commission, gratuity or other remuneration as paid or made available to a massagist administering massages as a primary or incidental activity resulting from such payment; a charge, fee, dues or other payment for the purpose of receiving any service or use of an establishment which provides for the payor the opportunity to obtain a massage. 
Genitals means the external sexual organs. 
Health certificate means a certificate from a regular practicing medical doctor showing that the person named therein has been examined and is free from any infectious or communicable disease. 
Massage means the act or art of treating the human body or any part thereof by rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction or percussion or like ministrations to stimulate circulation or increase suppleness for a charge, direct or indirect. 
Massage establishment means any building, room, place or establishment where massages are practiced upon the human body for a charge, either directly or indirectly, by a person, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, whether primary or an incidental activity of the establishment in which the message is performed. 
Massage establishment license means that document issued by the city to an establishment where massages are furnished. 
Massagist means a person who administers massages. 
Massagist license means that document issued by the city to a person who administers massages. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2021. - Limit of applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall in no way affect nor limit the provisions and requirements of the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2022. - Inspections. 
The city shall be authorized to make, or cause to be made, inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this article in any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city shall also have authority to direct that the health officer or official of the city shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the sanitary conditions of any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The inspections may be made at any time during which a massage establishment is open for business pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2023. - Violations; penalty. 
The operation of any business, administration of any massage, use of any license issued pursuant to this article contrary to any provision of this article or the failure to comply with any provision of this article: 
(1)  Shall, if continued, be deemed and considered a nuisance; 
(2)  Shall be subject to any other provision for suspension, revocation or denial as provided herein and any other civil or criminal action or penalty or proceeding provided by state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2024. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or licensed vocational or practical nurse acting at the direction of a doctor; nor a duly licensed establishment wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor and which operate only under the licensed party's direction; nor shall it apply to athletic trainers of a bona fide athletic team when the trainers are massaging members of the team, nor to a duly licensed hospital or medical clinic. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 15-2025. - Issuance procedures. 
Following the submission of an application for the license as provided in this article, either for an initial or renewal license, the following procedure or requirement shall apply thereto in addition to those elsewhere specified in this article: 
(1)  Investigation and inquiry. Any investigation or inquiry pertaining to the information provided on the license application as may be considered reasonable and necessary shall be made by the city. The investigation and inquiry shall be concluded within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the application for a license except that if for any reason the investigation or inquiry is not concluded, the city shall so notify the applicant of that situation. The notice shall specify a reasonable period within which the city expects to conclude the investigation and inquiry, the reasonable period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Failure to obtain information. Upon the expiration of the period above specified or as extended, if the city is unable to conclude the investigation and inquiry by reason of inability to obtain information, the applicant shall be so notified in writing by the city and given a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days during which the applicant may provide the information to the city as the city may consider accurate and complete. Upon the failure to obtain the information or to confirm the accuracy of completeness of the same, the city shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant. 
(3)  False or deficient information. If, upon concluding the review, investigation and inquiry of the application and the applicant, the city determines that any information provided in the application is false or that the information provided in the application or as determined by the city upon its investigation and inquiry the following facts are found to exist, the city shall not issue a license to the applicant: 
a.  The health certificate required for any massagist and attached to an application is absent. 
b.  Any massagist employed or to be employed in any massage establishment does not have a license as required by this article and has not submitted application for the same prior to the filing of an application for a massage establishment license by the applicant therefor. 
c.  A massagist does not hold the qualifications specified by evidence of a diploma or training and experience as provided for and being a requirement of the issuance of a massagist license. 
d.  The applicant, if an individual, for any license required by this article or any person or entity owning and/or controlling the applicant including, but not limited to, all partners, principals or managers and also if the applicant is a corporation, an officer, director or shareholder holding at least ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation has been convicted of any violation of this article within the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the filing of the application or any offense specified in subsection 15-2052(1) or subsection 15-2072(2)i. of this chapter. 
e.  The applicant has previously had a license required by this article revoked, or is at the time of filing an application for a license, presently holding a license which is under suspension pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(4)  Notice of refusal. Upon refusal to issue a license as above provided, the city shall give to the applicant notice which shall contain the reasons for failure to issue the license. 
(5)  Appeal petition. The applicant may within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice petition to the mayor and council members for a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a license shall be granted to the applicant. The hearing shall be scheduled and conducted at any special called meeting of the city council to be held within thirty (30) days of the date the petition is filed and with written notice to the applicant of the time, date and place of the hearing unless postponed with the consent of the applicant or by motion adopted at meeting of council specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2026. - Fees. 
The fees or charges for the licenses required pursuant to this article shall be set by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2027. - License; duration, display, assignability. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid, except as otherwise provided herein, from the date of issuance through December 31 of the year in which the license is issued. Any license obtained, as required by this article, shall be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment. Any license issued pursuant to this article shall not be assignable to any other person, firm, corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2028. - Suspension and revocation. 
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation subject to the following violations and procedures: 
(1)  Grounds for suspension. The city may suspend a license issued to and held by a massage establishment or a massagist upon any of the following grounds: 
a.  A massagist who has an infectious or communicable disease has administered a massage. 
b.  Any massagist and/or any massagist employed by a massage establishment or any part specified in subsection 15-2052(9) has been convicted of any violation of this article or crime specified in subsection 15-2052(10) or subsection 15-2072(2)i. 
c.  Any massagist has violated or permitted to be violated any provision of section 15-2071 or any provision of division 4 of this article. 
d.  Suspension duration. The city shall have authority to suspend a license for a period of from one day to ninety (90) days for each occasion upon which one of the grounds for suspension as above set forth has occurred. The suspension shall be effective from the time specified or during the period specified pursuant to a hearing as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(2)  Special suspension. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the city shall have authority to suspend a license instantly without hearing, to be effective until a hearing as herein provided, whenever any holder of a license issued pursuant to this article: 
a.  Shall have violated any provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) above on more than one occasion or occurrence prior to a hearing as specified herein; or 
b.  A hearing as specified herein is not held as scheduled by reason of postponement of the same by the holder of the license. 
(3)  Grounds for revocation. The city may revoke a license issued pursuant to this article for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Whenever in the judgment of the mayor and members of council of the city any holder of a license has violated a provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) above, the violation is of sufficient excess, neglect or aggravation as to require revocation rather than suspension or upon a judgment that the violation of this article is continuous. 
b.  That the holder of a license issued pursuant to this article has had the license suspended on more than one occasion during any calendar year wherein revocation of the license shall be automatic. 
(4)  Proceedings. Any proceeding for suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this article shall be pursuant to the following procedures: 
a.  Notice of the proceeding to be recommended or pursued by the city shall be given to the holder of the license specifying the proceeding recommended or to be pursued and the reason therefor pursuant to subsection (1) above. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of hearing on the matter at a special called meeting of city council and, if the provisions of subsection (3) above are being followed, a statement that the license is suspended from the time of service of the notice until the hearing. 
b.  The hearing as specified herein shall be held within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice being served upon the holder of the license unless postponed with the consent of the holder of the license or by motion adopted at the meeting of council specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
c.  At the hearing the holder of the license shall be required to present the license to the city prior to being heard at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing the license shall either be marked "revoked" or "suspended" with the period of suspension specified thereon or returned to the holder if no action of suspension or revocation is effected. 
d.  Subsequent to any action of suspension or revocation as provided herein, the city shall have authority to place one or more notices upon any massage establishment in a conspicuous place or places that the license issued to that establishment has been suspended or revoked and that the same is not open for the business of providing massages without the establishment holding a valid license issued pursuant to this article. In the event that the holder of a license fails to deliver the same to the city as regulated herein or upon the license being suspended pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, the city shall have the authority to take possession of the license from the holder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Secs. 15-2029—15-2050. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 15-2051. - License required. 
No license to engage in the business of operating a massage establishment shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the city clerk, and no massage establishment shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the city until the license has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2052. - Application. 
The city clerk shall provide, to an applicant for a massage establishment license, a form containing the information as hereinafter specified which shall be completed and filed with the city clerk by each applicant for such license to be accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
(1)  The kind of business to be operated. 
(2)  The name of the business. 
(3)  The location where the business is proposed to be carried on and the telephone number at the location. 
(4)  The legal name of the applicant for the license. If the applicant is a corporation, the date upon which the corporation was registered pursuant to the laws of the state; the name of its registered agent; the address of its registered office if the same is different from the address of the location of the business. If the business is not a corporation, the name, home addresses and home telephone numbers of all persons having an ownership interest in the business. Also, an applicant for a massage establishment license shall submit his/her date of birth, sex and race on the application. 
(5)  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the ninety (90) days preceding the date of the application. 
(6)  The home address of the applicant and telephone number and the length at which the applicant has been a resident of the address. 
(7)  The social security and federal employer's identification number of the applicant. 
(8)  The names and addresses of all massagists to be employed or presently employed by the applicant with a health certificate as defined in this article issued not less than fifteen (15) days prior to submitting the application to be attached to that application for each listed massagist. 
(9)  Names and addresses of all persons or legal entities owning and/or controlling the applicant, including but not limited to all partners, principals or managers and also if the applicant is a corporation then the officers, directors and shareholders holding at least ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. 
(10)  Disclosure as to all employees of the applicant and any and all partners, managers or principals of the applicant and also in the event the applicant is a corporation, all officers, directors or stockholders holding ten (10) percent or more of the capital stock of the applicant specifying all final convictions occurring within five (5) years of the date of the application of any federal or sate offense which is a felony or any misdemeanor offense of sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy or lewd house, keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, assault or battery or masturbation for hire. If such conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered. 
(11)  The applicant shall acknowledge that pursuant to this article the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information above provided and that if the inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of the information, the city has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the person about whom the information is disputed, and the applicant shall be required to provide such to the city upon the request of that official prior to that official making a final decision as to approving or denying the license. 
(12)  The names and residential telephone numbers and addresses for the last year of all proposed or present employees of the massage establishment for which the application is being made. 
(13)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the real property on which the massage establishment will be located so that the party may be located, if necessary, by any city employee or official during day or evening hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2053. - Change of information. 
The holder of any license issued pursuant to this article shall within seven (7) days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided in subsections 15-2052(8), (9) and (10) transmit the same in writing to the city clerk. The transmittal shall specify the changed information in accordance with such provisions in the same manner as if the information was specified in a license application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2054. - Separate locations. 
The license issued pursuant to this division shall be valid only at the location specified in the license as issued. Any change in the location of the massage establishment other than by ceasing business at a location shall require the filing of an application for a license pursuant to the requirements of this division. In the event the application is filed for the purpose of changing the location of the massage establishment, without adding thereto any total number of locations in excess of those for which the applicant presently holds a license, no additional license fee for the calendar year in which the massage establishment holds a valid license pursuant to this section shall be charged except that the city may impose a processing charge as shown on the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 2018-15, § 6, 7-17-18) 
Secs. 15-2055—15-2070. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MASSAGISTS 

Sec. 15-2071. - License—Required. 
No massage shall be administered by a person who does not have a current valid massagist license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2072. - Same—Application. 
Licensing and application procedures for massagists shall be as follows: 
(1)  No license to engage in the business of administering massages shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the city clerk, and no massagist shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the city until the license has been issued. 
(2)  The city clerk shall provide to an applicant for a massagist license, a form containing the information as hereinafter specified which shall be completed and filed with the city clerk by each applicant for such license to be accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
a.  The kind of license requested. 
b.  The name of the applicant. 
c.  The location where the applicant proposes to administer massages and solicit patrons and the telephone number at the location. If the applicant intends to engage in business or administer massages at more than one location, the addresses of the additional locations shall be specified if the applicant intends to or has previously administered massages at such locations on more than two (2) occasions during a calendar year. If the applicant intends to administer a massage at locations to be identified by patrons which are presently unknown to the application, a specific statement to that effect shall be set forth. 
d.  The legal name of the applicant for the license and the applicant's date of birth, sex and race. 
e.  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the ninety (90) days preceding the date of the application including the current home address of the applicant, his or her telephone number and the length of time the applicant has been a resident of the address. 
f.  A health certificate as defined in this article issued not less than fifteen (15) days prior to submitting the application to be attached to the application. 
g.  The social security number of the applicant. 
h.  The names and addresses of all massage establishments in which the applicant has been employed for the preceding two (2) years. 
i.  Disclosure as to the applicant of all final convictions occurring within five (5) years of the date of the application of any federal or state offense which is a felony or any misdemeanor offense of sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy or lewd house, keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, assault or battery or masturbation for hire. If such a conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the persons so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered. 
j.  The applicant shall acknowledge that pursuant to this article, the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information above provided and that if the inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of the information, the city has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the applicant, and the applicant shall be required to provide such to the city upon the request of the city prior to making a final decision as to approving or denying the license. 
k.  The name, address and telephone number of the real property on which the massages will be administered if the information provided in subsection c. above is not a massage establishment so that the party may be located if necessary by any city employee or official during day or evening hours. 
l.  A photostatic copy of a diploma of graduation from a school as an exhibit attached to the application. The diploma must be representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of study of not less than six (6) months, wherein the course of study consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene. In the event the applicant should not have such diploma, then the applicant must attach a transcript from an accredited educational institution demonstrating the completion, with passing grades, of courses of instruction of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene or must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two (2) years in a regularly licensed massage or physical culture establishment in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene; the application to specify the name and address of the establishments from which the applicant has obtained the training and experience with the periods during which the training was received and the specification of the nature of the training. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2073. - Supervenient regulations. 
Any massagist administering a massage pursuant to a license issued as required by this article shall comply with the substantive provisions and regulations of sections 15-2092, 15-2094 and 15-2095. Any reference in such section to a massage establishment shall apply to the massagist in the manner of conduct or performance in the administration of any massage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2074. - Change of information. 
The holder of any license issued pursuant to this division shall, within seven (7) days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided, transmit such change in writing to the city. The transmittal shall specify such changed information in accordance with the provisions of the subsections in the same manner as if the information was specified in a license application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2075. - Group license prohibited. 
A license as provided for in this division shall be issued only to an individual. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Secs. 15-2076—15-2090. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 15-2091. - Compliance. 
Any massage establishment in operation pursuant to a license issued as required by this article shall comply with the provisions and regulations in this article in the conduct and operation of its business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2092. - Prohibitions generally; exemption. 
(a)  No person shall receive a massage unless the patron is covered by opaque material such as a towel or shorts covering the hips, genitals and anal areas. No massagist shall touch the genitals or anal area of any patron or the breast if the patron is a female, nor shall a patron touch the genitals or anal area of a massagist, and if the massagist is a female, the prohibited area shall include the breast. 
(b)  No massage shall be administered to any person who is a minor as defined by state law. 
(c)  In the administration of any massage, the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not be applicable to any person for whom a massage is ordered upon the written certificate of a licensed physician, osteopath or chiropractor; provided that such certificate shall be signed by the physician, osteopath or chiropractor, be dated, shall specifically state the number of treatments recommended therein and further that the date and hour of each treatment given pursuant to the certificate, the name of the massagist giving the treatment, and the name of the patron receiving the treatment shall be maintained in a record to be preserved by the owner or operator of the massage establishment for a period of two (2) years and shall be available for inspection by the city or its designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2093. - Hours. 
No massage establishment shall be open for the business of providing massages during any day prior to 8:30 a.m. and subsequent to 12:00 midnight Eastern Standard Time or such other daylight or standard time as may be applicable to the geographical territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2094. - Sanitary conditions. 
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices, or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron, shall be sterilized before using the same upon another. No towels and linens shall be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered. All massagists shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering a massage to each patron accommodated. No person suffering from an infectious or communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of the owner, person in control, or any employee, the person is suffering from an infectious or communicable disease. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 15-2095. - Off-premises massage restricted; record. 
No massage establishment nor any massagist shall either arrange for or conduct the administration of a massage under the license applicable to the party except upon the premises of the massage establishment and at the location specified in the application for the license unless, within the application, information is specifically set forth that it is the intention of the holder of the license to administer massages or arrange for the same at unspecified locations within the city and, in such event, the holder of the license shall maintain records subject to the same provisions as in this article above which shall specify as to each massage so arranged or conducted, the name, residential address, and telephone number of the person receiving the massage, and the date, hour and place at which such massage was administered. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, 6-1-10) 
Secs. 15-2096—15-2099. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - SOLICITORS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-08, adopted May 3, 2011, repealed Art. XV, §§ 15-2100—15-2104, in its entirety and enacted a new Art. XV as set out herein. Formerly, Art. XV, §§ 15-2100—15-2104, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-26, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2010. 

Sec. 15-2100. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to preserve public safety, human life and convenience and secure the comfort, health, welfare and prosperity of all Perry citizens against crime and undue annoyance, and to protect those on the streets and at home against abusive solicitation and canvassing practices. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvass, canvassing means the practices of a canvasser. 
Canvasser means any person, including an employee or agent of another, traveling either by foot, motor vehicle or any other means of conveyance, who engages in the practice of going from door to door, from house to house or otherwise along any of the streets within the city for the purpose of distributing handbills, leaflets or fliers directly to the occupants of private residences or dwellings for commercial purposes. 
Solicit, soliciting, solicitation means the practices of a solicitor. 
Solicitor means any person, including an employee or agent of another, traveling either by foot, motor vehicle or any other means of conveyance from door to door, from house to house or otherwise along any of the streets within the city for purposes of: 
(1)  Selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, merchandise, wares, services or other items of value at that time or for future delivery or services to be performed in the future, for commercial purposes, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or attempted sale; or 
(2)  Requesting contribution of funds, property or anything of value or the pledge of any type of future donation or selling or offering for sale any type of property. 
The term "solicitor" is an all-inclusive term which includes, but is not limited to, persons commonly referred to as peddlers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2102. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation or canvassing activities in, of, or upon any private structures, property, residences, establishments or premises within the corporate limits of the City of Perry without first obtaining a permit from the City of Perry Tax and License Department. No permit issued by the city pursuant to this article is transferable. A permit issued pursuant to this article may be effective for a period up to but not exceeding ninety (90) days. 
(b)  Only one permit shall be required of any applicant, other than a natural person, who desires or intends to engage in solicitation or canvassing activities in the city, notwithstanding that the applicant may be represented in such activities by more than one person; provided, however, the applicant fully identifies such representative as required by subsection 15-2104(a)(4), pays the fees required for additional representatives as required by subsection 15-2104(c) and each such additional representative maintains upon his person a copy of the actual permit as required by section 15-2113. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2103. - Exemptions. 
The following classes of persons shall be exempt from this article. 
(1)  All persons specifically requested or invited by the owner or occupant to come to a private residence to engage in soliciting or canvassing; 
(2)  Persons who are either running for elected public office or who are supporting the campaigns of others who are running for elective public office; 
(3)  Representatives of newspapers making regular house-to-house deliveries; 
(4)  Representatives of food delivery services; and 
(5)  Canvassing or soliciting for political, charitable, religious or other noncommercial purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2104. - Application and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to conduct solicitation or canvassing activities in the city must make application therefore. The application for a solicitor's or canvasser's permit shall be in a form prescribed by the city administration and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date of application. 
(2)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(3)  Name and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed or whom such applicant represents, if any. 
(4)  Name, address and relationship to the applicant of all persons who may engage in solicitation or canvassing activities for or on behalf of the applicant. 
(5)  The place of residence and nature of employment of the applicant during the preceding year. 
(6)  A brief description of the nature, character, quality and price of the goods, wares, merchandise or subscriptions that are to be offered by the applicant. 
(7)  A description of the planned soliciting or canvassing activities. 
(8)  A personal description of the applicant and of each person who may engage in solicitation or canvassing activities for or on behalf of the applicant. 
(9)  If employed, credentials establishing the exact relationship of the applicant with the employer. 
(10)  A valid picture identification of the applicant and all persons identified pursuant to subsection (a)(4) of this section of which can be photocopied to provide a useable picture. 
(11)  The fingerprints of the applicant and all persons identified pursuant to subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(12)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant and all persons identified pursuant to subsection (a)(4) of this section have been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to any crime, including a misdemeanor, or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore. 
(13)  A statement by the applicant and all persons identified pursuant to subsection (a)(4) of this section consenting to and expressly authorizing the city, through its police department, staff or any third party retained by the city, to perform criminal background searches, criminal history investigations and personal character investigations of the applicant. 
(14)  The names of municipalities, counties or other governmental entities in whose jurisdictions and from whom the applicant and all persons identified pursuant to subsection (a)(4) of this section have received license, permission, authority or the like to solicit or canvass in the two (2) years next preceding the date of the application. 
(b)  The fee which shall be charged by the city for any permit issued under this section shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the mayor and council for the period expiring ninety (90) days after the date of said registration. If the applicant and any and all persons identified pursuant to this section or their employer or whom such applicant represents, if any, is taking payment before delivery of merchandise, the company must be bonded in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and provide proof of same to the city. 
(c)  The fee shall be paid at the time the application for the permit is submitted. The fee shall entitle one natural person, as designated by the applicant upon the application, to engage in solicitation or canvassing activities in the city. There shall be a fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the mayor and council for each additional natural person who may engage in solicitation or canvassing activities for or on behalf of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2105. - Investigation of applicant, employee, agent, etc. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this article, the city manager or his designee shall cause an investigation of the criminal background, criminal history and personal character of the applicant including the solicitor, employee or agent of the solicitor shall be made. If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the application may be disapproved. If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the city manager or his designee shall execute a permit in the name of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2106. - Identification badge. 
All individuals including the applicant, solicitor, employee or agent of the solicitor shall be issued an identification badge by the Perry Police Department. Said identification badge must be worn at all times when engaged in solicitation or canvassing activities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2107. - Revocation. 
(a)  Permits issued under this article may be revoked by the city manager or his designee upon written notice for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with or contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of soliciting or canvassing; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime constituting a felony or involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of revocation shall be given in writing and set forth with particularity the grounds for such revocation. Further, such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the person to whom the permit was issued at the address set forth in the application or at such updated address that the permitted makes known in writing to the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2108. - Appeal of revocation. 
(a)  If the city manager or his designee fails to issue a permit required under this article upon application or if the city manager or his designee makes a good faith determination that there is cause for revocation of a permit issued under this article, the applicant or permitted, as the case may be, shall be so notified in writing. The revocation shall be effective twenty-four (24) hours after the issuance of the notice. The notice shall state with reasonable particularity the grounds for such determination. 
(b)  If the applicant or permitted wishes to contest such action, he must, within ten (10) days after the issuance of the notice, deliver to the city manager a written request for a hearing. 
(c)  If a written request for a hearing to contest the validity of such action is delivered to the city manager within the time limitations imposed in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor and council shall cause notice to be served upon the permitted, by hand delivery or registered or certified mail addressed to permitted's address shown in the application, requiring the permitted to appear before the mayor and council to show cause why the permit should not be revoked. This hearing shall not be held sooner than five (5) days from the mailing of the notice, and the notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing as well as the grounds for failure to issue the permit or the grounds which could, if sustained, result in the revocation of the permit. The mayor and council shall notify the permitted of their decision within a reasonable time after the hearing in the same manner as provided herein for service of notice of the hearing. If such decision is to revoke the license, no rebate shall be made on any portion of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2109. - Renewal. 
Permits under this article may be renewed, provided an application for renewal is received by the city manager or his designee no later than the expiration date of the current permit. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new applications. The city manager or his designee shall review each application for renewal to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with this article. If the city manager or his designee finds that the application for renewal meets such requirements, he shall issue a new permit, provided the appropriate fee for the permit and for additional representatives, if any, as set forth in section 15-2104 has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2110. - Prohibited working hours. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or canvass in the city between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., unless having been specifically requested or invited to do so by the owners or occupants of the private residence sought to be solicited or canvassed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or canvass in the city on Sunday or any recognized holiday, unless having been specifically requested or invited to do so by the owners or occupants of the private residence sought to be solicited or canvassed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2111. - Unwanted solicitation or canvassing. 
Persons engaged in the activity of soliciting or canvassing are prohibited from entering upon a dwelling or disturbing the occupants of any residence whenever a "No Soliciting" or "No Canvassing" sign has been posted on or adjacent to the entrance to the dwelling or is in prominent view at the entrance of the dwelling or when the residence is located in a subdivision or neighborhood that has a "No Soliciting" or "No Canvassing" sign posted on or adjacent to the entrance of the subdivision or neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2112. - Request to leave premises. 
Any person issued a permit to solicit or canvass in accordance with this article shall upon request of any owner or occupant, immediately leave the residence or place of business of such owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2113. - Soliciting or canvassing in roadways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or canvass from, in or on any public roads, streets, rights-of-way, medians or safety zones, including sidewalks, in the City of Perry. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2114. - Permit carried upon person and produced upon demand. 
(a)  Any person engaging in solicitation or canvassing must clearly and affirmatively state to the person being solicited or canvassed at the initial contact and at all subsequent contacts and before making any other statement or asking any questions, all of the following: 
(1)  The identity of the solicitor or canvasser; 
(2)  The legal name of the person represented by the solicitor or canvasser; 
(3)  The purpose of the solicitation or canvassing; 
(4)  The type of goods or services, if applicable, being offered for sale and the method of distribution; and 
(5)  The intended uses of the proceeds or contributions. 
(b)  Any person engaging in solicitation or canvassing in the city must at all times maintain upon his person a copy of the actual permit issued by the city. The permit must be produced for review and inspection upon demand of any person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2115. - Receipts. 
(a)  Every solicitor shall, upon request, provide written receipts to persons to whom the solicitor has: 
(1)  Sold or taken orders for the purchase of goods, merchandise, wares, services, other items of value or for services to be performed in the future; and/or 
(2)  Obtained a contribution or donation of funds, property or anything of value or obtained a pledge for any type of future contribution or donation. 
(b)  The receipt shall reflect: 
(1)  The name and business address of the solicitor; 
(2)  If different from the solicitor, the name and address of the person for whom the solicitation was made; 
(3)  The name and address of the person solicited; 
(4)  The nature of the items sold or ordered and the amount thereof; and 
(5)  The amount of the contribution or donation or pledge for future contribution or donation and the intended uses thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 15-2116. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment under the city charter. A separate offense shall be deemed permitted on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, 5-3-11) 
ARTICLE XVI. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 15-2117. - Findings. 
The mayor and city council make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The City of Perry is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph III thereof and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services throughout the City of Perry. 
(2)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the government of the City of Perry hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility enterprise fund and establish rates for stormwater management services. 
(3)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, the City of Perry is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the City Charter of the City of Perry to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. 
(4)  Improper management of stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within the City of Perry. 
(5)  A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the City of Perry and surrounding areas. 
(6)  The City of Perry presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the city in concert with the management of other water resources within the city. In order to do so, the city must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source for its comprehensive program operation and drainage-related capital improvement needs. 
(7)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater can adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by the City of Perry thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. 
(8)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the further degradation of the water quality in area waterbodies which may result in higher levels o treatment requirements imposed on the City of Perry wastewater treatment facilities and increased water treatment cost of potable water supplies by the City of Perry. 
(9)  Proper management of stormwater is a key element of having clean water with adequate assimilative capacity for treated wastewater discharges and adequate potable drinking water that are essential to support existing development as well as future development and redevelopment in the City of Perry. 
(10)  The city will soon be required under federal and state regulations (i.e., the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Georgia Notice of Intent (NOI) and stormwater permit effective March 13, 2003) to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and stormwater conveyance system into State of Georgia or United States' waters. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(11)  Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the NPDES phase II stormwater permit, along with other city stormwater program activities, will substantially increase the cost of providing stormwater management services above what is currently being spent for water quality management, drainage system maintenance, flood control and other program activities. 
(12)  The cost of operating and maintaining the City of Perry stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system. 
(13)  The professional engineering and financing analysis, known as the stormwater funding feasibility analysis (including amendments) and related documents, dated February 2004 and prepared by the city's consulting stormwater engineer, which report is incorporated herein by express reference, properly assesses and defines the city's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, defines the city's stormwater management program funding strategy. 
(14)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems within the city in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(15)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the incorporated areas of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(16)  The stormwater needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service and a benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways as described in the stormwater utility implementation report. 
(17)  The services and benefits rendered, or resulting from provision of stormwater management services, may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of improved properties in proportion to the long term demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management services which render or result in services and benefits to such properties and the owners thereof. 
(18)  A stormwater management program (SWMP) provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city, and the most equitable means to regulate the use of a higher level of stormwater management services within the city through stormwater user fee charges, user fees and other mechanisms as described in the stormwater utility implementation report, and the other related documents, that have been prepared for the city by its consultants. 
(19)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Such user fee charges may be complemented by other types of charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council. 
(20)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site systems, facilities, activities or assets which reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular property on the city's SWMP, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or credit, and such reduction or credit should be conditional upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater utility manager. Reductions or credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the property. 
(21)  The area of impervious surfaces on each improved property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the city or to be provided by the city in the future, and the area of impervious surfaces on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge. 
(22)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, together with any other revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and revenues shall therefore be deposited into the enterprise accounting fund of the city stormwater utility and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2118. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto. 
Attached residential property means improved property containing individually owned, attached dwelling units such as duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, townhouses, or other residential structures not listed herein where one or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. Improved property may be classified as an attached residential property despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports and small storage buildings. Improved property may be classified as an attached residential property despite the presence of a commercial use. Attached residential property shall not include improved property containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, hotels, motels, rental apartments not individually owned, retirement centers, nursing homes and assisted living home. 
Credit means a reduction in the amount of a stormwater user fee charge to the owner of a particular property for the existence and use of privately owned, maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce or mitigate the city's cost of providing stormwater management services for that particular property. 
Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the services provided by the city's SWMP and the stormwater utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the stormwater utility's administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems for the handling of stormwater runoff of private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities, and activities. 
Detached single-family residential property or DSFR means improved property containing one residential structure which is not attached to another dwelling, and which contains one or more bedrooms, with bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. A detached single-family residential property may include a "stick-built," industrialized, or other type of home other than manufactured home located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Improved property may be classified as a detached single-family residential property even if there is present incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces. Detached single-family residential properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
Improved property means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than five hundred (500) square feet of impervious surfaces. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a structure, which contains one or more bedrooms, a bathroom and a kitchen facility. 
Equivalent runoff unit (ERU) means the statistical median horizontal impervious surface area of a detached single-family residential property within the City of Perry as of the date of adoption of this article. The horizontal impervious surface area includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways and sidewalks. 
Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater, the parcel's antecedent moisture and the parcel's geologic condition. 
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Manufactured home property or MH means a single-family property or lot that is occupied by a manufactured home used for residential purposes. 
Non-single-family residential property or NSFR means improved property containing multiple dwelling unit residential properties, condominiums, apartments, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, tennis courts, swimming pools, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses, water and wastewater treatment plants, and any other form of use not otherwise mentioned which is not a detached single-family residential (DSFR), attached residential (AR) property or manufactured home (MH), and which has private parking lots and private drives or roads. 
Public water influence zone means those areas lying downstream of a culvert or other stormwater management conveyance system. On the downstream side of the conveyance system, the public water influence zone will extend for a length of six (6) times the diameter (or width) of the culvert from which runoff is being discharged (Field Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Third Edition, pg. 99), and within the horizontal limits set forth in the aforementioned field manual. For example, if a forty-eight-inch diameter culvert is discharging to a private property, the public water influence zone shall extend twenty-four (24) feet (six (6) times forty-eight (48) inches) from the end of the culvert and for the specified width (i.e., typically the width of the creek). The City of Perry Stormwater Utility may perform maintenance and/or capital construction activities only within that portion of the public water influence zone which the city has an ownership interest in, or for which a dedicated easement has been granted to, and accepted by the city for such purpose. 
Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the city. 
Stormwater management services means all services provided by the city which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated portions of the city; 
(2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; and 
(5)  Compliance with applicable state and federal stormwater management regulations and permit requirements. 
Stormwater management services may address the quality of stormwater runoff as well as the quantity thereof. 
Stormwater management systems and facilities means those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey, detain, retain, treat or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater utility manager means the person appointed by the mayor and city council to administer the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge imposed pursuant to this article by the City of Perry Stormwater Utility for providing stormwater management services. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, on-site stormwater control systems and other stormwater management services provided by the City of Perry for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have minimal impervious surface, which impedes the infiltration of stormwater runoff or causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the creation or installation of five hundred (500) square feet or less of impervious surface. 
User means any person who uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2119. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the City of Perry Stormwater Utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated areas of the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the City of Perry SWMP and Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the City of Perry Stormwater Utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund and shall be used solely for stormwater management services. All expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  The city shall place responsibility with the stormwater utility manager for operation, maintenance and regulation of the SWMP and stormwater management services performed, owned and operated or maintained by the City of Perry, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2120. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(a)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way; 
(2)  On private property but within easements granted to, and accepted by, the City of Perry, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon; 
(3)  On private property but within the public water influence zone as defined in section 24-452 of this article; 
(4)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or 
(5)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. 
(b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management and systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(d)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its commissioners, officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2121. - Stormwater utility customer classes. 
(a)  There shall be one stormwater utility service area in the City of Perry with specified customer classes to reflect variations in services provided to stormwater utility customers and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the city SWMP and drainage system. The specified customer classes for the City of Perry Stormwater Utility are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family residential (DSFR) customers as defined in section 15-2118 of this article. 
(2)  Attached residential (AR) customers shall consist of all properties as defined in section 15-2118 of this article. 
(3)  Manufactured home (MH) customers shall consist of all properties as defined in section 15-2118 of this article, 
(4)  Non-single-family residential (NSFR) customers, as defined in section 15-2118 of this article, shall consist of all properties located in the City of Perry that are not classified as DSFR, AR or MH. 
(b)  Documentation pertaining to the City of Perry Stormwater Utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater utility manager for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2122. - Stormwater user fee charges. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service areas shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services. Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the city, including, but not limited to, plan review and inspection fees, fees for special services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements, system development charges and special assessments. 
(b)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for onsite stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by public and private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2123. - Stormwater user fee charge rates. 
(a)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be set and may be modified from time to time by the city council. A schedule of said rates shall be on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Perry. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the goal of the city to establish rates that are fair and reasonable, and together with other sources of support available to the City of Perry Stormwater Utility, are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management services, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(1)  The stormwater user fee charge shall be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Detached single-family residential (DSFR) customer class. All DSFR properties shall be charged a flat rate equivalent to one ERU. 
(3)  Attached residential (AR) customer class. All AR properties as defined herein shall be charged the rate applicable to one ERU times the number of dwelling units located on the property (ERU total) times an adjustment factor (AF). The adjustment factor (AF) has been determined to be 0.72. For each monthly user fee charge billing, the ERU total figure will be multiplied by the adjustment factor (AF) which adjusts the ERU total to equal the median impervious surface of a statistical comparison of AR properties versus DSFR properties in the city. Therefore, each attached residential dwelling unit will be charged a stormwater user fee of 0.72 ERU per dwelling unit per month. 
(4)  Manufactured home (MH) customer class. All MH properties as defined herein shall be charged the rate applicable to one ERU times the number of dwelling units located on the property (ERU total) times an adjustment factor (AF). The adjustment factor (AF) has been determined to be 0.37. For each monthly user fee charge billing, the ERU total figure will be multiplied by the adjustment factor (AF) which adjusts the ERU total to equal the median impervious surface of a statistical comparison of MH properties versus DSFR properties in the city. Therefore, each attached residential dwelling unit will be charged a stormwater user fee of 0.37 ERU per dwelling unit per month. 
(5)  Non-single-family residential (NSFR) customer class. All NSFR properties as defined herein shall be billed one ERU for every three-thousand-three-hundred-square-foot increment, or portion thereof, of impervious surface. In cases where a fractional ERU is calculated, the total ERU for the customer account will be rounded down to the next whole number for billing. Increments of impervious surface less than three thousand three hundred (3,300) square feet shall not be billable except in the case of minimum bills (i.e., five hundred (500) to three thousand two hundred ninety-nine (3,299) square feet of impervious surface), which shall be billed at the rate for one ERU. For customers located within a development with shared common parking or other impervious surface, the amount of shared common impervious surface associated with the developed land shall be apportioned to the individual customer by a percentage of the impervious surface attributable to the customer as determined by the total common shared impervious surface times the percentage of the customer's square feet of leased, or owned, interior or exterior space to the total square feet within the development of interior, or exterior, space available for occupancy. Fractional ERUs for NSFR properties will be rounded to two (2) decimal places to establish the actual number of ERUs for billing. 
(b)  The customers of the stormwater utility shall be billed for the stormwater user fee charges. The stormwater user fee charge may be billed on a common statement and collected along with other city public utility charges. The customer may be the occupant, owner or user who is billed by the city for public services, i.e., water, sewer, natural gas and/or sanitation. If the improved property does not receive any other city public utility services, or is not being charged for public utility services due to vacancy, or non-use, at the time of stormwater user fee billing, then the owner of the property, shall be billed for stormwater management services by the city. Regardless of whether or not the developed land has an occupant or user, the owner is ultimately responsible for payment of the stormwater user fee charges. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2012-24, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 15-2124. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. 
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no public or private property located in the incorporated area of the City of Perry shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels which contain five hundred (500) square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks) shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(3)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way and road systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other improved property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. All other state, federal, and county properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties. 
(4)  The City of Perry (city owned) public streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by the city via the general fund. However, other improved property used for city purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(5)  Any property whereby one hundred (100) percent of the stormwater runoff is contained or infiltrated on the property and no stormwater runoff is discharged, via overland flow, into the city owned storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2125. - Stormwater user fee charge credits. 
(a)  The stormwater utility manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the Stormwater Utility Credit Technical Manual. Copies of the credit technical manual will be maintained by and available from the stormwater utility manager. 
(1)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit technical manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit technical manual. 
(2)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit technical manual and/or upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The stormwater utility manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit technical manual or this article. 
(3)  In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the city on forms provided by the stormwater utility manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit technical manual. 
(4)  Property owners may apply for any credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format established by the stormwater utility manager. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater utility manager, he shall have thirty (30) days from the date the complete application is accepted to either grant the credit in whole, grant the credit in part, or deny the credit. Credits applied for by the property owner and granted in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit technical manual. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2126. - Enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  All property owners of improved property within the incorporated areas of the City of Perry shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable city development regulations, ordinances, and state and federal laws. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the City of Perry Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-11 of the City of Perry Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Alternately, in the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the stormwater utility manager the city may elect to sue in the City of Perry Municipal Court to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the City of Perry Municipal Court, the city may enter upon the property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of filing of such abatement action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the City of Perry Municipal Court. 
(c)  The city shall have the right for its designated officers and employees to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours, and after reasonable notice to the owner thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes: 
(1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on site; or 
(2)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2127. - Stormwater user fee charge billing, delinquencies, collections, adjustments. 
Failure to receive a stormwater utility bill is not justification for non-payment. The property owner, as identified from public land records of Houston County, shall be obligated to pay the appropriate stormwater user fee charge for that property. 
(1)  Billing. 
a.  Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue as established by the mayor and council, and shall be billed prospectively. A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater user fee charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. 
b.  The stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected as deemed most effective and efficient by the city council. 
c.  Frequency of the billing of stormwater user fee charges shall be specified by the city council. 
d.  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each improved property subject to stormwater user fee charges shall be obligated to pay stormwater user fee charges and any interest on delinquent stormwater user fee charge payments. 
e.  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of improved property, the City of Perry Stormwater Utility may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any delinquency charges during the back billed period. 
(2)  Delinquencies and collection. 
a.  Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner and/or the property. 
b.  A late charge shall be assessed against the customer for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility user fee charge that becomes delinquent in accordance with applicable state law. In addition, the city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(3)  Adjustments. The stormwater utility manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. 
a.  If a customer believes their stormwater user fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater utility manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. 
b.  Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide supplemental information to the stormwater utility manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the stormwater utility manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustment request. 
c.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater utility manager, the stormwater utility manager shall have thirty (30) calendar days within which to render a written decision. Concurrent payment of any charges allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to this request for review. 
d.  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater utility manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater utility user fee charge for the property is correct. 
e.  The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
f.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater bill. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Sec. 15-2128. - Appeals, hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal to the mayor and city council may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater utility manager. The appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the decision of the stormwater utility manager by filing with the mayor and city council a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the stormwater utility manager shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and city council all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearing. The mayor and city council shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The mayor and city council shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the stormwater utility manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the stormwater utility manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. 
(c)  Decision final. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative action. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the mayor and city council may appeal that decision to the Superior Court of Houston County by Writ of Certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2012-23, 10-23-12) 
Secs. 15-2129—15-2199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 15-2200. - Purpose. 
The general purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Perry, Georgia by requiring that new and existing mobile food vendors provide residents and customers with a level of cleanliness, quality and safety. 
It is also the intent of this article to establish reasonable guidelines and restrictions for mobile food vendors in relationship to established restaurant businesses and ensure the safe and convenient use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 15-2201. - Definitions. 
Commissary means an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
Director means the director of community development or its designee. 
Ice cream truck means a motor vehicle in which pre-packaged ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind are carried for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. For the purpose of this article, the term "ice cream truck" shall not include vendors who prepare ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind, nor shall it include vendors who serve ice cream products as part of a menu of other foods, i.e. pie a la mode. 
Mobile food vendor means any person selling food from a mobile food vendor vehicle. 
Mobile food vendor vehicle means a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable, is a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle designed and equipped to prepare and serve food. 
Pushcart means a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving commissary prepared or prepackaged food and non-potentially hazardous food, unless the equipment is commercially designed and approved to handle food preparation and service. Pushcarts shall not be required to comply with mobile vehicular safety requirements. 
Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. 
Temporary food establishment means a retail food establishment, other than a licensed mobile food vendor or pushcart, that is not intended to be permanent and that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2018-19, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 15-2202. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a commissary, mobile retail food establishment vendor, ice cream truck, pushcart or temporary food establishment without a license first having been granted under this section, except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. 
(b)  An application for a license or a permit hereunder shall be submitted to the director setting forth all information required hereunder and in compliance with this article. The director shall develop an appropriate application form(s) for the purpose of compliance with this article. 
(c)  The following information shall be provided with each application for a mobile food vendor vehicle, or push cart permit: 
(1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; 
(2)  Make, model, and license plate number of vending vehicle; 
(3)  Owner's contact information; 
(4)  Operator's contact information; 
(5)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); 
(6)  Copy of approved permit from the county health department; 
(7)  List of operating locations and times; 
(8)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property; 
(9)  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. 
(d)  The following information shall be provided with each application for an ice cream truck permit: 
(1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; 
(2)  Owner's contact information; 
(3)  Operator's contact information; 
(4)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); 
(5)  Copy of approved permit from the state department of agriculture; 
(6)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property, if applicable; 
(7)  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. 
(e)  Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 each year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 15-2203. - Prohibited conduct and requirements. 
(a)  Operation on public property. Except for ice cream trucks, no mobile food vendor vehicle shall conduct business or operate on any street, sidewalk, alley, trail or other right-of-way or on any city-owned property, including plazas and parks, except: 
(1)  As part of a city-sponsored or city-sanctioned special event; 
(2)  Through a contract with the department of leisure services; or 
(3)  When parked in a city-designated mobile food vendor vehicle parking space within the assigned dates and times. 
(4)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit or by contract with the department of leisure services, mobile food vendors are permitted in a city-designated mobile food vendor vehicle parking space no more than five (5) days in any calendar month. A minimum of two (2) calendar days must transpire between operating periods on any given parking space. 
(b)  Operation on private property. 
(1)  A mobile food vendor shall not operate on any private property without the prior written consent of the property owner. 
(2)  In the C-3 Central Business District only, and except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, mobile food vendors are permitted on a given property no more than five (5) days in any calendar month. A minimum of two (2) calendar days must transpire between operating periods on any given property. 
(3)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, no more than two (2) mobile food vendors may operate on any single property at any one (1) time. 
(4)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, mobile food vendors may occupy no more than ten (10) percent of the designated parking spaces on a given property, and at no time shall the operation of a mobile food vendor reduce the number of parking spaces on a property below the minimum required by city Code or ordinance. 
(5)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(c)  A mobile food vendor who prepares food shall maintain a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the mobile food vendor and the public from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without thirty (30) days' advanced written notice to the city. 
(d)  Except for ice cream trucks, a mobile food vendor shall not make sounds or announcements to call attention to the mobile food vehicle either while traveling on the public rights-of-way or when stationary. At all times said mobile food vendor, ice cream truck, or push cart shall be in compliance with the city noise ordinance. 
(e)  The license under which a mobile food vendor vehicle, ice cream truck, or push cart is operating must be firmly attached and visible on the vehicle or pushcart at all times. 
(f)  Any driver of a mobile food vendor vehicle or ice cream truck must possess a valid state driver's license. 
(g)  Each licensed mobile food vendor must maintain for patrons' use, a litter receptacle of sufficient size to accept the litter being generated by the sales from the vendor's vehicle at the point of sales. City receptacles shall not be utilized for this purpose. Each vendor shall pick up litter which is associated with the vendor's sales in the vicinity of the vendor's place of business prior to departing the sales location. A pattern of leaving excessive litter shall be a basis for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(h)  Liquid waste and grease shall only be disposed of in a container approved for such substances. 
(i)  Except for ice cream trucks, mobile food vendors are allowed only in C-1, C-2, C-3, IMU, MUC, and NMU zoning districts, except as part of a special event sponsored by a homeowners association or similar official neighborhood organization. 
(j)  Mobile food vendors shall not operate within twenty-five (25) feet of any street intersection, pedestrian crosswalk or driveway except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. 
(k)  Mobile food vendors shall not operate within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the door of a lawfully established eating establishment that is actively open for business serving customers, unless the mobile food vendor provided documentation, which is signed by the eating establishment owner, that the eating establishment owner interposes no objection to a closer proximity. If an eating establishment opens within the two hundred fifty-foot zone after the mobile food vendor is licensed, the mobile food vendor may remain in that location until the following annual permit is due. 
(l)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. 
(m)  Hours of operation shall not be limited, except as part of a city-sponsored event permit or by contract with the department of leisure service. When operating in the C-3 Central Business District, and not part of a city-sponsored event, a mobile food vendor may operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. At the end of each business day's operation, the vendor shall remove from the premises the mobile food vendor vehicle and all materials associated with the business. 
(n)  No sale or offer for sale of ice cream, frozen milk, frozen dairy or ice confection products shall be made from a mobile food vendor unless each side of the vehicle is marked, in letters and numbers at least three (3) inches in height, with the name and address of the mobile food vendor licensee. 
(o)  The mobile food vendor shall comply with all state, federal and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. 
(p)  Except as otherwise allowed and described within this section, a mobile food vendor must operate from a motorized, wheeled vehicle that may lawfully be driven upon streets and roadways within the state. 
(1)  The owner of a licensed restaurant located within the city may, with a valid city mobile food vendor permit, engage in mobile food vending from a wheeled mobile trailer, pushcart, or motorized vehicle as an ancillary location of said restaurant, provided that all other provisions of this article are met and adhered to. 
(2)  As allowed by a city-issued special event permit, a mobile food vendor that holds a valid city mobile food vendor permit may operate from a wheeled mobile trailer, pushcart, or motorized vehicle. 
(q)  The following safety regulations shall apply to any and all vehicles operating under this article or used for mobile retail food establishments: 
(1)  Every self-propelled vehicle shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. 
(2)  Every self-propelled vehicle shall be equipped with two (2) rear-vision mirrors, one (1) at each side, firmly attached to the outside of the motor vehicle, and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. 
(r)  The mobile food vendor may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only. The sale of nonfood and drink items shall be limited to merchandise displaying the mobile food vendor company logo and/or branding. No items shall be displayed outside of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2018-19, §§ 2—4, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 15-2204. - Indemnity. 
As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein agrees to indemnify the city and hold the city harmless from any and all claims, demands, actions, damages, liability and expenses in connection with loss of life, personal injury and/or damage to property arising from or out of any occurrence in, upon, or on any property in the city, and occasioned wholly or in part by any act or omission of vendor or those acting or failing to act in the right of the vendor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2018-14, 7-17-28) 
Sec. 15-2205. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  The director shall have the right to suspend or revoke a mobile food vendor license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the director seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, the director shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations for which cause the action is being taken. 
(b)  The director shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed a violation of this mobile food vendor ordinance to occur or did not make a reasonable effort to prevent any such occurrence; 
(3)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, license fee, or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other licensing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event that the director determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for thirty (30) days for the first violation. For a second violation occurring within any consecutive twelve-month period, the license shall be suspended for ninety (90) days. Any license that has been suspended two (2) times within any consecutive twelve-month period that is determined to have committed a subsequent license violation with twenty-four (24) months of the second suspension shall be revoked. Provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) hereafter. Should a license be revoked, the owner and/or operator shall not be eligible to apply for a mobile food vendor license for a period of three (3) years from the date of revocation. 
(d)  In the event of a revocation by the director, the licensee may appeal the decision of the director to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within ten (10) business days from the date of the written notice issued to licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a written document fully stating the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The director may submit a memorandum in response to the document filed by the licensee on appeal to the city manager. The director's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the director's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. 
(e)  When an appeal is received, the city manager shall, within ten (10) business days from the date on which the notice of appeal is received by the director take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date before the city manager and instruct the director to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place of hearing. The director shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice as may be required by law. 
In either event, the hearing shall be held within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the appeal is filed, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the licensee and the director. 
(f)  The city manager or assigned hearing officer may sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the director. The decision of the city manager or hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 15-2206. - Fees. 
The fee for every application for license under this section shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 2-20-18) 
Chapter 16 - MASS GATHERINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; state regulation of certain mass gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 31-27-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively ascribed to them: 
Mass gathering means any event likely to attract one thousand (1,000) or more persons and to continue for six (6) consecutive or more hours. 
Permit means written authorization to a person by the city to operate a mass gathering. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Exemption. 
This chapter shall not apply to any mass gathering which is to be held in any regularly established permanent place of worship, athletic field, auditorium, coliseum or other similar permanently established building within the maximum seating capacity. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to fairs and similar industrial-agricultural exhibitions which have been in existence for at least one (1) year prior to June 3, 1975. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to recognized religious gatherings which have been in existence for at least one (1) year prior to June 3, 1975. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-9) 
Sec. 16-3. - Violations. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in section 1-10. In addition to the penalties set forth therein, any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-7) 
Secs. 16-4—16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 16-21. - Generally. 
No person shall hold or promote, by advertising or otherwise, a mass gathering, unless a permit has been issued for the gathering. Such permits shall be issued by the city and shall be in writing and shall specify the conditions under which issued, and shall remain in effect until suspended, revoked or until the mass gathering is terminated. The permit shall not be transferable or assignable, and a separate permit shall be required for each mass gathering. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-2) 
Sec. 16-22. - Application. 
Application for a permit to promote or hold a mass gathering shall be made to the city on a form and in a manner prescribed by the city by the person who will promote or hold the mass gathering. Application for a permit to promote or hold a mass gathering shall be made at least five (5) days before the first day of advertising and at least fifteen (15) days before the first day of the gathering. Water and sewage facilities shall be constructed and operational not later than twenty-four (24) hours before the beginning of the mass gathering. The application shall be accompanied by such plans, reports and specifications as the city shall deem necessary. The plans, reports and specifications shall provide for adequate and satisfactory water supply and sewage facilities, adequate toilet and lavatory facilities, adequate refuse storage and disposal facilities, adequate traffic-control plans and facilities, and such other matters as may be appropriate for security of life or health. The application shall disclose the names and addresses of all of the persons providing financial backing to the mass gathering, and the amounts of such backing. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-3) 
Sec. 16-23. - Plans and statements to be filed. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant must: 
(1)  Provide a plan for limiting attendance, including methods of entering the area, number and location of ticket booths and entrances, and provisions for keeping nonticket holders out of the area; 
(2)  Provide a statement verifying that all construction and installation of facilities as required in section 16-22 will be completed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of the event; 
(3)  Provide a statement from local fire and police authorities having jurisdiction over the area acknowledging that they can supply adequate security, traffic control and law enforcement for the proposed gathering. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-4) 
Sec. 16-24. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
If it appears necessary and proper that such application for a permit be denied or that a permit previously granted be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit shall be notified thereof in writing and shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing before the council within at least ten (10) days from suspension, revocation or denial of the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-5) 
Sec. 16-25. - Bond. 
The person holding or promoting a mass gathering shall provide a bond of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. The bond shall be to guarantee full compliance with this chapter as well as other applicable provisions of the Georgia Health Code and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. The bond shall also cover cleanup of the site. This bond shall be in favor of the city for the benefit of any person who is damaged as a result of the activity of a mass gathering. Any person claiming against the bond may maintain an action at law against the person holding or promoting the mass gathering and the surety. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-6) 
Sec. 16-26. - Fee. 
An applicant for a permit shall pay the fee as set forth in section 15-38 before any permit is issued. 
(Code 1966, § 5½-8) 
Chapter 17 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities preempted from enacting ordinances covering matters defined by general law, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in or upon any street, sidewalk or alley, either public or private, of the city, any glass bottle or bottles or pieces of broken glass, crockery of any kind; any tin can, pieces of tin or tinware of any kind; or any sweeping or trash of any kind from any place whatsoever. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sweep, throw, drop, litter or move any dirt, filth, papers, bottles, cans or garbage of any kind, boxes, rubbish, dead animals, newspapers or discarded materials upon any street, sidewalk or alley, public road or right-of-way within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to throw, drop, or otherwise deposit or dispose of litter or any other refuse from any moving vehicle. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other public road within the city unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; provided, however, that sand of any substance for increasing traction, or water or other substance, may be sprinkled on a roadway and the cleaning or maintaining of such roadway may be undertaken by the governmental agency having that responsibility. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass, litter or other object has fallen or escaped which constitutes an obstruction or could damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel on such street, highway or other public road shall immediately cause the street, highway or public road to be cleaned of all glass objects and shall pay any cost for such removal. No provision of this section shall apply to any motor vehicle which is used exclusively for agricultural purposes and which is not operated on or over any public highway for any other purpose than the purpose of operating it across the highway or along the highway from one (1) point of the owner's land to another part thereof, irrespective of whether or not the tracts adjoin or the purpose of taking the vehicle to a repair shop. 
(Code 1966, § 12-22; Ord. No. 2018-18, § 2, 9-4-18) 
Secs. 17-2—17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY 

Sec. 17-26. - Defacing private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to deface, write upon or mutilate any private buildings, fences, or signboards placed on private property or any other structures, without the consent of the owner, or by the use of any filthy substance defile any house, signboard, fence or other structure, or to wantonly injure or destroy any property. 
(Code 1966, § 12-13) 
Sec. 17-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 7 of Ord. No. 98-01, adopted April 21, 1998, deleted § 17-27 which pertained to tampering with utility property and derived from § 12-13 of the 1966 Code. 
Sec. 17-28. - Spitting on, defacing sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate on the sidewalks of the city, or to print signs or advertisements on, or otherwise mar or deface such sidewalks. 
(Code 1966, § 12-29) 
Sec. 17-29. - Destroying or injuring trees, etc., on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, destroy or injure any shade tree, shrubbery or plants upon any street, alley, square, park or other public place within the city. This section shall not prevent the trimming of shade trees by any person upon the express permission of the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 20-1) 
Sec. 17-30. - Yard sales, estate sales and other similar sales 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Yard sales, estate sales and other similar sales shall mean and include all sales entitled "yard sale", "estate sale", "garage sale", "lawn sale", "attic sale", "rummage sale", "flea market sale", or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale and for which the city does not require a license. 
(2)  Goods are meant to include any goods, warehouse merchandise, personal property or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
(3)  Person shall mean and include individuals, partnerships, corporations, and any other legal entity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct any sale as defined herein more than four times not to exceed two days each during a twelve-month period. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to erect or post signs advertising said sale or sales more than seven (7) days prior to the date of the sale and any sign advertising said sale shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the sale. All signs erected or posted advertising said sale or sales shall comply in all respects with the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, 5-21-02) 
Secs. 17-31—17-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY 

Sec. 17-51. - Fireworks. 
No person shall sell, possess or use fireworks except as provided in the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as adopted or amended by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 12-17) 
Sec. 17-52. - Weapons. 
(a)  No person shall shoot any firearms in the city, unless it be in a licensed shooting gallery, or by permission of the chief of police. The subsection does not prohibit persons from exercising the right of self defense, defense of others or defense of property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use any Alabama slings, or other sling, or instrument for throwing projectiles; or to throw any stone or other missile from such sling or instrument, or by the hand, in the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use or shoot an air gun or other gun of like character in the city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 12-31, 12-32) 
State Law reference— Misdemeanor offenses of discharging firearm on or near public street (O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103) and discharging a firearm on property of another (O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104). 
Sec. 17-53. - Keying automatic dialer burglar alarms to city numbers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to key automatic dialer burglar alarms to the city's switchboard or into any emergency number the city now has or has in the future. These types of alarms shall be keyed to a private service that can then notify the police department. 
(Code 1966, § 12-37) 
Sec. 17-54. - Drinking, drunkenness and intoxication. 
(a)  Any person who shall be found intoxicated to such an extent as to be boisterous or noisy, or who shall commit any other act of disorder amounting to a breach of the peace, or who shall become so far intoxicated as to lie about the streets, or prove a nuisance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or grounds, or in or at any other public place in the city. It shall be unlawful to be upon the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or grounds, or in or at any other public place in the city in an intoxicated condition. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages in or at any restaurant, cafe, eating place, hotel, drugstore or other place of business in the city unless such person first secures the express consent of the proprietor or manager then in charge of such place. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or at any restaurant, cafe, eating place, hotel, drugstore or other place of business in the city, in an intoxicated condition. 
(d)  No person shall maintain any place in the city at which he permits other persons to assemble and violate any provisions of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 12-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 17-55. - Noise—Prohibited; enumerated; exceptions to prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after such person has been given one (1) warning by law enforcement personnel, to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
(b)  The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The volume of the noise; 
(2)  The intensity of the noise; 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
(7)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(8)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(9)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
(10)  The duration of the noise; 
(11)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
(12)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(c)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, unusual and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns. The continued sounding of any horn or signal devise on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any signal device for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time; 
(2)  Televisions, radios, phonographs and musical instruments. The playing of any television, radio, phonograph, musical instrument or other such instruments in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity; 
(4)  Noisy vehicles. The use of any vehicle in any manner as to create loud and unnecessary noise; 
(5)  Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any engine, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom; 
(6)  Construction work. The erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the chief of police or his designee, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days while the emergency continues. If the chief of police or his designee should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration and repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and if he should further determine that loss or inconvenience will result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for this work to be done during these hours upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded and during the progress of the work; 
(7)  Institutions requiring quiet. The creation of an excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while in session, or adjacent to any hospital, nursing home or personal care home, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof; 
(8)  Loud speakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical or electrical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes; or 
(9)  Loud speakers on public property. It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loud speakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city; provided that nothing herein shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county, the city or any public or private school system, nor to public agencies of any of them. 
(10)  Consumer fireworks. Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. except for the days and times set out in O.C.G.A. §§ 25-10-2(b)(3)(B)(ii) and (iii). 
(d)  None of the prohibitions of this section shall apply to or be enforced against the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state, during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform this work during the day; nor shall they apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loud speakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character; or 
(4)  Any parade, celebration or performance for which a permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-21(2), § 2, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2018-16, 8-7-18) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2000-21 amended section 17-55 in its entirety. The former section 17-55 pertained to similar material and derived from section 12-24 of the Code of 1966. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 17-56. - Same—Phonographs, musical instruments, televisions, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any phonograph, musical instrument, television set, music box or radio in such a manner as to disturb the neighbors. 
(Code 1966, § 12-25) 
Sec. 17-57. - Loitering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such manner as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, regress therein, thereon and thereto. 
(b)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (a) herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 12-26) 
State Law reference— Obstructing highways, sidewalks, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 17-58. - Distribution of commercial and noncommercial handbills. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
(1)  Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
a.  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or 
b.  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
c.  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information, provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
d.  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
(2)  Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
(3)  Private premises means any dwelling house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
(4)  Public place means any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, ground or building. 
(5)  Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. 
(b)  Depositing or selling handbills in or upon public places prohibited; exception. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(c)  Depositing handbills in or upon vehicles prohibited; exception. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(d)  Depositing handbills in or upon vacant private premises prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(e)  Depositing of handbills in or upon private premises prohibited in certain situations. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words, "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(f)  Manner of depositing handbills in or upon inhabited private premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  Interpretation. Nothing set forth herein shall be construed to prohibit any person from advertising in newspapers or to prohibit the insertion of commercial or noncommercial handbills in newspapers prior to delivery. 
(Code 1966, § 12-21; Ord. No. 2018-18, § 2, 9-4-18) 
Sec. 17-59. - Obedience to school crossing guards directing traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any school crossing guard who is directing, controlling or regulating traffic on any street adjacent to any school property or at or adjacent to any designated school crossing. 
(Ord. No. 88-2, 2-16-88) 
Sec. 17-60. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct at any place within the city; such disorderly conduct to be manifested by fighting, drunkenness, obscene or profane language, indecent acting, or any other act tending to disturb the good order, peace and dignity. 
(Ord. No. 88-9, 6-7-88) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 17-61. - Occupying the driver's seat of a motor vehicle while intoxicated. 
No person shall occupy the driver's seat of a motor vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public place in the city immediately under the steering wheel while under the influence of intoxicating liquors and/or drugs. A person shall be considered under the influence of intoxicating liquors and/or drugs if said person has some of the physical manifestations thereof (glossy appearance of the eyes, dilated pupils, slow or slurred speech, etc.), fails to complete successfully any field sobriety tests as instructed by the officer, or refuses to submit to same and, in the instance of being under the influence of intoxicating liquors, gives a test positive for alcohol on the Alco-sensor or refuses to submit to same. 
(Ord. No. 2010-31, § 1, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2013-21, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-13) 
Sec. 17-62. - Marijuana possession. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who is charged with the possession of one ounce or less of marijuana, such offense having occurred within the corporate limits of the city, may be tried in the municipal court of the city, which court may try and dispose of the case. 
(Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 12-7-10) 
Sec. 17-63. - Resisting, interfering with officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make resistance to or in any manner interfere with a police officer or firefighter in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 17-64. - Disorderly houses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to live in, keep, maintain, operate or rent a house or other residence that is loud, boisterous, disorderly or otherwise creates a general disturbance to the surrounding neighborhood or orderly citizens in the immediate vicinity of such house. A house shall be deemed "disorderly" within the meaning of this section if the noise or other disturbances created therein are regularly recurring, continuous, habitual or customary. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to keep, maintain, operate or rent a house or other residence in which illegal drugs, other controlled substances and/or alcohol are freely available for sale or otherwise; or in which lewd conduct, including, but not limited to, gambling or prostitution, is habitually or customarily carried on and which creates a general disturbance to the neighborhood or immediate vicinity of such house or residence. 
(Ord. No. 2015-18, § 1, 7-21-15) 
Secs. 17-65—17-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-18, § 3, adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed §§ 17-76 and 17-77, which pertained to dancing on Sunday and profane, indecent language, and derived from Code 1966, §§ 12-28 and 12-33. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 

Secs. 17-76—17-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING CITY CEMETERIES 

Sec. 17-90. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases will have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery or city cemetery means any cemetery now owned or hereafter established and managed by the city including any new land added thereto at any time in the future. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation or association. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 17-91. - Application of city laws. 
All provisions of the City Code now in force or hereafter enacted, relating to and defining public offenses in the city, shall, insofar as the same shall be applicable, be in full force and effect in the city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 17-92. - Unlawful entry. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than duly authorized officers, officials or employees of the city, to enter into or be upon the cemetery grounds of the city during the time after sunset and before sunrise on any day without first obtaining the permission of the police chief or his designee. It shall further be unlawful at all times for any person to enter or leave the grounds other than by the established and open entrances or gateways. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 17-93. - Trespass, loitering; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or trespass upon lots and graves in a city cemetery or for the parent or guardian of any child under the age of sixteen (16) to permit such child to be within said cemetery grounds unless accompanied by an adult person. Provided, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any person having lawful business in the cemetery in connection with improvement thereof or persons visiting the graves of relatives or friends from being in said cemetery in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 17-94. - Operation of vehicles and parking. 
No person shall drive or move any vehicle within the cemetery except over a roadway open for vehicular traffic, or obstruct any path or driveway within the cemetery open to vehicular traffic. No person shall use the cemetery grounds or any driveway therein as a public thoroughfare or drive any vehicle through said grounds except for the purpose of making deliveries in the cemetery, attending a grave side service or burial service, or visiting any grave site. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 17-95. - Rubbish; debris. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any rubbish, trash, waste materials, litter or debris of any kind in a city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 17-96. - Property damage. 
No person shall remove, molest, injure, mark, deface, throw down or destroy any headstone, monument, survey marker, corner marker, tomb, vault or mausoleum, or decoration on any cemetery lot in any public cemetery, or open, disturb or molest any grave or place of burial therein. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, 11-17-98) 
Chapter 18 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; Powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; Jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
In addition to all other definitions, the following apply to this chapter: 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
Traffic division means the traffic division of the police department of the city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then such term whenever used herein shall refer to the police department of the city. 
(Code 2966, § 21-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Statutes adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 6, §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, [O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.] (all known as the Uniform Rules of the Road) and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 2966, § 21-1.1) 
Sec. 18-3. - Enforcement, obedience to regulations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 2966, § 21-2) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(2). 
Sec. 18-4. - Chief of police to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark traffic lanes. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and any traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 2966, § 21-13) 
Sec. 18-5. - Speed limit restrictions. 
All persons driving or operating automobiles, trucks, and other motor vehicles of every kind and character on the streets and avenues and roads of the city shall not exceed the following speed limits: 
All streets not specifically named herein\25 
S.R. 7, from a point 2350 feet south of Hicks Drive, m.p. 10.77, to S.R. 127, m.p. 12.07, a distance of 1.30 miles\45 
S.R. 7, from Hicks Drive, m.p. 11.21, to Greenwood Drive, m.p. 11.54, a distance of 0.33 miles (school zone-school days only)\35 
S.R. 7, from S.R. 127, m.p. 12.07, to Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, m.p. 13.32, a distance of 1.25 miles\40 
S.R. 7, from Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, m.p. 13.32 to a point 250 feet north of Northside Drive, m.p. 14.04, a distance of 0.72 miles\30 
S.R. 7, from a point 250 feet north of Northside Drive, m.p. 14.04, to Mason Terrace, m.p. 15.18, a distance of 1.14 miles\35 
S.R. 7, from Mason Terrace, m.p. 15.18, to a point 685 feet north of Woodland Drive, m.p. 15.64, a distance of 0.46 miles\45 
S.R. 7 DU, from S.R. 7 Commerce Street, m.p. 0.00, to S.R. 7 Washington Street, m.p. 0.54, a distance of 0.54 miles\35 
S.R. 7 SP, from S.R. 7, m.p. 0.00, to Hay Road, m.p. 0.30, a distance of 0.30 miles\35 
S.R. 11, from Saddle Creek Road (south city limits), m.p. 9.73, to a point 500 feet north of S.R. 11 BU (north city limits), m.p. 14.66, a distance of 4.93 miles\55 
S.R. 11, from a point 1575 feet east of S.R. 11 BU, m.p. 14.25, to a point 300 feet north of S.R. 11 BU, m.p. 14.61, a distance of 0.36 miles (school zone-school days only)\45 
S.R. 11 CO, from S.R. 7, m.p. 0.00 to S.R. 11, m.p. 2.79, a distance of 2.79 miles\55 
S.R. 11 CO, from a point 300 feet west of S.R. 11, m.p. 2.73, to S.R. 11, m.p. 2.79, a distance of 0.06 miles\45 
S.R. 11 BU, from a point 1250 feet south of Keith Drive, m.p. 0.63, to Glenwood Avenue, m.p. 1.09, a distance of 0.46 miles\45 
S.R. 11 BU, from Glenwood Avenue, m.p. 1.09, to Talton Place, m.p. 1.30, a distance of 0.21 miles (school zone—school days only)\35 
S.R. 11 BU, from Forest Hill Drive, m.p. 1.73, to a point 150 feet south of First Street, m.p. 2.20, a distance of 0.47 miles\35 
S.R. 11 BU, from a point 100 feet of 2nd Street, m.p. 2.08, to a point 250 feet south of Meeting Street, m.p. 2.26, a distance of 0.18 miles (school zone—school days only)\25 
S.R. 11 BU, from a point 150 feet south of First Street, m.p. 2.20, to Northside Drive, m.p. 2.67, a distance of 0.45 miles\30 
S.R. 11 BU, from Northside Drive, m.p. 2.67, to Smoak Avenue, m.p. 2.98, a distance of 0.31 miles\35 
S.R. 11 BU, from Smoak Avenue, m.p. 2.98, to S.R. 11, m.p. 4.44, a distance of 1.46 miles\45 
S.R. 11 BU, from a point 1320 feet south of S.R. 11, m.p. 4.19, to S.R. 11, m.p. 4.44, a distance of 0.25 miles (school zone—school days only)\45 
S.R. 11 BU, from a point 217 feet of Cambridge Road to a point 495 feet west of Forest Hill Drive (school zone-school days only)\25 
S.R. 11 BU, from a point 1307 feet south of S.R. 11 CO (North Perry Parkway) m.p. 1.7, to a point 435 feet north of SR 11 CO (North Perry Parkway), m.p, 2.0, a distance of 0.30 mile (school zone-school days only)\35 
S.R. 127, from a point 1.50 feet west of Hilltop Drive (west city limits), m.p. 4.90, to S.R. 7, m.p. 5.28, a distance of 0.38 miles\45 
S.R. 127, from S.R. 11 BU, m.p. 7.10, to Kings Chapel Road, m.p. 8.10 a distance of 1.00 miles\35 
S.R. 127, from Jackson Lane, m.p. 7.72, to a point 475 feet of east of Kings Chapel Road, m.p. 8.19, a distance of 0.47 miles (school zone—school days only)\25 
S.R. 127, from Kings Chapel Road, m.p. 8.10, to a point 1050 feet east of Keith Drive, m.p. 8.79, a distance of 0.69 miles\45 
S.R. 127, from a point 1050 feet of Keith Drive, m.p. 8.79, to a point 2375 feet west of S.R. 247, m.p. 15.46, a distance of 6.67 miles\55 
S.R. 127, from a point 300 feet west of Moody Road, m.p. 13.05, to a point 1550 feet east of Moody Road, m.p. 13.40, a distance of 0.35 miles (school zone—school days only)\45 
S.R. 127, from a point 2375 feet west of S.R. 247, m.p. 15.46, to S.R. 247, m.p. 15.91, a distance of 0.45 miles\45 
S.R. 127, from a point 300 feet west of Moody Road, m.p. 5.8, to a point 1550 feet east of Moody Road. m.p. 6.1, a distance of 0.30 mile (school zone-school days only)\35 
S.R. 224, from S.R. 7, m.p. 5.36, to a point 300 feet east of S.R. 7, m.p. 5.42, a distance of 0.06 miles\40 
S.R. 224, from a point 300 feet east of S.R. 7, m.p. 5.42, to a point 200 feet west of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, m.p. 6.24, a distance of 0.82 miles\50 
S.R. 224, from a point 200 feet west of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, m.p. 6.24, to a point 3700 feet west of Flat Creek (East City Limits), m.p. 7.30, a distance of 1.06 miles\55 
S.R. 247, from S.R. 247 SP, m.p. 7.91, to S.R. 127, m.p. 10.00, a distance of 2.09 miles\55 
S.R. 247 SP, from S.R. 11, m.p. 0.00 to S.R. 247, m.p. 3.16, a distance of 3.16 miles\55 
S.R. 401, from South City Limits, m.p. 134.06, to North City Limits, m.p. 137.11, a distance of 3.05 miles\65 
Airport Road, from S.R. 7 to S.R. 11 CO a distance of 0.65 miles\45 
Airport Road, from S.R. 7 in a northeasterly direction along Airport Road/Airport Road Extension for 7,500 feet, a distance of 1.5 miles\45 
Airport Road Extension, from Valley Drive to S.R. 7 a distance of 1.10 miles\35 
Amberly Court, from Wingfield Way to Glennfinnan Way, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Armdale Drive, from Galloway Street to Glennfinnan Way, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Ball Street, from the intersection of Ball Street and Tucker road to the end of Ball Street at Larry Walker Parkway, a distance of 1.07 miles\45 
Black Hawke Lane, from Grand Reserve Way to the end of Black Hawke Lane, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Brampton Way, from Notting Hill Drive to the end of Brampton Way, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Brookwater Lane, from Gurr Road to the end of Brookwater Lane, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Carter Circle, from Duncan Avenue to Forest Hill Road a distance of 0.31 miles\25 
Carter Circle, from Forest Hill Road to S.R. 11 a distance of 0.24 miles\30 
Christine Circle, from Macon Road SR 11 BU to the end of Christine Circle, a distance of 0.50 mile\25 
Danny Carpenter Drive, beginning at the intersection of Sandefur Road and Danny Carpenter Drive and proceeding north 3,530 feet to the corporate limits, a distance of .50 miles 
School hours\25 
Nonschool hours\30 
Duncan Avenue, from Ball Street to Forest Avenue a distance of 1.02 miles\30 
Flowing Meadows Drive, from Woodlands Blvd. to the end of Flowing Meadows Drive, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Frank Satterfield Road, from Tucker Road to South City Limits a distance of 1.03 miles\30 
Gaines Drive, from I-75 to a point 0.28 miles east of I-75 a distance of 0.28 miles\35 
Gaines Drive, from a point 0.28 miles east of I-75 to S.R. 7 a distance of 0.25 miles\25 
Glennfinnan Way, from Amberley Court to Newport Avenue, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Grand Reserve Way, from Bear Branch Road to the end of Grand Reserve Way, a distance of 0.50 mile\25 
Grayton Way, from Washington Place Drive to the end of Grayton Way, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Hawks Tail Drive, from Woodlands Blvd. to the end of Hawks Tail Drive, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Hill Road, from S.R. 11 to Tucker Road, a distance of 0.50 mile\35 
Huntley Drive, from Amberley Court to Winthrop Court, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Ivey Glen Drive from Highway 341 S to the end of Ivey Glen Drive, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Keith Drive, from Tucker Road to S.R. 127 a distance of 0.28 miles\35 
Kings Chapel Road, from S.R. 127 to Keith Drive a distance of 0.64 miles\35 
Kings Chapel Road, from Houston Lake Drive to Keith Drive, a distance of 0.6 mile (school zone-school days only)\25 
Kings Chapel Road, from Keith Drive to City Limits a distance of 0.90 miles\45 
Lavendar Lane, from Arctic Lane to the end of Lavendar Lane, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Legacy Park Drive, from North Perry Parkway S.R. 11 Conn. to the end of Legacy Park Drive, a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Longhorn Trail, from Todd Road to the end of Longhorn Trail, a distance of 0.60 mile\25 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, from S.R. 7 to Rutherford Drive a distance of 0.95 miles\35 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, from Rutherford Drive to a point 500 feet south of Limerock Road a distance of 0.23 miles\45 
Morningside Drive, from S.R. 11 to Kings Chapel Road a distance of 0.77 miles\35 
North Davis Drive, from Country Club Road to S.R. 127 a distance of 0.39 miles\30 
North Davis Drive, from S.R. 127 to Kings Chapel Road a distance of 0.24 miles\25 
Oak Ridge Drive, from Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive to Kellwood Road a distance of 0.30 miles\35 
Oak Ridge Drive, from Kellwood Road to S.R. 7 a distance of 0.44 miles\30 
Park Avenue, from S.R. 11 to North Davis Drive a distance of 0.75 miles\30 
Parkway Drive, from Park Avenue to Smoak Avenue a distance of 0.31 miles\35 
Parkway Drive, from Smoak Avenue to Third Street a distance of 0.32 miles\25 
Parkway Drive, from Park Avenue to North Avenue a distance of 0.24 miles (school zones—school days only)\25 
Pebble Stone Place, from Gurr Road to Brookwater Lane, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Perimeter Road, from S.R. 11 to a point 1325 feet north of S.R. 7 a distance of 0.70 miles\45 
Perimeter Road, from a point 1320 feet north of S.R. 7 to S.R. 7 a distance of 0.25 miles\35 
Red Hawke Point, from Black Hawke Lane to Jared Court, a distance of 0.50 mile\25 
Rippling Water Way, from Langston Road to the end of Rippling Water Way, a distance of 0.50 mile\25 
Sandefur Road, from Houston Lake Road to Lake Joy Road, unless otherwise posted\35 
Shoshone Circle, from Windriver Drive to the end of Shoshone Circle, a distance of 0.50 mile\25 
Stonegate Trail, from Gurr Road to the end of Stonegate Trail, a distance of 0.50 mile\25 
Tucker Road, from South City Limits to a point 1320 feet south of Ball Street a distance of 1.27 miles\35 
Tucker Road, from a point 1320 feet south of Ball Street to Ball Street a distance of 0.25 miles\25 
Tucker Road, from Hillcrest Avenue to Moreland Avenue a distance of 0.35 miles (school zone—school days only)\25 
Valley Drive, from West Perry By-Pass to a point 1.90 miles south of the West Perry By-Pass a distance of 1.90 miles\45 
Valley Drive, from a point 1.90 miles south of West Perry By-Pass to S.R. 7 a distance of 0.60 miles\35 
Walton Chase, from Airport Road to the end of Walton Chase, a distance of 1.2 miles\25 
Washington Place Drive, from Perry Parkway S.R. 11 BUS to the end of Washington Place Drive, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
West Perry By-Pass, from S.R. 7 to Moss Oaks Road a distance of 1.90 miles\55 
Wingfield Way, from S.R. 127 to the end of Wingfield Way, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Winthrop Court, from Newport Avenue to Armdale Drive, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
Wooden Eagle Trail, from Lake Joy Road to the end of Wooden Eagle Trail, a distance of 0.80 mile\25 
Woodlands Blvd., from S.R. 127 to the end of Woodlands Blvd., a distance of 0.40 mile\25 
Yorktown Drive, from Perry Parkway S.R. 11 BUS to the end of Yorktown Drive, a distance of 0.30 mile\25 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2006-25, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2008-18, 8-5-08; Ord. No. 2012-07, §§ 1, 2, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 2013-01, 1-15-13; Ord. No. 2014-17, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-12, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-16) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2001-17, adopted June 5, 2001, amended section 18-5 in its entirety. The former section 18-5 pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1966, and §§ 1, 2 of Ord. No. 94-7, adopted Sept. 20, 1994. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to alter maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 18-6. - Coasters, rollerskates, skateboards, go-carts and similar devices, use restricted. 
No person upon rollerskates, or riding in or by means of any coaster or skateboard, go-cart, all terrain vehicle, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk; when so crossing such persons shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. In addition, this section shall not apply to any parade or motorcade which has been properly permitted as provided in article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 21-21) 
Sec. 18-7. - Riding bicycle on sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the business area of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-22) 
Sec. 18-8. - Funerals and processions; generally. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(c)  A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division. 
(Code 1966, §§ 21-26—21-28) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 
Sec. 18-9. - Logs to be securely fastened to vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul logs and other heavy timbers through the streets and avenues of the city without having such logs or timbers securely fastened to the trucks or other vehicles of conveyance, with chains securely fastened, to prevent such logs or timbers from fallings or rolling from such vehicles. 
(Code 1966, § 21-32) 
Sec. 18-10. - Through trucks restricted. 
Any truck defined as a motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property with more than six (6) wheels shall not travel on the following streets or roads: 
(1)  Main Street from the intersection of General Courtney Hodges Boulevard and Main Street to the intersection of Main Street and Ball Street; 
(2)  Houston Lake Drive from the intersection of Third Street and Houston Lake Drive to the intersection of Houston Lake Drive and Swift Street; and 
(3)  Jernigan Street from the intersection of Jernigan Street and Commerce Street to the intersection of Jernigan Street and Main Street. 
(Code 1966, § 21-66; Ord. No. 2015-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 18-11. - Restrictions relative to Walton Road. 
(a)  There will be a total of not more than three (3) curb cuts on Walton Road between Buckeye Road, also known as Todd Road, and the southern boundary of Parcel A1B shown on a plat of survey recorded in plat book 23, page 280, clerk's office, Peach Superior Court. In addition, if one (1) curb cut is placed on the road frontage on that part of Walton Road between Buckeye Road and the northern boundary of said Parcel A1B, only two (2) curb cuts will be placed on Parcel A1B. If no curb cuts are placed on the property fronting on Walton Road between Buckeye Road and the northern boundary of Parcel A1B, three (3) curb cuts can be placed on Parce1 A1B. Provided, however, none of the curb cuts will be placed within three hundred (300) feet of the two (2) existing entrances to The Farm Subdivision which two (2) entrances presently front on the west side of Walton Road. 
(b)  There will be no through traffic on Walton Road by vehicles which have more than one (1) rear axle or which exceed twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds in weight except for public utility service vehicles. Walton Road shall be so posted. 
(c)  There will be no ingress to or egress from Walton Road by way of the curb cuts referred to in (a) above by vehicles which have more than one (1) rear axle or which exceed twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds in weight except for public utility service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2003-56, 8-19-03) 
Sec. 18-12. - Jake brake usage prohibited. 
The use of exhaust brakes, exhaust retarders and Jake brake usage by eighteen-wheel vehicles in the city is prohibited. A violation of this section shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment provided under the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-40, 10-18-05) 
Sec. 18-13. - Commercial vehicles of eight wheels or greater. 
Commercial vehicles of eight (8) wheels or greater shall not be kept in a residential neighborhood or in the central business district (C-3 zone) for more than two (2) visits during a 30-day period. A visit is defined as arriving, parking of least four (4) hours and departing. The maximum length of a visit without the vehicle leaving is three (3) days. 
(Ord. No. 2006-61, § 4, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 2007-23, §§ 1, 2, 5-1-07) 
Sec. 18-14. - Restrictions on Milton Way and Greenwood Circle. 
There will be no through traffic on Milton Way and on Greenwood Circle between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Milton Way and Greenwood Circle shall be so posted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, 4-17-12) 
Sec. 18-15. - Regulation and control of the weight and size of motor vehicles operated on city streets. 
(a)  All motor vehicles or vehicle combinations with a gross weight in excess of sixty-four thousand (64,000) pounds including the load, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any street within the city limits except those authorized as truck routes in subsection (e) below. 
(b)  Restricted vehicles must stay on designated truck routes unless a destination necessary for business, such as a pickup or delivery point, garage, or terminal is accessible only via a non-designated truck route. Ingress and egress to and from such points shall be made by most direct route available from nearest designated truck route. 
(c)  Any person driving or in charge or control of any of the restricted vehicles defined in the preceding section where upon streets other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(d)  If any designated truck route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the city. 
(e)  The following streets are authorized as truck routes in the City of Perry: 
Houston Lake Road. 
Swift Street. 
Macon Road. 
Main Street between Ball Street and Perry Parkway. 
US 341E between Perry Parkway and city limits. 
Ball Street. 
Commerce Street. 
General Courtney Hodges Boulevard. 
Kings Chapel Road. 
Lake Joy Road between Houston Lake Road and city limits. 
Sandefur Road. 
Langston Road. 
Airport Road. 
Valley Drive between Perry Parkway and Industrial Park Drive. 
Industrial Park Drive. 
Larry Walker Parkway. 
Marshallville Road between Larry Walker Parkway and city limits. 
Elko Road. 
South U.S. 41. 
Kellwood Drive. 
SR 127 between Houston Lake Road and SR 247. 
(f)  A violation of any portion of this section shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment provided under the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-21-17) 
Sec. 18-16. - Golf carts prohibited. 
The operation and/or driving of golf carts, utility terrain vehicles (UTVs), all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), and other similar off-road vehicles is prohibited on all portions of city streets and state routes located within the city limits on which the speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Secs. 18-17—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, and parking generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 18-31. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle within an alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1966, § 21-58) 
Sec. 18-32. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or alley for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1966, § 21-59) 
Sec. 18-33. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1966, § 21-60) 
Sec. 18-34. - Hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1966, § 21-62) 
Sec. 18-35. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park any vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1966, § 21-63) 
Sec. 18-36. - Prohibited in specified areas. 
No person shall stop or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the following places: 
U.S. 41 South, beginning at a point where Sear Road intersects same and running thence in a northeasterly direction along the southeasterly side of U.S. 41 South for five hundred (500) feet. 
U.S. 341 North, east side, from Washington Street to Interstate Highway No. 75. 
U.S. 341 North, from Spring Street, being mile point 14.34, to Interstate Highway No. 75, said point being mile point 14.90, and said area being a distance of 0.56 mile. 
U.S. 341 South, also known as Main Street, from north side, to the City of Perry, Georgia: Second Street northernmost entrance to Eastgate Shopping Center. 
U.S. 341 South, also known as Main Street, south side, from School Street to Clinchfield Circle. 
Valley Drive, from State Route 7 and running thence in a southerly direction for a distance of 210 feet. 
State Route 11 (Washington Street) from the junction of State Route 11 (Washington Street) and Main Street, on the west side, Milelog 13.51, and continuing to a point 137.5 feet further north, Milelog 13.76, a distance of 0.25 mile. 
Park Avenue on both sides of the street between west Marshall Circle and Cooper Street (unopened). 
Northside Drive on both sides of the street between Park Avenue and the northern fence line of Perry High School baseball field. 
Marshallville Highway from General Courtney Hodges Boulevard to Larry Walker Parkway. 
Commerce Street from Macon Road to General Courtney Hodges Boulevard. 
Washington Street from Commerce Street to Sam Nunn Boulevard. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to designate by proper signs or markings "no parking" in the above described areas. 
(Code 1966, §§ 21-64, 21-65, 21-67, 21-68; Ord. No. 88-6, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 2005-12, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 2006-24, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 18-37. - Parking limited to two hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays—Certain streets. 
When signs are placed, erected or installed in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park any vehicle for longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any date, except Sundays and legal holidays, upon any of the streets or portions of streets described as follows: 
(1)  On both sides of Washington Avenue between the intersection of Washington Avenue and Commerce Street and the intersection of Washington Avenue and Main Street; 
(2)  On both sides Ball Street between the intersection of Ball Street and Commerce Street and the intersection of Ball Street and Carroll Street; 
(3)  On the easterly side of Ball Street between the intersection of Ball Street and Carroll Street and the intersection of Ball Street and Main Street; 
(4)  On both sides of Jernigan Street between the intersection of Jernigan Street and Commerce Street and the intersection of Jernigan Street and Carroll Street; 
(5)  On the westerly side of Jernigan Street between the intersection of Jernigan Street and Carroll Street and the intersection of Jernigan Street and Main Street; 
(6)  On both sides of Carroll Street between the intersection of Carroll Street and Marion Street and the intersection of Carroll Street and Jernigan Street; 
(7)  On both sides of Carroll Street between the intersection of Carroll Street and Jernigan Street and the intersection of Carroll Street and Ball Street; 
(8)  On both sides of Carroll Street between the intersection of Carroll Street and Ball Street and the intersection of Carroll Street and Washington Avenue; 
(9)  On both sides of Main Street between the intersection of Main Street and Marion Street and the intersection of Main Street and Jernigan Street; 
(10)  On the southerly side of Main Street between the intersection of Main Street and Jernigan Street and the intersection of Main Street and Ball Street; and 
(11)  On both sides of Main Street between the intersection of Main Street and Ball Street and the intersection of Main Street and Washington Avenue. 
The changing of the position of a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block shall not be deemed to constitute a break in one (1) continuous parking period. 
(Ord. No. 88-19, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 90-1, §§ 1, 2, 3-6-90; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 18-38. - Same—Exceptions. 
When a temporary parking permit is issued by the clerk of superior court of the county, the judge of superior court of the county or the county sheriff relative to any proceedings in the superior court of the county and said permit is displaced on the dashboard or hung from the rearview mirror of the parked vehicle, the parking limit outlined in section 18-37 above shall not apply on the following streets: 
(1)  On the easterly side of Ball Street between the intersection of Ball Street and Carroll Street and the intersection of Ball Street and Main Street; 
(2)  On the westerly side of Jernigan Street between the intersection of Jernigan Street and Carroll Street and the intersection of Jernigan Street and Main Street; 
(3)  On both sides of Carroll Street between the intersection of Carroll Street and Jernigan Street and the intersection of Carroll Street and Ball Street; and 
(4)  On the southerly side of Main Street between the intersection of Main Street and Jernigan Street and the intersection of Main Street and Ball Street. 
(Ord. No. 95-7, § 2, 4-4-95) 
Secs. 18-39—18-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18A - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-16, adopted June 17, 2014, added new provisions to the Code designated as Ch. 18B, §§ 18B-1—18B-4; however, at the discrection of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 18A, §§ 18A-1—18A-4 for purposes of maintaining Code format. 

Sec. 18A-1. - Name. 
The municipal court in the City of Perry shall be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Perry. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, 6-17-14) 
Sec. 18A-2. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by associate judges as determined by the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Any persons so appointed shall meet the qualifications as outlined in the Charter of the City of Perry. 
(c)  Compensation of the chief judge and any part-time, full-time, or stand-by associate judges shall be as set forth in the annual budget of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, 6-17-14) 
Sec. 18A-3. - Sessions of court. 
Municipal court shall convene on the first and third Wednesday of each month at such time as may be designated by the chief judge and may be additionally convened at such other times and dates as deemed necessary by the chief judge; provided, however, in the discretion of the chief judge, any regularly scheduled court session can be cancelled. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, 6-17-14) 
Sec. 18A-4. - Court costs. 
Court costs in the amount determined by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk shall be collected on all cases heard in municipal court which result in a plea or finding by the court of "guilty" or "nolo contendere". Such costs shall be waived when a party disposes of a citation, when allowed under state law, prior to the designated court session. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, 6-17-14) 
Sec. 18A-5. - Failure to appear. 
The judge of the municipal court is hereby authorized to impose a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine for failure to appear in municipal court on cases where warrants are issued. 
(Ord. No. 2014-24, 11-4-14) 
Chapter 19 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 19, §§ 19-1—19-23, and enacted a new Ch. 19 as set out herein. The former Ch. 19 pertained to nuisance, debris and waste control and derived from Ord. No. 2000-11, adopted May 16, 2000; Ord. No. 2003-01, §§ 1—4, adopted Jan. 7, 2003; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1, 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2003; Ord. No. 2006-04, §§ 3, 4, adopted Feb. 21, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-61, §§ 5—12, adopted Dec. 5, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2007; Ord. No. 2008-34, adopted Dec. 2, 2008; Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 4, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-30, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 16, 2014; and Ord. No. 2017-19, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 2017. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Secs. 19-1—19-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-10. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the minimum conditions which will protect and preserve the public health, safety, morality, order, property values, and welfare of the citizens of Perry, Georgia, as well as to maintain a healthful, clean and beautiful environment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-11. - International Property Maintenance Code incorporated. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by city council and incorporated as part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-12. - Responsibility of owner and tenant generally. 
(a)  Owner. Each owner of premises shall be responsible for maintaining their premises in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the owner is not the occupant of the premises, the owner shall be accountable for the activities of the tenant, and thereby, the premises. 
(b)  Tenant. Each tenant of premises shall be responsible for maintaining the premises under their control in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-13. - Storage of hazardous waste. 
Maintenance of hazardous waste prohibited. Hazardous waste shall not be stored, buried, burned, or otherwise maintained on any premises, except on premises approved as an inert landfill or sanitary landfill in compliance with the City of Perry Land Management Ordinance [Appendix A of this Code] and all applicable state, federal and city law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-14. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means any authorized city personnel responsible for code enforcement within the city. 
Derelict vehicle means any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or parts thereof, that was originally designed or manufactured to transport persons or property on a public highway, road, or street and that is junked, scrapped, dismantled, disassembled, or in a condition otherwise harmful to the public health, welfare, peace, and safety. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are in force and effect on February 1, 1998, codified as C.F.R. § 261.3, and any designated hazardous waste. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man. (O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1.) 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises; or recorded in the clerk of superior court of Houston County or Peach County, as applicable, as holding title to such premises; or otherwise having control of a premises, including the guardian of the estate of such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of the premises by a court. 
Permittee means the contractor or other person to whom was issued any type of development permit, approval, certificate, or other form of authorization. 
Premise means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures and improvements thereon. 
Private property means all land, and all improvements thereon, which is not owned by a governmental entity. 
Public view means any area that is visible by a person standing on the ground in a public right-of-way, public park, or other publicly owned property. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include, but is not limited to, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree parts, yard trimmings, construction waste, furniture, appliances, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and similar materials, as well as the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Tenant means a person, corporation, partnership or group whether or not the legal owner, occupying a premises or portion thereof. 
Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle and which is neither attached to the motor vehicle nor a part of the motor vehicle as original equipment. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of two and thirty-two one-hundredths (2/32) inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose but is no longer new. A tire retailer shall inventory and market used tires in substantially the same fashion as a new tire. 
Water receptacle means tanks, barrels, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, tires, buckets, automobile casings or other items which permit the collection of standing water. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Secs. 19-15—19-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RUBBISH, GARBAGE AND TIRES 

Sec. 19-20. - Rubbish and garbage shall be properly contained. 
(a)  Appropriate receptacles for the disposition of rubbish and garbage generated on any premises shall be provided and maintained by the owner or tenant. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be allowed, all rubbish and garbage shall be contained in an appropriate receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-21. - Construction and demolition sites. 
(a)  All permittees and/or owners shall adhere to all provisions of this section. 
(b)  On-site receptacles to effectively and securely handle the accumulation of all rubbish and garbage produced by those working on the site shall be installed and maintained during construction activity. All construction and demolition sites shall be kept in a litter-free condition. 
(c)  Permittees shall implement erosion and sedimentation controls and control waste at the construction site such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, rubbish and sanitary waste. All dirt, mud, silt, or any other earth deposited upon any public right-of-way as a result of construction and/or demolition shall be immediately removed by the permit holder as to prevent any detectable amount of accumulation which may tend to cause a threat to the public safety, property values, both real and personal, or good order of the city or environment. 
(d)  Any construction supplies or materials, landscaping supplies or materials, or any other material deposited on a public road or right-of-way shall be removed on a daily basis, or immediately if the presence of such materials constitutes a threat to the public health or safety. 
(e)  Rubbish or garbage shall not be buried on any property unless expressly and properly permitted for such activity. Nor shall rubbish or garbage be burned on any property unless the proper permit is secured from the state forestry commission and/or the city fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-22. - Storage of new, used and scrap tires. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to store tires, used tires, or scrap tires outside of an enclosed building or shipping type container, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Scrap tires shall handled in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. Said provisions are hereby incorporated in this section as if set out in full herein. 
(c)  No owner or tenant shall store more than twenty-five (25) scrap tires anywhere, except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1. 
(d)  Used tires and scrap tires may be stored outside of an enclosed building or shipping type container on the premises of an authorized business within a cage not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area, and eight (8) feet in height. Such cage shall be covered with a water proof top and be screened on all four (4) sides. All tires stored outdoors shall comply with section 19-60. 
(e)  New tires may be displayed on racks or stands outside of an enclosed building, provided they are stored inside after business hours. 
(f)  Only one (1) shipping type container or cage as described in subsection (d) shall be allowed per each premises and shall be located out of public view. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Secs. 19-23—19-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 19-30. - Weeds grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to maintain any weeds, grasses or other plants exceeding eight (8) inches in height on any premises, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, ornamental trees and shrubs, and cultivated agricultural crops shall be exempt the height limit, except as noted in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Notwithstanding, subsection (b) above, all weeds, grasses, and other plants shall be maintained so as to provide free and full use of streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and street lights. Any plant that causes any obstruction to these facilities is subject to maintenance or removal by the city and or the state department of transportation. 
(d)  The provisions of this division shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Houston County or Peach County, as applicable and original city lots. These provisions shall not apply to undeveloped areas of un-subdivided lands. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-31. - Maintenance of easements and rights-of-way. 
Owners and tenants shall be responsible for maintaining any easements which may exist on their premises and rights-of-way adjacent to their premises in accordance with the provisions of section 19-12. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Secs. 19-32—19-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES 

Sec. 19-40. - Derelict vehicles. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4, the city is authorized to provide by ordinance for the removal and disposal of derelict vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to keep any derelict motor vehicle, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from public view by an opaque fence, wall, and or plant material, on any property unless properly zoned or permitted. 
(c)  Any such derelict motor vehicle in violation of this section, whether such motor vehicle is on private property or public property, shall be subject to removal by the city and disposed of, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter, when requested by the land owner or when such derelict motor vehicle is in such a condition that it constitutes a health or safety hazard or an unsightly nuisance. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which is regularly engaged as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. The provisions of this section shall also not apply to any motor vehicle which is located within the premises of any junkyard complying with the laws of the state relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Secs. 19-41—19-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGNS 

Sec. 19-50. - Posting of signs on utility poles or other structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device to any utility pole, lamppost, bench, waste receptacle, street furniture or structure except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-51. - Sign control. 
Unless authorized in section 19-9 of the Land Management Ordinance (Appendix A of this Code), no sign shall be installed, erected, or displayed on any premises or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Secs. 19-52—19-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOSQUITO PREVENTION 

Sec. 19-60. - Prevention of mosquitoes and other disease carrying organisms. 
All premises shall be kept free of water receptacles and other articles that permit the holding of water which is not drained on a regular basis so as to prevent providing temporary breeding places for mosquitoes and other disease carrying organisms. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Secs. 19-61—19-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 

Secs. 19-70—19-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 19-80. - Enforcement, general. 
(a)  Subject to constitutional limitations and upon proper identification, the administrator shall be permitted to enter upon private property for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon determination that a violation of this chapter exists, the administrator shall issue a written notice of violation to the person responsible for the violation or the owner of a derelict vehicle and to the owner of the premises The notice of violation shall state the specific violation of this chapter, order the action necessary to correct the violation, and give a deadline by which the violation shall be corrected. The deadline shall be reasonable, based on the nature and intensity of the violation, but shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar days, unless specifically provided in this division. 
(c)  Written notice may be provided by personal delivery, by mail to the tenant and or owner reflected on the current property tax records of Houston/Peach County, by posting the violating premises/vehicle, and or posting a sign in the right-of-way adjacent to the violating premises/vehicle. 
(d)  If the violation is not corrected by the deadline established in the notice of violation, or as agreed upon by the administrator, the administrator shall take appropriate action as provided in section 19-85 to correct or abate the violation and ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  Only two (2) notices of violation will be issued for the same type of violation on the same premises within a calendar year. Third and subsequent violations of the same type on the same premises within a calendar year will be immediately addressed according to section 19-85. 
(f)  Stormwater management is enforced per article 7 of the Land Management Ordinance (Appendix A of this Code). 
(g)  If the nature of a violation of this chapter is such that an immediate threat to safety or health is evident, the administrator shall take any legal action necessary to correct or abate the threat. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Sec. 19-81. - Additional procedures for derelict vehicles. 
(a)  Upon determination that a violation of article IV of this chapter exists, the administrator shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the derelict vehicle and the owner of the premises on which the derelict vehicle is located. The notice of violation shall be consistent with the provisions of section 19-80(b), except that the deadline shall be fifteen (15) calendar days, or as agreed upon by the administrator. 
(b)  In the event the owner of the vehicle cannot be determined for whatever reason, posting of the notice of violation in the right-of-way adjacent to the premises on which the derelict vehicle is located shall be deemed as notice to the vehicle owner. 
(c)  For each derelict motor vehicle removed by the city or at the city's direction, the city shall keep a log identifying such vehicle and all steps involved in the removal and disposal of same. 
(d)  In the event an owner or tenant of a premises containing a derelict vehicle request the removal of a derelict vehicle, such person shall sign a release allowing a towing company to remove the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Secs. 19-82—19-84. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-85. - Remedies and penalties. 
The city may use any combination of the following enforcement actions, remedies and penalties pursuant to city code section 1-10 to correct, stop, abate, and enjoin a violation of this chapter: 
(a)  Citation noting violation. The administrator may issue a citation to the person responsible for the violation, owner of a derelict vehicle, and or the owner of property on which a violation exists, requiring appearance before the municipal court. 
(b)  Abatement. The administrator may remove and dispose of a violation, or hire a third party to correct the violation. All costs associated with abatement shall be the responsibility of the owner, per the current city fee schedule. 
(c)  Stop order. The administrator may issue and serve upon a person pursuing activities in violation of this chapter a stop work order requiring the person to stop all activities in violation of this chapter. No work or construction shall proceed after service of a stop work order. 
(d)  Permit suspension or revocation. Any development permit, approval, certificate, or other form of authorization issued by the city may be suspended or revoked if the administrator determines that a violation of this chapter exists. Written notice of suspension or revocation shall be mailed or served upon the owner and or the permittee, or posted in a prominent location at the place of violation. No work or construction shall proceed after service of notice. 
(e)  Civil remedies. In addition to all other remedies and penalties outlined in this chapter, the administrator may initiate an action or proceeding for injunction or mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate, or correct a violation of this chapter. 
(f)  Remedies cumulative. The remedies provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law, and may be exercised in any order. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. Criminal penalties shall be as provided by city code section 1-10. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Remedies and penalties for stormwater management are contained in article 7 of the Land Management Ordinance (Appendix A of this Code). 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-4-18) 
Chapter 20 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); Authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; Establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 99-10, adopted Aug. 17, 1999, deleted Art. I in its entirety and section 2 enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. I contained § 20-1, which pertained to entering recreation areas when closed and derived from § 12-23 of the 1966 Code. 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
Animals: Cats, dogs, horses, any fowl or birds or living creatures within the jurisdiction of the park or recreation area. 
Director: The City of Perry Recreation Director. 
Park: A park, playground, recreation area or any other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Permit: Any written license issued by or under the authority of the mayor and council, recreation director or chief of police permitting a special event or activity on park facilities. 
Person: Any natural person, corporation, company, association, firm or partnership. 
Soliciting: Persons selling goods or services by sample or taking orders for future delivery with or without accepting advance payment for the goods or persons seeking any form of contributions. 
Vehicle: Any motor vehicles, trailers of all types, campers, bicycles (motorized or not) or vehicles propelled by other than muscular power. Also any horse or horse-drawn conveyance. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-2. - Structures, plants, trees, earth, rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to: 
(1)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavations by tools, equipment, blasting or other means. 
(4)  Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(5)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(6)  Take into, carry through, or put into any park, any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material. Such refuge and rubbish shall be deposited in receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(7)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird. Exception to the forgoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous may be killed on sight. 
(8)  Walk a domestic animal without a leash, said leash to be no longer than six (6) feet. Further, the owner or person having custody of said domestic animal shall be responsible for removal of animal solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-3. - Vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to: 
(1)  Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary areas. 
(2)  Park a vehicle anywhere except on a designated parking area. 
(3)  Leave a vehicle standing or parked in established parking areas or elsewhere in the park and recreation area during hours when the park and recreation area is closed. 
(4)  Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others. 
(5)  Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or pavement, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by them. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-10, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed § 20-4 in its entirety which pertained to firearms and weapons and derived from Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, adopted Aug. 17, 1999. 
Sec. 20-5. - Explosives and fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or set off any fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-6. - Advertising. 
No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, deliver, place, cast or leave about, any bill, billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular, or advertisement. Provided, however, nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from allowing advertisements to be placed in a park for the purpose of raising revenue for the city recreation program. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-7. - Merchandise, sale prohibited. 
No person shall expose or offer for sale any article in any park or recreation area, without a license as a concessionaire. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-8. - Ignitable and combustible materials. 
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places provided for such purposes. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time that it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper or other material. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-9. - Alcoholic beverages, controlled dangerous substances, alms, gambling. 
While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular, no person shall: 
(1)  Bring alcoholic beverages, or controlled dangerous substances, drink or use the same at any time nor shall any person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled dangerous substance in a park or recreation area. 
(2)  Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private. 
(3)  Play any game of chance or have possession of any instrument or device for gambling. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-10. - Miscellaneous conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to: 
(1)  Roller skate or use skateboards except in those areas specifically designed for such pastimes. 
(2)  Enter an area posted as "closed to the public." 
(3)  Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace. 
(4)  Fail to produce and exhibit any permit he or she claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(5)  Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. 
(6)  Erect or occupy any tent, stand or other structure in any park or playground, or sell or give away from any such tent, stand or other structure any food, drink or other thing, without a permit. 
(7)  Violate any posted rule even if not specifically stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-11. - Picnic areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold a picnic in any park, except in areas set aside or specifically designated as picnic areas. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-12. - Park curfew. 
All parks of the city shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. with the exception of city sponsored organized sporting events which may continue past 10:00 p.m. but only until their conclusion. Any persons in the city parks between these hours shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. The recreation director or the chief of police of their designees are authorized to issue special event permits to allow use of the parks during the otherwise prohibited hours, and the mayor or the chief of police and their designees are authorized to close the parks earlier than 10:00 p.m. if deemed necessary for public safety purposes. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-13. - Enforcement. 
(1)  The city police department, recreation director and attendants shall, in connection with their duties diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter and any other posted rules. 
(2)  The city police department, recreation director and any attendants shall have the authority to order any person or persons acting in violation of any provision of this chapter to leave the park. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 20-14. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the maximum punishment as provided in section 4.13 of the City Charter. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of article III of this chapter shall be subject to revocation of their fishing permit or privileges for the remainder of the year in which any violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Secs. 20-15—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 3.11. 

Sec. 20-21. - Established. 
There is hereby established the Perry Recreation Commission. 
(Code 1966, § 2-67; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 1, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 20-22. - Membership. 
(a)  The recreation commission shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be eighteen (18) years of age and residents of the city. The mayor and each council person shall appoint one (1) member to the commission. There shall always be one (1) commission member representing the mayor and each of the six (6) council posts. 
(b)  The mayor and each council person will appoint a member at the beginning of his term to run concurrently with his term. 
(c)  Any member can be removed by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the mayor and councilpersons with the mayor having the right to vote on the question of removal. Absence from three (3) meetings within a calendar year without justification will be cause for removal from the commission. 
(d)  All of the members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(e)  No member of the commission shall hold a board position with the Perry Junior League. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-69, 2-71, 2-73, 2-76; Ord. No. 2002-13, §§ 1, 3, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 20-23. - Officers. 
The recreation commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and a secretary/treasurer from its membership, with each committee officer serving a two-year term. 
(Code 1966, § 2-70) 
Sec. 20-24. - Meetings. 
The recreation commission shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less than quarterly. At its first meeting in January and every other year thereafter, the commission shall elect its officers. Meetings of the commission shall be open to the public; however, no elected officials will be allowed to participate in such meetings, or use such meetings as a political forum. It is intended that the commission be free from political influence of any type. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-72, 2-74) 
Sec. 20-25. - Powers and duties. 
The duties and powers of the recreation commission shall be to: 
(1)  Recommend to council fee schedules that accomplish the goals of the council; 
(2)  Evaluate program results and viability of continuing programs or starting programs; 
(3)  Develop, promote and evaluate independent contractor programs to provide widest range of options without direct personnel cost increases; 
(4)  Recommend park plan to council; 
(5)  Act as an appeal board for recreation programs such as age restriction, team selection disputes, use of facilities, etc; 
(6)  Promote and authorize expenses from a donation account; 
(7)  Act as a booster group to seek and develop private contributions for recreational/park uses; 
(8)  Provide community feedback to improve department promotions, neighborhood participation and effectiveness of programs; 
(9)  Assist in development of department goals and objectives; 
(10)  Recommend rules and policies for facility usage and operation; and 
(11)  Analyze and recommend funding equity plans addressing department usage by noncity residents. 
(Code 1966, § 2-68; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 4, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 20-26. - Annual report. 
It shall be the duty of the recreation commission, on April 15 of each year, to file with the finance committee, a comprehensive report on the recreational needs and proposals for the coming year, to include cost estimates therefor. If indicated, minority reports will be accepted. 
(Code 1966, § 2-75) 
Secs. 20-27—20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROZAR PARK FISHING PONDS 

Sec. 20-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide rules and regulations for the use of and conduct at the Rozar Park Fishing Pond. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-32. - Creel and possession limit for fish caught. 
It is unlawful for any one person to take in one day or to possess at any one time more than the following stated limits: 
(1)  Bream and sunfish ..... 15 
(2)  Channel catfish (10" minimum length) ..... 10 
(3)  Largemouth bass (14" minimum length) ..... 5 
Sec. 20-33. - Annual fishing permits and daily use permits. 
The policy of the city at the Rozar Park Ponds must be recognized as essential to the quality of life in the city. For this reason charges will be made to fish in order to avoid having to discontinue the use of the ponds. Precautions will be taken so that no person will be denied an opportunity to use the ponds by reason of poverty. 
(1)  Annual fishing permits and daily use permits can be obtained from the City of Perry Recreation Department, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. at a cost of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the annual permit and three dollars ($3.00) for the daily permit. 
(2)  Anyone the age of sixteen (16) to sixty-four (64) years must possess a current Georgia fishing license to obtain an annual permit to fish in the Rozar Park ponds. Children under the age of sixteen (16) and senior citizens sixty-five (65) and older are exempt from having to pay for a city permit. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-34. - Children. 
Children under the age of twelve (12) must be accompanied and supervised by an adult when fishing. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-35. - Baits; equipment; boats. 
(a)  No minnows or shiners are allowed. The only permissible baits are worms, crickets, cut bait (liver, blood bait, etc.) or artificial lures. 
(b)  Only two (2) cane poles, or two (2) rods and reels, or combination thereof per person is allowed. 
(c)  No boats of any kind, canoes or rafts shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-36. - Fishing hours. 
Fishing hours at Rozar Park Pond shall be from 7:00 a.m. until dark, seven (7) days per week. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-37. - Vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person at or around Rozar Park Fishing ponds to: 
(1)  Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary areas. 
(2)  Park a vehicle anywhere except on a designated parking area. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-38. - Structures; plants; trees; earth; rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person at or around Rozar Park Fishing Ponds to: 
(1)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any tables, benches, pavings, or pavings materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of the ponds any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(3)  Take into or put into or around any pond, any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other materials. Such refuse and rubbish shall be deposited in receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-39. - Firearms; weapons; tools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or have in his possession at or around any pond area: 
(1)  Any pistol or revolver or objects upon which loaded or blank cartridges may be used. 
(2)  Any rifle, shotgun, BB gun, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow, or other weapon in which the propelling force is gunpowder, a spring or air. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-40. - Ignitable and combustible materials. 
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper or other material within or around any pond. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-41. - Alcoholic beverages; controlled dangerous substances; alms. 
While at or around a pond, all persons shall conduct themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular, no person shall: 
(1)  Bring alcoholic beverages, or controlled dangerous substances, drink or use the same at anytime nor shall any person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled dangerous substance at or around any pond area. 
(2)  Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-42. - Miscellaneous conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person at or around a pond to: 
(1)  Camp or stay overnight unless approved by the recreational director. 
(2)  Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace. 
(3)  Fail to produce and exhibit any permit he claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(4)  Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area around a pond. 
(5)  Swim or play in the water of any pond. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-43. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city police department, recreation director and attendants shall, in connection with their duties diligently enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city police department, recreation director and any attendants shall have the authority to order any person or persons acting in violation of this article to leave the pond or pond area. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 20-44. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the maximum punishment as provided in section 4.13 of the City Charter and shall be subject to revocation of their fishing permit or privileges for the remainder of the year in which any violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 95-14, 7-18-95) 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-26, adopted Oct. 20, 2015, repealed Ch. 22 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 22 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 22, §§ 22-1—22-25, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1966, § 10-44—10-52, 10-54—10-57; Ord. No. 87-12, § 2, adopted June 16, 1987; Ord. No. 88-15, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 4, 1988; Ord. No. 89-6, §§ 1—3, April 4, 1989; Ord. No. 89-14, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 27, 1989; Ord. No. 90-7, §§ 1—3, adopted July 10, 1990; Ord. No. 92-6, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 19, 1992; Ord. No. 93-5, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 22, 1993; Ord. No. 94-5, §§ 1—10, adopted June 21, 1994; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, adopted July 11, 1995; Ord. No. 97-7, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 17, 1997; Ord. No. 99-13, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 7, 1999; Ord. No. 2000-15, § 1, adopted Aug. 1, 2000; Ord. No. 2004-53, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 7, 2004; Ord. No. 2006-61, § 13, adopted Dec. 5, 2006; and Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2013. 
Cross reference— Water sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  To control the costs of solid waste management to the residents of the City of Perry. 
(b)  To protect the health, safety and general well-being of the citizens of the City of Perry. 
(c)  To enhance and maintain the quality of the environment, conserve natural resources and prevent water and air pollution by providing a comprehensive, rational and effective means of regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste in the city in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management as amended. 
(d)  To control solid waste material in the city by establishing limitations, prohibiting certain acts causing solid waste disposal problems and to provide for enforcement for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  To govern the storage, collection and disposal of solid waste produced or otherwise created within the city. 
(f)  To encourage and expand solid waste recycling and waste reduction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-2. - City to be exclusive collector of solid waste; mandatory solid waste service required. 
(a)  The city shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all residential garbage, trash, recycling, yard waste, bulk waste and other solid waste defined as acceptable for city collection by the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be mandatory for all owners, occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of all dwellings, buildings, places and premises in the City of Perry in and from which solid waste is created, accumulated or produced to use the solid waste collection system of the city and pay for refuse collection service rendered to such dwelling, building, place or premises by a collector or permittee. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to contract for and provide a waste collection system employing the use of standardized front-loaded containers to facilitate the collection and hauling of commercial and business garbage and solid waste in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-3. - Refuse disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be by a method or methods in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, as amended and local law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-4. - Unlawful disposal of solid waste. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, place, throw or deposit within the city's service area, or cause or permit any other person to leave, place, throw or deposit within the city's service area, solid waste of any kind for the purpose of collection and disposal by the city when the solid waste is generated at a location outside the city's service area or from a location where the city does not collect solid waste. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of a building or dwelling or any other person to bury or submerse in water any solid waste material that is not permitted by the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management as amended. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of a building or dwelling or any other person to burn solid waste except as permitted by the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management as amended. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of a building or dwelling or any other person to allow an accumulation of solid waste which creates a fire, health or safety hazard or harborage for rodents or insects. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of a building or dwelling or any other person to deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise set out for solid waste collection and disposal by the city or its authorized representative any waste that is considered unacceptable as defined in section 22-13. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15; Ord. No. 2018-18, § 4, 9-4-18) 
Secs. 22-5—22-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-18, § 4, adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed §§ 22-5—22-9, which pertained to littering; littering on street by moving vehicle; accumulations; enforcement; and abatement of violation by the city; collection of costs, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-26, adopted Oct. 20, 2015. 
Sec. 22-10. - Proper storage. 
(a)  No owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any property may deposit, store or permit to accumulate any solid waste upon his property that is not stored or disposed of in a manner prescribed by this chapter. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow an accumulation of solid waste which creates a fire, health or safety hazard or harborage for rodents or insects. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any premises within the city to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter, except where the property is unoccupied or where the occupant or owner has by deed, contract, lease, negotiation, agreement, arrangement, express or implied, or custom, determined otherwise; and further except in the case of mobile toter replacement in which case the duly shall be as provided in section 22-20. In case the property is unoccupied, the responsibility of the owner shall be as set forth in section 19-12. 
(c)  In case there is some arrangement between the owner and occupant, upon proof thereof by the occupant, the terms of such deed, contract, lease, regulations, agreement, arrangement, express or implied, or custom shall control the responsibility. 
(d)  The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of any premises upon which garbage is stored shall remove, or cause to be removed all garbage from said premises at least once a week (7 day period). The work shall be done in a clean orderly manner and any refuse that is spilled shall be cleaned up and the premises left in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(e)  No owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a building or dwelling may leave outside the building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or unattended icebox, refrigerator or other receptacle that has an airtight door, without first removing the door. 
(f)  No person shall store solid waste in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any public or private premises. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-18, § 4, adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed § 22-11, which pertained to scavenging, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-26, adopted Oct. 20, 2015. 
Sec. 22-12. - Refuse acceptable for collection by city. 
The following refuse shall be considered to be acceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)  Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods. 
(2)  Ashes. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
(3)  Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, grass clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, metal and similar materials. All boxes and packing crates regardless of construction shall be dismantled and/or flattened. 
(4)  Dead animals. Small dead animals, not exceeding seventy-five (75) pounds in weight, which die in the normal course of community activity, excluding condemned animals from a slaughterhouse or other animals normally considered industrial refuse, shall be removed by the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-13. - Refuse not acceptable for collection by city. 
(a)  Unless otherwise determined by the city, the following waste is determined inappropriate for collection and conveyance by the city: incinerator ash; foundry sand; explosives; hospital, pathological and biological waste; chemicals and radioactive materials; oil sludge; asbestos in identifiable quantities; septic tank or other human waste; sewage and other highly diluted, water-carried materials or substances; materials in gaseous form; human remains; street sweepings; ash mining waste; sludge; and hazardous refuse of any kind, such as cleaning fluids, crank case oils, cutting oils, paints, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs. The city may issue regulations adding or removing items from this list. 
(b)  Hazardous waste means any refuse, sludge or other waste material or combinations of refuse, sludge or other waste material in solid, semi-solid, liquid or contained gaseous form which, because of its quantity, concentration or chemical, physical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not limited to: explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants and corrosives. The city may issue regulations adding or removing items from this list. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-14. - Prohibition of tires in garbage dumpsters and mobile toters. 
No tires are allowed in garbage dumpsters or mobile toters. Tire tubes are allowed and may be placed in toters or dumpsters. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-15. - Duty of occupant. 
(a)  The occupant of any premises within the city, whether business, commercial, industrial, institutional or residential shall maintain the premises in a clean, orderly, safe and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of solid waste which creates a fire, health or safety hazard or harborage for rodents or insects. 
(b)  The occupant of any premises within the city shall ensure that all solid waste is stored on the premises in containers complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The occupant of any premises within the city shall cover and/or secure all solid waste containers, keeping the storage area and area surrounding any containers in a clean, orderly and sanitary manner and preventing the waste from being scattered by animals, wind or other means. In the event that any solid waste stored in a plastic bag or other container becomes torn, spilled or otherwise scattered, the occupant shall be responsible for clean-up of the area. 
(d)  The occupant of any premises within the city shall not store any solid waste, including yard waste and bulk waste, outside for more than seven (7) days. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-16. - Duty of owner. 
(a)  The owner of any multi-family dwelling shall provide the premises with a sufficient number of covered solid waste containers complying with the requirements of section 22-24 to allow the occupants to adequately store the solid waste generated by the occupants of the premises between collection days. 
(b)  The owner of any premises shall not allow the accumulation of solid waste on the premises to such an extent that the solid waste creates a fire, health or safety hazard or harborage for rodents or insects. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-17. - Service charges. 
(a)  All fees and charges for the cost of collecting, removing and disposing of garbage and other solid waste in the city shall be determined by the mayor and council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk and the utility business office. Such fees and charges are hereby incorporated in this section as if set out in length therein and shall include, but shall not be limited to, fees and charges for: 
(1)  Single family dwellings. 
(2)  Duplex dwellings. 
(3)  Multi-family housing facilities. 
(4)  Commercial, governmental, institutional, business or industrial establishments using mobile toters and containerized trash served by the city. 
(5)  Commercial, institutional, business or governmental establishments using dumpsters leased from the city's authorized representative. 
(6)  Businesses and residential areas which generate trash in excess of normal household waste. 
(b)  The service charges, specified above, are levied against both the owner and occupant of the premises served, jointly and severally. The owner of the property shall be billed by the city for the service charges, but collection from one (1) shall relieve the other. The service charges shall be collected in the manner and at such intervals as may be prescribed by the mayor and council and shall be paid into the city treasury. All uncollected service charges shall constitute a continuing lien against the property served to the same and as full an extent and subject to addition of interest and costs as provided by law with respect to city ad valorem taxes, and may be enforced in the same manner. The rates of such service charges may be fixed and changed from time to time; users of said services may be classified and reclassified; and, different rates for different classes of users may be prescribed by mayor and council. 
Changes may be made without adoption of an amendment to existing. 
(c)  Each resident of the city, who is the head of the household of the residential dwelling unit in which such person resides and upon whom is imposed a residential garbage and sanitation services charge for the residential dwelling unit in which such person resides by the provision of this article, and who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older, or who is then totally disabled according to a current ruling of any agency of this state or the federal government, and who has a gross annual income from all sources, including the income of all members of such person's family residing within said residential dwelling unit, not in excess of seventeen thousand nine hundred dollars ($17,900.00), shall not have to pay the monthly residential charge for garbage and sanitation services. 
(1)  The exemption provided in this section shall not, however, be granted unless an affidavit of the person claiming the exemption prepared upon forms prescribed and provided by the city manager for that purpose, shall be filed with said city manager or his or her designee which affidavit shall be filed annually on or before January 15 and the exemption from such payment shall apply to each billing cycle beginning more than thirty (30) days thereafter and shall show the age of the person claiming such exemption on the date of the filing of such affidavit or shall have attached a true copy of a determination of total disability issued by either a state or federal agency. If disability is claimed as the ground for exemption, the total amount of income received by such person from all sources during the immediately preceding calendar year, the total amount of income received during the immediately preceding calendar year from all sources by each family member residing in such residential dwelling unit, together with a statement that such claimant's income, when added to the income of each other family member residing in said residential dwelling unit will not be in excess of the income level of seventeen thousand nine hundred dollars ($17,900.00) in the calendar year in which such affidavit is filed, together with the exact address of the residence of such claimant, and including such other information as may be required by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to willfully furnish any false information to the city manager to obtain the exemption of the monthly garbage service charge as provided herein. 
(3)  In the event that any person has once qualified hereunder for an exemption of the monthly residential garbage pickup service charge and, subsequent thereto, such person becomes disqualified therefore, it shall be the duty of such person to immediately so notify the city manager who shall remove such person's name from the list of those receiving said exemption; in the event that any such person fails to so notify the city manager and continues to receive such exemptions after being no longer qualified, therefore, such person shall be immediately liable to the city for the amount that would have been required to be paid by such person without such exemption and upon the refusal of such person to pay the amount due, the city manager or his or her designee shall cause all city utility services to be discontinued as to such person's residence until such time as such person has paid the amount due in full. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-18. - Unlawful credit claim; penalty. 
Any person who claims an exemption against the monthly residential garbage and sanitation services charge levied by this chapter who is not entitled thereto in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of violating this chapter and shall, upon conviction, be subject to the maximum punishment as provided in the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-19. - Mobile toters generally. 
(a)  A mobile toter is a plastic, wheeled refuse receptacle having a tight-fitting attached lid, carrying identification of the city and/or the city's solid waste collection contractor, with a designated serial number/barcode and whose design, construction and capacity shall be determined by the city. 
(b)  Toters shall be required for curb side collection service. The responsibility for obtaining such toter shall be upon the owner or occupant of the premises desiring and otherwise eligible, by the terms of this chapter, for curb side collection service. The owner or occupant of the premises is required to contact the department of public works and request the delivery of a toter. 
(c)  Additional toters may be obtained from the city by the owner or occupant for an additional fee and will be serviced according to the provisions of this chapter subject to this section. 
(d)  All refuse, ashes, garbage and trash shall be placed in the toter for collection. The toter shall be placed at curb side for collection purposes and the collection schedule shall be announced by the department of public works. If the toter is not near the curb side at collection time, this will indicate no service is needed. 
(e)  Any person physically incapacitated so as to prevent such person from placing the toter at curb side for collection purposes, may obtain non curb side collection by obtaining the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-20. - Maintenance of mobile toters. 
(a)  The city shall own the mobile toter and residents are granted exclusive use of the toter at their address only. All toters issued by the city for use shall remain the city's property and shall only be used for storage of solid waste materials collected by the city. Each person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for the toter assigned and must not abuse, remove or destroy the toter. If service is discontinued for any reason, the toter must be left on the premises vacated, and if the toter is not left on the vacated premises the cost of the toter may be charged to the utility deposit refund. 
(b)  Toters shall be secured by the resident, between collection days, in such a manner that they are not readily susceptible to theft or vandalism. 
(c)  Use shall be for small businesses, single-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings with four (4) or fewer units. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any other person to willfully damage or destroy any toter. Anyone found to have intentionally or negligently damaged a city-owned toter shall be liable for the replacement or repair cost. The city shall have sole determination of willful damage or destruction of a toter. In cases of hardship, the department of public works shall have the ability to waive the fee for replacement. Any toter that is stolen shall be replaced by the city, provided that a police report is submitted to the city. 
(e)  If the toter requires physical maintenance, including replacement of wheels, lid or repairs of other wearing or damage, the customer shall call the city to request such service. The damaged toter shall be emptied and washed out and left in front of the garage or next to the building/house where it can readily be seen from the street. 
(f)  Customers shall keep the inside and the outside of the toter clean. There shall be no markings, such as graffiti or stickers, on the outside of the toter that are not placed there by the city or by the city's authorized representative. Any markings that appear on the outside of the toter that are not placed there by the city's authorized representative or the city shall be promptly removed by the customer. 
(g)  Customers shall routinely wash or rinse out the interior of the toter so that offensive odors are not detected outside of the empty toter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-21. - Containers for trash and cold ash, generally. 
Trash or cold ashes may be separately placed in disposable containers. All such containers shall be removed with the contents. Trash and ashes shall not be placed in any disposable containers that are so worn or defective that the contents leak or spill out. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-22. - Frequency of collections. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided and except in the case of an emergency arising from an act of God or under circumstances over which the city has or had no control, the city shall collect, remove and dispose of all household garbage, recycling, yard waste, bulk waste and other solid waste in the city's service area at least once a week. If a holiday should fall during the week in which an area is due a regular collection, such collection shall not be made until the next regularly scheduled collection day for that area, unless otherwise announced by the city. 
(b)  Solid waste pickup shall be any time from 6:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection. Changes in weather conditions, crew assignment and equipment problems can cause the pickup time to be earlier or later in the day. Solid waste for collection should always be out by 6:00 a.m. on collection day. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-23. - Solid waste transportation and vehicle requirements. 
(a)  No solid waste collector shall transport solid waste in a conveyance that has not been approved by the city manager. All vehicles, except those owned by individuals hauling their own solid waste, shall display an identifying tag or decal. 
(b)  All haulers under contract to collect residential and commercial waste in the city shall use a compactor or roll-off trucks. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage or refuse containing garbage shall be covered, leak-proof, durable and of sturdy construction. They shall be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent a nuisance, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. In cases when the compactor or roll-off trucks cannot proceed on a certain road due to physical barriers or safety concerns, trucks with permanent bed covers shall be acceptable. 
(c)  All vehicles, both private and commercial, used for the transportation of solid waste shall provide that all solid waste or other items to be disposed of be covered or loads secured by some effective means such to prevent the spillage or loss of waste while being transported. "Effective means" shall mean durable, heavy plastic, canvas or tarpaulin tied down or secured to cover the entire load. Loads consisting of building rubbish, limbs and bulk items shall be loaded and secured with rope or tie downs to assure spillage does not occur. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the solid waste collector and transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned. 
(d)  If a residential or commercial hauler allows leachate to escape onto the public roadway or ditch line, said leachate shall be cleaned up immediately by the hauler. 
(e)  Any person collecting and transporting solid waste generated on their property for disposal at an approved disposal site shall comply with this chapter in all respects. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-24. - Collection and disposal of solid waste. 
Trash and refuse collectors are not required to collect from premises where the provisions of this chapter are violated. The failure to collect any trash or garbage from the premises because of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the person responsible for such violation from prosecution and penalty therefore. 
(1)  Residential solid waste collection and disposal. The city, or its authorized representative, shall provide residential solid waste collection and disposal services from eligible residential buildings. The city, or its authorized representative, is not required to collect any residential solid waste that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
a.  The occupant shall place all residential solid waste curbside for collection and disposal by the city, or its authorized representative, no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection and no earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled collection day. The mobile-toter shall be removed from curbside no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day after collection. Violations of this section should be reported to the department of public works. Upon receiving a complaint, the department of public works shall investigate such complaint. Upon finding a violation, the offending party shall be notified in writing to remove the toter. The offending party shall have forty-eight (48) hours after receiving the notice to remove the toter. Any party failing to remove the toter from curbside within the specified time after receiving the notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
b.  All toters shall be stored on the property of the owner or occupant of the premises at a site not in public view. 
c.  The toter shall not be filled to overflowing. When the toter is fully loaded, extra trash, garbage, refuse or ashes shall be placed in a metal or plastic, insect proof, rodent proof container with a tight-fitting, waterproof cover and placed next to the toter for collection. If bags are used, they must be of sufficient strength and tightly secured to contain all solid waste generated from the location without tearing or breaking when lifted. Bags may not be stored outside a building for extended periods unless placed in solid waste containers. Bags, however, may be placed curbside without a container the day of collection. 
d.  The occupant shall place all residential solid waste for collection by the city, or its authorized representative, within five (5) feet of the edge of the traveled portion of the street or at such other place as approved or designated by the city. 
e.  All toters shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair. 
f.  Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this section, or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect that will hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof, or is likely to cause bags to tear, must be promptly removed and replaced by a proper container upon receipt of notice to that effect from the city. 
g.  Use of unapproved containers, such as wooden containers, screen/wire containers or fifty-five (55) gallon drums for the storage and collection of solid waste are prohibited. 
(2)  Commercial solid waste collection and disposal. 
a.  The occupant of any commercial building shall be responsible for the lawful collection and disposal of all commercial solid waste generated from the location, except that the owner of a building containing five (5) or more rental dwelling units shall also be responsible for the lawful collection and disposal of all solid waste generated from the location. The owner shall supply the building with containers of sufficient number and size to contain all solid waste generated from the location. 
b.  In the case of multiple housing units of ten (10) or more separate units, and in the case of commercial establishments when the limit imposed by section 22-19 is exceeded, dumpsters shall be used. In the case of multiple housing units and trailer courts, of ten (10) or more units, when dumpsters are required, there shall be one (1) six-cubic yard dumpster for every twenty (20) units. 
c.  All containers in which solid waste is placed shall be made of metal or plastic, insect-proof, rodent-proof and have a tight-fitting, watertight cover. 
d.  All containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair. 
e.  Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this section must be promptly removed and replaced by a proper container upon receipt of notice to that effect from the city. 
(3)  Dumpsters. 
a.  Each dumpster or roll-off container shall have posted thereon the name, address and phone number of the owner of said dumpster or roll-off container. 
b.  Each dumpster or refuse container shall be equipped with reflectorized tape or other reflector devices adequate to warn others of its presence during night hours. 
c.  No dumpster or refuse container shall be placed in a moving lane of traffic. 
d.  The director of public works shall be notified of the location of all dumpsters or refuse containers placed in any streets, alleys, highways, sidewalks or other public ways within the city. 
e.  The dumpster or refuse container shall be required to be moved if the placement or location of the dumpster or refuse container constitute a safety hazard. 
f.  No dumpster or refuse container shall be placed so as to interfere with public works construction being performed by the city. 
g.  No dumpster or refuse container shall be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection. 
h.  Dumpsters or refuse containers used in commercial areas shall be maintained and cleaned to prevent the harboring or breeding of vectors including rats, rodents, flies or harmful insects. 
(4)  Dumpster and recycling bin screening. 
a.  All dumpsters and recycling bins shall be enclosed within a wall of equal or greater height but at a minimum of eight (8) feet in height, on three (3) sides, accessed by an opaque or solid gate The material of the wall enclosure and access gate shall be similar and compatible to the material on the outside of the principal building and shall comply with the design standards of that particular land district 
b.  Dumpsters and recycling bins shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
c.  Restaurants and other food establishments shall place dumpsters and recycling bins on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15; Ord. No. 2017-23, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 22-25. - Yard waste. 
(a)  The city's yard waste collection service was established for the benefit of its residential customers who have the mobile toter. Yard waste includes organic waste generated during regular household landscaping and gardening activities. Examples include: leaves, straw, hedges, shrubs, tree trimmings, grass and other inert materials resulting from general residential yard cleaning. Rocks, dirt and gravel are not considered yard waste. 
(b)  Commercial, multi-family, industrial, institutional or other similar facilities are required to make private arrangements to dispose of their yard waste. Yard waste from these facilities is prohibited from staying on the curb more than five (5) days. Any such materials found in the right-of-way after five (5) days shall be immediately removed by the city, and the costs of such removal will be billed to the property owner. 
(c)  Preparation of yard waste. 
(1)  Yard waste shall not be mixed with household waste or other solid waste. 
(2)  Yard waste shall be placed within five (5) feet of the curb and at least three (3) feet away from other collection items and obstacles such as mailboxes, phone poles, vehicles, etc. Do not block the sidewalk. If the department of public works is unable to reach the yard waste due to an obstruction, it will not be collected. 
(3)  Separate brush, limbs and logs into piles that are no larger than five (5) feet wide and five (5) feet high. Piles larger than these dimensions shall result in an additional collection charge. 
(4)  Put yard waste in one (1) pile. Collection crews will only pick up one (1) pile and will not move their truck multiple times at the same residence to pick up yard waste without an additional fee. 
(5)  Should pile weigh more than city collection equipment can handle, a special collection fee will be charged. 
(6)  Sod is accepted if the dirt is removed. 
(7)  Leaves, straw, hedges, shrubs, tree trimmings, grass and other inert materials resulting from general residential yard cleaning should not be placed in ditches or along the curbs. When ditches and storm drains get clogged with leaves and debris, water no longer drains from the street it ponds along streets and can flood intersections and homes. 
(d)  Yard waste that will not be collected. 
(1)  Yard waste generated by private contractors performing tree removal, mowing, trimming or other landscaping activities at residences. All nurseries, landscape gardening firms, clearing, grading and building contractors and logging and pulpwood related operations shall remove all solid waste which they generate through their work. 
(2)  Trimmings where trees are trimmed or cut for compensation whether the compensation is in cash or in the wood from the trees trimmed. 
(3)  Trimmings from the original development of a lot. 
(4)  Tree stumps and root balls. 
(5)  Yard debris on vacant lots. 
(6)  Yard waste that is not properly prepared or is mixed with garbage or other solid waste. 
Any contractor working on the property of another person or owner shall, upon completion of the work undertaken or upon termination of the undertaking for any other reason, remove from the work site property all yard rubbish or trash that is on such property as a result of the contractor, its subcontractor, agent or employee working thereon, including but not limited to, yard rubbish or trash resulting from trimming trees, clearing land, excavating, bulldozing, cutting trees and site preparation for building. Any such materials found in the right-of-way shall be immediately removed by the city, and the costs of such removal will be billed to the property owner. 
(e)  Trimmings generated by tree surgeons are collected by the department of public works only after a natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-26. - Bulk waste. 
(a)  The city's bulk waste collection service was established for the benefit of its residential customers who have the mobile toter. Acceptable bulk waste items include furniture, carpeting, mattresses and debris from residential remodeling and repair operations (if the work is performed by the resident and the proper building permit is displayed), household appliances or "white goods," including items such as refrigerators, washing machines or dryers. 
(b)  Commercial, multi-family, industrial, institutional or other similar facilities are required to make private arrangements to dispose of their bulk waste. Bulk waste from these facilities is prohibited from staying on the curb more than five (5) days. Any such materials found in the right-of-way after five (5) days shall be immediately removed by the city, and the costs of such removal will be billed to the property owner. 
(c)  Preparation of bulk waste: 
(1)  Bulk waste shall be placed within five (5) feet of the curb and at least three (3) feet away from other collection items and obstacles such as mailboxes, phone poles, vehicles, etc. Do not block the sidewalk. If the department of public works is unable to reach the bulk waste due to an obstruction, it will not be collected. 
(2)  Bulk waste shall be neatly stacked in a pile and not scattered. 
(3)  Carpet, padding and rugs shall be rolled in five (5) foot sections and tied or taped and weigh no more than fifty (50) pounds. 
(4)  Any refrigerator, freezer, icebox or other similar receptacle that has an airtight door and is accessible to children shall have the door removed prior to being placed curbside for collection. 
(5)  For items that contain glass, the glass shall be extensively taped and cross taped to prevent it from shattering. 
(6)  Bulk waste should not be placed in ditches or along the curbs. When ditches and storm drains get clogged with debris, water no longer drains from the street it ponds along streets and can flood intersections and homes. 
(7)  The total allowable volume of bulk waste that shall be collected at curbside per resident is six (6) cubic yards. Any volume exceeding six (6) cubic yards shall be charged an additional fee. 
(d)  Bulk waste that will not be collected: 
(1)  Auto parts, dirt, shingles, pallets, concrete blocks, concrete, bricks, fuel/oil tanks, manufacturing process debris, lose or dangerous refuse. 
(2)  Debris from work performed by anyone other than the resident. 
(3)  Building materials from a contractor. 
(4)  Materials from evictions, foreclosures, unoccupied properties, home renovation/remodeling debris from contractors, commercial properties or apartment complexes. 
(5)  Debris from vacant property that has been empty for more than sixty (60) days. 
(6)  Debris of any type on vacant lots. 
(7)  Bulk waste that is mixed with other types of solid waste. 
Any contractor working on the property of another person or owner shall, upon completion of the work undertaken or upon termination of the undertaking for any other reason, remove from the work site property these items including but not limited to brick, stone, asphalt, plumbing materials, renovation/remodeling debris, materials from evictions, foreclosures, unoccupied/vacant properties, roofing, floor coverings, gutters and shingles that is on such property as a result of the contractor, its subcontractor, agent or employee working thereon. Any such materials found in the right-of-way shall be immediately removed by the city, and costs of such removal will be billed to the property owner. 
(f)  Bulk waste that is not properly prepared or is mixed with garbage or other solid waste shall not be collected. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-27. - Disposition of industrial waste. 
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing the same in accordance with regulations promulgated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-18, § 4, adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed § 22-11, which pertained to scavenging, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-26, adopted Oct. 20, 2015. 
Sec. 22-29. - Confinement of animals which interfere with collectors. 
Any occupant owning or possessing an animal on the premises which may bite or attempt to bite a collector while engaged in collecting refuse shall be required to secure the animal(s) or place the receptacles in such manner that such animal shall not constitute a hazard or endanger a solid waste collector. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-30. - Fire prevention. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set or cause to be set any fire in a solid waste container. No person shall place embers, ashes or other materials into a solid waste container which would create a fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 22-31. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the maximum punishment as provided in section 4.13 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-26, 10-20-15) 
Chapter 23 - STREET AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Curb cut permits, § 5-6. 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; Powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; Regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Excavation in streets; contractors liable. 
(a)  All building contractors shall be responsible and liable for any excavations they make in the streets of the city. 
(b)  The work of filling such excavations shall be done by the city at the expense of the contractor. 
(Code 1966, § 18-4) 
Sec. 23-2. - Parking of recreational vehicles, boat trailers and utility trailers on public street rights-of-way. 
(a)  Recreational vehicles, boat trailers and utility trailers and trailers of all types shall not be parked on the right-of-way of any public street. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment provided under the City Charter. A second offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, 3-19-13) 
Secs. 23-3—23-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 23-21. - Violations. 
In the event that the owner or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this article by failing to affix the number assigned within sixty (60) days after notification, or by failing within such period to remove any old numbers affixed to such house, or house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number assigned thereto, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, § 18-5) 
Sec. 23-22. - Designation of street numbers. 
(a)  Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets shall be assigned by the mayor and council in accordance with their administrative procedures. 
(b)  The city shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 18-1) 
Sec. 23-23. - Posting of designated street address. 
(a)  The owner or person in charge of any house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by the code enforcement department of the number assigned to the same at any time after the adoption of this section. 
(b)  Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of such written notification from the code enforcement department, the owner or occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of such owner or person in charge thereof upon affixing the new number to remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with the number assigned to said structure by the city. 
(d)  Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one (1) business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance may display a separate identification. 
(e)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner as to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. The numerals shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height. 
(f)  Whenever any building, residential or business, is situated more than fifty (50) feet from the street line, the numbers shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to the building upon a gatepost, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernable from the sidewalk. 
(Code 1966, § 18-2; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-18-05) 
Sec. 23-24. - New structures. 
(a)  Numbers will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyors' copies of final subdivision plats by the planning commission. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the code enforcement department the official number of the premises. Final construction approval for any principal building erected or repaired after the effective date of this section shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 18-3) 
Secs. 23-25—23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; Operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

Sec. 23-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police is the Chief of Police of the City of Perry, Georgia. 
The city is the City of Perry, Georgia. 
Motorcade means an organized procession containing twenty-five (25) or more vehicles upon any public street, sidewalk or alley. 
Parade means any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city consisting of people, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls. 
Parade permit is a permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-32. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-33. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising the parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof, constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any persons to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-34. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or motorcade in or upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the city or knowingly participate in any such parade or motorcade unless and until a permit to conduct such parade or motorcade has been obtained from the chief of police, or, as hereinafter provided, from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-35. - Application for permit. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than seventy-two (72) hours no more than thirty (30) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. The application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the chief of police. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of the parade or motorcade, the application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade or motorcade. 
(2)  If the parade or motorcade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade or motorcade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade or motorcade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade or motorcade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(7)  The hours when such parade or motorcade will start and terminate. 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade or motorcade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or motorcade. 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade or motorcade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade or motorcade. 
(12)  If the parade or motorcade is designated to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade or motorcade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to reach a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-36. - Fee for permit. 
There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade or motorcade permit a fee as determined by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97; Ord. No. 2015-09, §§ 1, 2, 4-21-15) 
Sec. 23-37. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade or motorcade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade or motorcade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(4)  The conduct of such parade or motorcade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment in route to a fire; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade or motorcade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(6)  The parade or motorcade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays in route; and 
(7)  The parade or motorcade will not interfere with another parade or motorcade for which a permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-38. - Denial of permit; notice. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade or motorcade permit within three (3) days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within three (3) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-39. - Appeal procedure following denial to permit. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or motorcade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within five (5) days after notice. Upon such appeal, the city council shall act upon the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting and may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-40. - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, may tender a permit for a parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-41. - Officials to be notified upon granting of permit. 
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade or motorcade, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The mayor. 
(2)  The city manager. 
(3)  The fire chief. 
(4)  The head of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-42. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade or motorcade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade or motorcade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-43. - Duties of the permittee; permit to be carried; 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-44. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit for a parade or motorcade issued pursuant to this article may be summarily revoked by the chief of police at any time when by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-45. - Parade or motorcade for commercial purpose prohibited. 
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or motorcade which the chief of police finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise or event and is designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-46. - Interference with parade or motorcade. 
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or motorcade conducted under permit from the chief of police in violation of any of the terms of said permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade or motorcade without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-47. - Waiver of permit. 
Nothing contained herein to the contrary, the permit required hereunder can be waived in the event the proposed parade is primarily for entertainment purposes and is nonpolitical, is noncommercial and is not being conducted for the purposes of promoting a cause. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 3-18-97) 
Secs. 23-48—23-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS 

Sec. 23-51. - Crowds; obstructing streets prohibited. 
(a)  It shall not be lawful for any person by day or by night, for any purpose whatever, to obstruct the sidewalks, streets or alleys of the city, by crowds or otherwise; nor shall it be unlawful for any person to engage in any business so as to obstruct the sidewalks of this city, and whenever any obstruction occurs it shall be the duty of the police to notify the person causing the obstruction to disburse or move on. 
(b)  No person shall boycott, picket, demonstrate, molest or interfere with any other person having unlawful business in a building or business place by standing, sitting, lying or congregating in any manner in any public place, street, lane, alley, or highway, or any portion thereof, within the city limits; nor shall any person or persons obstruct any entrance of any building, storeroom or factory by parading in or around it for the purpose of preventing the full lawful use of the entrance by any person desiring to use it, or for the purpose of picketing, parading or boycotting. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-52. - Limitation on number of pickets or demonstrators before given place of business or facility. 
Pickets shall be limited to a total of fifteen (15) persons and shall not interfere with ingress or egress to any business or public facility. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-53. - Notice of proposed picketing or demonstrating. 
The chief of police of the city is to be given at least twelve (12) hours' notice by any person planning to picket or demonstrate. This written notice shall include the name of the organization or organizations planning to picket and also shall include the names of the places of business or public facilities which will be picketed and the hours that the picketing or demonstrating will be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-54. - Duty to disburse as directed by police. 
Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disburse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disburse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-55. - Use of vehicles for picketing or demonstrating. 
No vehicles shall be used in any picket or demonstrating line, and all pickets or demonstrators shall be on foot. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-56. - Picketing residents or dwelling unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the residence or dwelling of any individual in the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 23-57. - To be peaceful and unattended by noise, etc. 
All demonstrations and picketing shall be peaceful and unattended by excessive noise and boisterousness. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 3-18-97) 
Secs. 23-58, 23-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NEIGHBORHOOD/BLOCK PARTIES OR CITY PARK PARTIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-50, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2004, amended the title of art. V to read as herein set out. The previous title was "Neighborhood/Block Parties." 

Sec. 23-60. - Definitions. 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Perry, Georgia. 
City means the City of Perry, Georgia. 
City park party means a party to be held at a city park which will have eighty (80) or more participants. 
Event coordinators means two (2) citizens who are organizing and coordinating the neighborhood/block party. 
Neighborhood/block party means a party held by all of the residents who reside on one block of a city street. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-44, § 1, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 2, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 23-61. - Application. 
(a)  A neighborhood/block party or a city park party application must be completed and returned to the chief of police of the city or his or her designee at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the proposed party. 
(b)  The application must contain the names and addresses of two (2) citizens who live in the neighborhood or who will be attending the city park party and who agree to serve as coordinators of the event. 
(c)  The application must have designated thereon the specific area wherein the party will be held and an estimate of the number of host[s] or hostesses and invitees. 
(d)  The application must be signed by at least ninety (90) percent of the citizens who live in the designated area. In the event [that signatures of] at least ninety (90) percent of the citizens who live in the designated area are not obtained, the application will be denied. 
(e)  The chief of police will have, in his or her sole discretion, the right to deny a permit and suggest an alternative site at a city park. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-44, §§ 2—4, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2004-50, §§ 3, 4, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 23-62. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
No alcoholic beverages will be consumed on city streets or on public property. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03) 
Sec. 23-63. - Time of party. 
A party shall not begin before 5:00 p.m. and shall end no later than 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. On Saturday, a party shall begin no earlier than 2:00 p.m. and shall end no later than 11:00 p.m. No neighborhood/block party or city park party shall be held on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-44, § 5, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 4(c), 10-19-04) 
Sec. 23-64. - Off-duty police. 
At least two (2) off-duty police shall be hired by the event coordinators for any neighborhood/block party or city park party that has one hundred (100) or less participants. For events that exceed one hundred (100), the event coordinator will hire an additional police person for each additional fifty (50) participants or a fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 5, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 23-65. - Interference with traffic on public streets; barricades. 
No public street shall become congested with vehicles, people or otherwise so as to prevent the safe and swift operation of public safety vehicles, and the use of public streets shall be subject to the following restrictions and/or requirements: 
(a)  A block party will be allowed only on minor streets and not directly adjacent to a major or arterial street; 
(b)  A block party shall not exceed the length of one (1) city block; 
(c)  A barricade shall be placed at each end of the block designating the block party area and providing adequate warning and notice to motorists that the street is blocked. No vehicular traffic other than emergency vehicles will be allowed to travel inside the barricades during the hours of the block party; 
(d)  A deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the barricades must be made no less than five (5) days prior to the block party; and 
(e)  No street shall be closed for a block party more than once in a three-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-44, § 6, 9-21-04) 
Sec. 23-66. - Noise. 
A neighborhood/block party or city park party shall comply with section 17-55 of the Code of the city relative to noise. Should a complaint be received by the city police, the event coordinators will receive one (1) warning by the police to reduce the volume of the noise that is disturbing other neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 6, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 23-67. - Fee for neighborhood/block party or city park party. 
There shall be paid at the time of filing the application fee as determined by the mayor and council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-50, § 7, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 23-68. - Penalties. 
In the event any section of this article is violated, the event coordinators shall be notified, if possible, and the party shall be immediately terminated. In addition, the violator or violators shall be subject to the maximum punishment provided in section 1-10 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 10-7-03) 
Sec. 23-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 

Sec. 23-70. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of Perry (the "City") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic development of the city, and which also must be utilized to protect the public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article VI shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article VI, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article VI. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Perry, Georgia. 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Perry, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, to dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the Assistant City Manager of the City of Perry, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wire, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities-related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one (1) of its facilities representatives are available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities-related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two (2) or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than fifty (50) percent at one (1) time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than fifty (50) percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor, subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-71. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the office of the city manager within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one (1) year after the effective date of this article VI, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-72. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the office of the city manager in accordance with the terms of this article VI. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the office of the city manager. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representatives; 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit: 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article VI; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date, whichever shall first occur, unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article VI; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within twenty (20) business days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within fifteen (15) calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six (6) months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-73. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article VI. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Perry municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the office of the city manager from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this changes involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wire-holding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wire-holding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  [Blasting or excavating.] As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given forty-eight (48) hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-74. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after twenty (20) business days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-75. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article VI or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-76. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way so as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions or sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as provided in this article VI. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-77. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article VI shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 23-78. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article VI is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this article VI, does not surrender or to any extent, lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has not or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(c)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article VI by reason of any failure of the city to enforce compliance. 
(d)  Appeal of administrative decisions. All appeals provided for by this article VI and any notification to the city required by this article VI shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this article VI. 
(e)  Chapter headings. Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article VI. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, 10-17-17) 
Chapter 24 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-16. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words have the indicated meanings: 
License means a business license issued under chapter 15, article II of this Code. 
Taxicab shall mean a motor-driven vehicle of not more than eight-passenger capacity operated by the owner thereof or an agent, lessee or employee of the owner and which is regularly available for hire to transport persons within or outside the city. 
Taxicab business shall mean any separately owned and operated taxicab; or a fleet of owned or leased taxicabs; or a fleet of taxicabs owned separately but operating under one (1) name. 
(Code 1966, § 22-11) 
Sec. 24-17. - Rules and regulations. 
The mayor and council may adopt additional rules and regulations respecting taxicabs, operators and drivers and to designate, from time to time, the necessary changes and rules governing the taxicabs. 
(Code 1966, § 22-19) 
Sec. 24-18. - Inspection. 
The city police are authorized to make inspection of all taxicabs, from time to time, with full authority to approve or disapprove the operation thereof when the taxicab is not in good mechanical condition or is not in good sanitary condition. 
(Code 1966, § 22-15) 
Sec. 24-19. - Schedule of fares to be posted. 
The schedule of fares shall be posted in each taxicab and in the office of each taxicab company. 
(Code 1966, § 22-16) 
Sec. 24-20. - Prohibited operators. 
No person shall operate a taxicab in the city that has been convicted, plead guilty or nolo contendere to any felony within the three (3) years immediately preceding the issuance of the license or been convicted, plead guilty or nolo contendere to an offense involved in prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, or the illegal manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages or drugs in the three (3) years immediately preceding the issuance of the license. 
(Code 1966, § 22-17) 
Secs. 24-21—24-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 24-31. - Application; issuance; display. 
(a)  Every person desiring to operate a taxicab in the city shall make application for license or privilege to so operate to the city clerk or his designee on blanks furnished by the city, and this application shall contain the name and address of the owner, the make and motor number of the vehicle, the length of time it has been in use and total mileage it has traveled and its passenger-carrying capacity. 
(b)  The application shall be reviewed by the police department for any record of excessive recklessness on the part of the applicant or those operating taxicabs under the applicant's name. 
(c)  If the application meets all requirements, a license shall be issued upon the payment of the proper license fee prescribed by the mayor and council. This license or a copy thereof shall be displayed on each taxicab operated in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 22-12; Ord. No. 2003-13, §§ 1, 2, 2-18-03) 
Sec. 24-32. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  Every applicant for a taxicab business license shall, before the license is granted, deposit with the city clerk, for each taxicab for which the privilege to operate is sought, a policy or certificate of liability insurance, indemnifying the applicant in the sums required by law. The certificate or policy of liability insurance shall be issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in the state and, if obtainable, licensed to do business in the city. The certificate or policy of insurance shall identify by motor number all vehicles insured under the policy or policies. The license for the operation of the taxicab business shall expire upon the lapse or cancellation or termination or revocation of any policy covering any taxicab operated under the business. 
(b)  If any person owning, leasing or operating a taxicab in the city shall fail or refuse to satisfy and discharge any final judgment, within sixty (60) days after the date of the final judgment such failure or refusal shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued to any person or business found liable under that final judgment. 
(Code 1966, § 22-13) 
Sec. 24-33. - License amendment. 
(a)  Each licensee under this article shall amend the license application originally filed for the license to include new taxicabs or exclude old taxicabs promptly upon adding or deleting taxicabs from the licensee's business so that an up-to-date list of operating taxicabs may be maintained. 
(b)  Each licensee hereunder shall also provide the city clerk proof that any new taxicab added to the application is fully insured as required under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 22-14) 
Sec. 24-34. - Revocation. 
Any license under this article may be suspended or revoked by the municipal court upon a finding that any provision of this article has been violated or that the person or business holding the license no longer meets the standards required for the issuance of the license. 
(Code 1966, § 22-18) 
Chapter 25 - WATER, SEWERS, SEWAGE DISPOSAL, NATURAL GAS AND PRIVATE WATER WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-25, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2016, changed the title of Chapter 25 from "Water, sewers, sewage disposal and natural gas" to "Water, sewers, sewage disposal, natural gas and private water wells". 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule authority to exercise power over water and sewage system, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶¶ III(a)(6), (7); Water resources generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Authority of city to adopt ordinances, rules and regulations relating to construction or water and sewer connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; City authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Application for water, gas or sewer service. 
All applications for water, gas or sewer service shall be made at the city's utility business office, and the location of the premises shall be stated. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-2. - Bills; penalties; accessibility of meters; discontinuance or disallowance for unpaid bills. 
(a)  Bills to customers for utility services shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined to be desirable and the amount due shall be payable in fifteen (15) days from the date thereof. Failure to receive a bill does not entitle delayed payment. If a bill is not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the due date, a ten (10) percent penalty will be added to the past due balance. 
(b)  If the account is not paid within seven (7) days after the due date, all utility services shall be subject to disconnection without further notice. In addition, the city clerk may record an execution on the General Execution Docket of Houston County for the delinquent bill or bills. Such execution shall be a lien on the property where the bill was incurred until such bill is paid and shall be enforced in the same manner as a lien for city taxes. 
(c)  The utility service customer shall maintain the area immediately surrounding utility meters free of debris, shrubbery, weeds or tall grass to make such meter readily accessible to utility service personnel. Customers who do not meet the above requirements shall be subject to an administrative charge as now or hereafter established by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk for each meter reading where utility service personnel find a violation, said administrative charge to compensate for additional efforts made to read the meter. The customer shall be notified by certified mail of the utility department's findings that the requirements of this section have not been met, and said notice shall provide a minimum of twenty (20) days' notice to the customer of the utility department's intention to impose the administrative charge at the next subsequent meter reading if the obstruction has not been removed. 
(d)  The mayor and council may, at its discretion, cause utility services to past, present or subsequent owners to be discontinued until any unpaid charges owed to the city for utilities, taxes or other charges are paid, or take other steps that the mayor and council consider necessary to collect the delinquent charges. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 2001-20, §§ 1, 2, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2003-23, §§ 2, 3, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 2015-27, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-27, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2015, changed the title of § 25-2 from "Bills; penalties; accessibility of meters" to "Bills, penalties; accessibility of meters; discontinuance or disallowance for unpaid bills." This historic notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 25-3. - Schedule of charges, etc. 
All fees and charges for water, gas and sewer service, and regulations incidental thereto shall be determined by the mayor and council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk and the utility business office. Such fees, charges, and incidental regulations are hereby incorporated in this section as if set out in length herein and shall include, but shall not be limited to, fees, charges and incidental regulations for: 
(a)  Connection and reconnection. 
(b)  Cut-on and cut-off. 
(c)  Deposits. 
(d)  Temporary cut-in fees. 
(e)  Water, sewer and gas taps and service line. 
(f)  Sewer facilities and service. 
(g)  Storm drains. 
(h)  Water service: Inside city limits, outside city limits and industrial. 
(i)  Gas service: Residential, high load factor, commercial, industrial, and interruptible. 
(j)  Returned checks. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-4. - Water and sewer service outside the city; conditions. 
(a)  No water or sewer service shall be furnished to property outside the city that is to be subdivided until the following items have been complied with and approved by the mayor and council: 
(1)  Approval of preliminary plans for subdivision by the appropriate governmental authority which plan shall include the following: 
a.  Water system including size of main; 
b.  Sanitary sewer system including all trunk lines and lateral lines; 
c.  Proposed street names; 
d.  Type of street paving; 
e.  Provision for adequate curves and gutters; 
f.  Installation of storm sewers where needed; and 
g.  Proposed playground or park area, if any. 
(2)  Before any water or sewerage utilities will be furnished to such properties outside the city, it will be necessary that the city and contractor enter into a contract relative to the accomplishment of the items heretofore outlined and for the property owner to meet the requirements contained in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  When a property owner requests utility services to any property not within the corporate limits of the city, at the discretion of the city, the owner will be required to; (1) petition for annexation (if the property is contiguous to the existing limits of the city) prior to commencement of construction of utility lines; or (2) execute a restrictive covenant consenting to annexation of said property into the city when the property becomes contiguous. When property is not contiguous and execution of the covenant is required, the owner will also be required to submit a certificate of title to the city attorney's office to verify ownership of the property. The covenant will be recorded in the property records at the Houston County Courthouse and will stipulate that, if said property becomes contiguous in the future and the property owner refuses to petition for annexation, the city will have the authority to terminate utility services. Construction of utility lines will not begin until the requirements of this policy are met which shall be indicated by authorization of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-5. - Maintenance of utility lines in city's rights-of-way. 
The city shall maintain all utility trunk lines within the city's rights-of-way and all connections and service lines to the main trunk line shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-6. - Unlawful use of or tampering with utility property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to tap, connect with, disturb, damage, turn on or off any main, service connection or meter of any public utility in the city, whether such device is within the public ways, or on private premises, unless such person is acting with the consent of or under direction of the utility owning such property. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover or tamper with any meter(s), automated meter reading system (AMR), AMR telephone cables, connections, lines, pumping stations, purification plants, wells, equipment or any appurtenances to each structure named above which are a part of the city's water and sewer system. Damage to any city utility property shall be charged to the property owner or other individual as may be appropriate at the full cost of repair, including overhead in addition to a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per occurrence per day as determined by the director of public works or designated agent. 
(b)  If equipment has been damaged or tampered with, including, but not limited to, taking water without authorization or without having a hydrant meter installed, the party responsible for the damage, tampering or withdrawal may be charged for the damages caused and for the estimated water and sanitary services utilized, and shall also pay a penalty or surcharge as determined by the director of public works but not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per occurrence per day. Each such action and incident of damage, tampering or withdrawal, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  If the repair is performed by a contractor hired by the city, the charge for the repair submitted to the city plus fifteen (15) percent shall be levied against the party(s) causing the damage, excluding any fines imposed by the city. 
(d)  The above charges do not preclude the city from levying other charges or taking legal action as deemed appropriate, including injunctive relief. In the event that the city is required to institute legal proceedings to collect any costs, loss and/or damage, the person shall also pay all legal fees and expenses incurred by the city in the collection of said costs, loss and/or damage. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect to the public utility system of the city when the city has disconnected the utilities for nonpayment for services or utilities rendered. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any substance in any reservoir or other portion of the waterworks plants of the city, or in any manner pollute the water supply or any part of the waterworks system of the city. 
(g)  If shall be unlawful for any person to break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of municipal water system, sewer system or natural gas system. 
(h)  A violation of the above shall constitute a continuing daily offense against the city and shall be punishable in accordance with section 4.13 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 2009-16, §§ 1, 2, 6-16-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 25-7. - Meter tests and rereadings. 
(a)  Customers obtaining utilities from the city utility system are authorized one (1) reread without charge during a twelve-month period. Rereads in excess of this number and any meter tests will be charged a fee in the amount established by the mayor and council. 
(b)  No charge will be made when it is found that an error has been made by representatives of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-8. - Returned checks. 
The city will not run a returned check through the bank a second time. When a returned check is received in the utilities business office, the customer will be called that day and informed that they have until the next working day to pick up the returned check and pay the fee established by the mayor and council for said returned check or service will be cut off. If the customer cannot be contacted by telephone, a notice stating the same information will be mailed to the customer's residence. If the service is cut off, there will be a reconnection fee in addition to the check and service charge fee. Payment for the returned check and service charge must be paid in cash or money order. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-9. - Meter relocation. 
The city will, upon request, schedule and move a meter from one location on a lot to another location on the same lot. The fee for said move shall be as now or hereafter established by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-10. - Emergency authority of city manager and/or the mayor during water and gas shortages. 
(a)  The city manager and/or the mayor are authorized at all times when because of drought or low water from any cause, or because of accident or any other cause that becomes necessary for the public welfare to conserve the city water supply, to put into effect such reasonable limitations and regulations of the use of water as may in their judgment be necessary under the circumstances. Either may prohibit the use of water for sprinkling streets, yards or gardens or washing of cars, and may establish such other and further regulations and limitations as they may deem necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such regulations during the time they are in effect. 
(b)  The city manager and/or the mayor are hereby given power and authorization at all times during which the city is under a curtailment by the city's natural gas supplier with regards to a gas shortage or when any other emergency exists with regards to a shortage of natural gas, as a result of which the city is required to limit the use of natural gas by its customers, to limit, restrict, or terminate if necessary the use of natural gas by industrial and commercial customers of the gas department of the city. In addition: 
(1)  If the city council finds that an emergency exists with respect to the quantities of natural gas available to the city and the city manager and/or the mayor find it necessary to limit, restrict or terminate the service of any natural gas customer, reasonable notice shall be afforded to such customer as soon as practicable. Such notice shall be given in the local newspaper and on the local radio station and by personal notice when possible. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of a gas customer whose service is limited, restricted or terminated to protect his property from the elements by other means. 
(3)  Any violation of this subsection shall result in immediate termination of gas service, shall constitute a continuing daily crime against the city and shall be punishable in accordance with section 4.13 of the City Charter. In addition, all gas used in violation of this subsection since the last meter reading shall be billed at ten (10) times the normal rate. The bill must be paid prior to gas service being reconnected. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 2, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-11. - Water supply. 
(a)  The following definitions and terms shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section. 
(1)  City: The City of Perry, Georgia 
(2)  Public water supply: The waterworks system furnishing water to the city for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources/Environmental Protection division. 
(3)  Cross-connection: Any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves, or any other arrangements. 
(4)  Auxiliary intake: Any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than the city water system. 
(5)  By-pass: Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a customer's water system. 
(6)  Interconnection: Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewage or other waste or liquid, which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
(7)  Air gap: The unobstructed vertical distance (twice the pipe diameter or a minimum of one inch) through the free atmosphere between the flood level rim and the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device. 
(8)  Aspirator: A fitting or device supplied with water or other fluid under positive pressure that passes through an integral orifice or "constriction" causing a partial vacuum. 
(9)  Backflow: A reversal of flow in a pipe from the normal or designated direction of flow. 
(10)  Backflow preventer (BFP): A device to prevent backflow. 
a.  Double check valve type (BFP-DCV): A back pressure, backflow preventer designed to operate under intermittent or continuous pressure, including back pressure, where pollutants are involved. 
b.  Double detector check type (BFP-DDC): A line-size double check valve assembly with a metered bypass into which has been incorporated an approved smaller-than-line-size double check valve assembly. 
c.  Dual check type (BFP-DUC): A backflow preventer designed to contain a small water supply system from the public system, or isolate cross-connections where pollutants are involved. 
d.  Backflow preventer with intermediate atmospheric vent (BFP-IAV): A back-siphonage and back pressure, backflow preventer designed to operate under continuous pressure, including back pressure, where contaminants are involved. 
e.  Reduced pressure zone type (BFP-RPZ): A back-siphonage and back pressure, backflow preventer designed to operate under continuous pressure, including back pressure, where contaminants are involved. 
(11)  Backpressure: Pressure in a pipe greater than the supply pressure or in the case of a drain pipe, greater than atmospheric pressure. 
(12)  Back-siphonage: Backflow due to a negative pressure in a water pipe. 
(13)  Back-siphonage preventer: A device to prevent back-siphonage. 
(14)  Back water valve: A device to prevent backflow in a drain. 
(15)  Contaminant: A toxic substance that, if introduced into the potable water supply system, would create a health hazard. 
(16)  Critical level: A mark on a backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker established and stamped on the device by the manufacturer that determines the minimum elevation above the flood level rim of the fixture or receptacle served at which the device may be installed. In the absence of a critical level mark, the bottom of the vacuum breaker, combination valve or any approved device shall constitute the critical level. 
(17)  Cross-connection: Any connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and other fluid of questionable safety whereby there may be a flow from one (1) system to the other (see backflow and back-siphonage). 
(18)  Cross-connection control by containment: The installation of a backflow preventer at the service-connection to a premises to protect the water main (secondary protection). 
(19)  Cross-connection control by isolation: The installation of a backflow preventer or a vacuum breaker at each cross-connection on a premises to protect both the premises and the main (primary protection). 
(20)  Cross-connection, non-pressure type: A low inlet installation where the potable water supply line is connected or extended below the overflow rim of a receptacle or an environment that contains a non-potable fluid, and is at atmospheric pressure. 
(21)  Cross-connection, pressure type: An installation where the potable water supply line is connected to a piping system, or a closed vessel that contains a non-potable fluid above atmospheric pressure. 
(22)  Industrial wastes: Liquid or liquid-borne waste resulting from the processes employed in industrial and commercial establishments. 
(23)  Domestic sewage: The water-borne wastes derived from ordinary living processes. 
(24)  Liquid waste: The discharge from any fixture, appliance, area or appurtenance which does not contain human or animal waste water. 
(25)  Non-potable water: Water that is not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use. 
(26)  Person: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns; and includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns. Singular includes plural; male includes female. 
(27)  Pollutant: A non-toxic substance that, if introduced into the potable water supply system, would be objectionable but would not create a health hazard. 
(28)  Potable water: Conforming to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977. 
(29)  Rated: Capacities, loads and/or working pressures assigned to devices, equipment, or materials by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency, or other qualified organization concerned with produce evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of rates item and by whose rating attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards of tests to determine usage in a specified manner. 
(30)  Sewage: Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension of solution and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
(31)  Vacuum: Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere. 
(32)  Vacuum breaker: A back-siphonage prevention device that introduces air into the potable water system when the system pressure approaches zero and designed for use when the equipment or environment being served is subjected to atmospheric pressure only. 
(33)  Vacuum breaker, atmospheric type (VG-AT): A back-siphonage prevention device designed for use under flow conditions only, where it will be subjected to no static or back pressure. 
(34)  Vacuum breaker, pressure type (VB-PT): A back-siphonage prevention device designed to operate under continuous pressure; flowing, static or both, but no back pressure. 
(35)  Vacuum breaker hose type (VB-HT): A back-siphonage prevention device designed for hose connections, but not designed for continuous pressure, flowing or static. 
(36)  Vacuum relief valve: A device to limit the degree of vacuum in a vessel, but not designed for cross-connection control. 
(37)  Water distribution pipe: A pipe within the building or on the premises which conveys water from the water-service pipe to the point of usage. 
(38)  Water main: A water supply pipe for public use. 
(39)  Water supply system: The water service pipe, water-distributing pipes, fixture supply pipes and necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves and all appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
(b)  The city's public water supply is to comply with Chapter 391-3-5-.13 of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water and (PL 93-523) of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, legally adopted in accordance with this Code, which pertain to cross-connections, and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these undesirable connections. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection to be made, or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(d)  Where the nature of use of the water supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed: 
(1)  Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation. 
(2)  The owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply. 
(3)  The nature and mode of operation within a premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing. 
(4)  There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered or disconnected. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective device shall be a back-flow preventer approved by the city manager or his designee, as to manufacture, model and size. The method of installation of backflow protective device shall be approved prior to the installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth to the city. The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
The city shall have the right to inspect and test the device or devices on an annual basis, or whenever deemed necessary. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective device or devices. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the city manager shall notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water department shall require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of such repairs shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the city manager. 
(e)  Any person who now has cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections in violation of the provisions of this section shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to comply with the provisions of this section. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by the city manager. 
(f)  The city manager, or authorized representative, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the city's public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connection. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
The city manager and other duly authorized representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
The city manager or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the potential for polluting the public water system. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, the city manager or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(g)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this section shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(h)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided shall be in violation of the section. Any violation shall be punishable in accordance with section 4.13 of the City Charter and/or the violator shall be disconnected from the public water system until correction is made. 
(i)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply be protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
Minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters one-inch high, located on a red background. 
(j)  Should any part or parts of this section be declared invalid for any reason, no other part or parts of this section shall be affected. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, 5-19-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-02, amended the Code by adding § 25-10. In as much as there already exists § 25-10, said section has been redesignated as § 25-11 by the editor. 
Secs. 25-12—25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 25-26. - Deposit required; tap on fee. 
No water service shall be furnished unless the required deposit is paid, in advance, to the city. Upon discontinuance of water service, this deposit will be refunded to the customer within two weeks after the final bill is completely processed. The city reserves the right to deduct any outstanding water bill from the deposit and refund the balance thereof to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 4, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-27. - Meters. 
No water service shall be furnished except through a meter or other appropriate measuring devise. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 4, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-28. - Compound meter required. 
In all cases where it is determined by the utilities superintendent that the installation of a compound water meter for water taps of two (2) inches and larger would be in the best interest of the city, a compound meter will be required. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 4, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-29. - Service lines. 
Service lines on customer's property must be furnished by customer. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 4, 4-21-98) 
Secs. 25-30—25-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which to storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the city. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Superintendent means the utilities superintendent or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and, which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-1-1—16-1-18) 
Sec. 25-102. - Right of entry of city personnel. 
Subject to the constitutional limitations, the superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 16-7-01) 
Sec. 25-103. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except section 25-105, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 25-105 or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 25-104 hereof or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-8-01, 16-8-02) 
Sec. 25-104. - Use required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the corporate limits of the city and located within two hundred (200) feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or hereafter constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within sixty (60) days after date of official notice so to do. However, if in the sole and absolute discretion of the mayor and council, the city does not require connection by an owner and does not so notify an owner requiring a connection, nevertheless, such owner shall pay to the city the minimum sewer charge as determined by the city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-2-01—16-2-04) 
Sec. 25-105. - Rates. 
The sewer rates shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 16-6-01; Ord. No. 98-01, § 5, 4-21-98) 
Secs. 25-106—25-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE SEWERAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 25-121. - When required. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 25-104, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 16-3-01) 
Sec. 25-122. - Permit and inspection fee. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and the inspection fee as determined by the city shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1966, § 16-3-02) 
Sec. 25-123. - Inspection by superintendent. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Code 1966, § 16-3-03) 
Sec. 24-124. - Compliance with state standards, etc. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of public health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1966, § 16-3-04) 
Sec. 25-125. - Connection to public sewer when available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 25-104, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. However, from the date a public sewer becomes available to the property, the property owners shall pay to the city the minimum sewer charge as determined by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 16-3-05) 
Sec. 25-126. - Maintenance of facilities. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 16-3-06) 
Sec. 25-127. - Additional requirement authorized. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1966, § 16-3-07) 
Secs. 25-128—25-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 25-151. - Permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee in an amount determined by the city for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and a permit and inspection fee in an amount determined by the city for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-4-01, 16-4-02) 
Sec. 25-152. - Liability and expenses. 
All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the city property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee in an amount determined by the city for residential taps, and in an amount determined by the city for commercial taps. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-03) 
Sec. 25-153. - Separate and independent building sewers. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-04) 
Sec. 25-154. - Use of old sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-05) 
Sec. 25-155. - Materials and specifications. 
The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe; ASTM Specifications A74; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM Specifications C13; or concrete sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C14. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10) feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-06) 
Sec. 25-156. - Size and slope. 
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-07) 
Sec. 25-157. - Elevation and grade. 
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-08) 
Sec. 25-158. - Gravity flow. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-09) 
Sec. 25-159. - Joints. 
(a)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly placed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, Federal Specification QQL-156, not less than one (1) inch deep. Lead shall be run in one (1) pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe may be used as an alternate. 
(b)  All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-pouring jointing material, as specified below or by using rubber gaskets or preformed, factory-applied couplings having resilient properties in accordance with ASTM Specification C443-59T for concrete pipe and ASTM Specification C425-64 for vitrified clay pipe, or the latest revisions thereof. 
(c)  Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit, not be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved material. 
(d)  Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the superintendent. 
(Code 1966, § 16-4-11) 
Sec. 25-160. - Connection to public sewer. 
(a)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which entry in the downstream direction shall be at an angle of about forty-five (45) degrees. A forty-five-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-4-12, 16-4-13) 
Sec. 25-161. - Excavations. 
(a)  All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12; except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(b)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-4-10, 16-4-14) 
Secs. 25-162—25-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 25-176. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1966, § 16-5-10) 
Sec. 25-177. - Measurements and tests. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in section 25-179 shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 25-181, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1966, § 16-5-09) 
Sec. 25-178. - Groundwater, stormwater, etc. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-5-01, 16-5-02) 
Sec. 25-179. - Industrial, etc., discharges. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor which will cause the total influent flow to the treatment works to have a temperature higher than one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees centigrade). 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(10)  Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance such as plating or heat treating wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(11)  Any heavy metals as follows: 
a.  Cyanide greater than 1.0 part per million, as CN. 
b.  Hexavalent chromium greater than 1.0 part per million. 
c.  Travalent chromium greater than 10 parts per million. 
d.  Copper greater than 1.0 part per million. 
e.  Nickel greater than 1.0 part per million. 
f.  Cadmium greater than 1.0 part per million. 
g.  Zinc greater than 1.0 part per million. 
h.  Phenols greater than 12 parts per million. 
i.  Iron greater than 5 parts per million. 
j.  Tin greater than 1.0 part per million. 
k.  Radioactive wastes greater than allowable release as specified by current United States Bureau of Standards. 
(b)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter, or containing more than three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter of suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in subsection (a), or having an average daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to, reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter, or reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (a), or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval is obtained in writing. 
(c)  All industrial or other users discharging industrial waste into the city's sewer system must meet the industrial pretreatment requirements of 40 CFR part 403. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-5-03, 16-5-06, 16-5-11) 
Sec. 25-180. - Regulation of nondomestic kitchen facilities. 
(a)  General. It shall be unlawful for any nondomestic kitchen to discharge, or cause to be discharged, processing wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) which contains oils, greases, solids, or liquids sufficient to cause obstruction or otherwise interfere with the proper operations of the POTW. 
(b)  Pretreatment. 
(1)  Required. Nondomestic kitchens discharging to the POTW shall install, operate, clean and maintain a sufficiently sized oil and grease, water and solids, separator (herein called grease trap) necessary to achieve compliance with requirements set forth under this provision. The size of the grease trap shall be determined by the utilities director. 
(2)  Design criteria. 
a.  Plumbing and grease trap size requirements. No sanitary wastes are to be discharged to grease trap. 
b.  Construction. Grease traps shall be water tight and constructed of sound and durable materials not subject to excessive corrosion, decay, or frost damage, or to cracking or buckling due to settlement or backfilling. Tanks and covers shall be designed and constructed so as to withstand normal structural loadings. A tank installed in ground water shall be weighted to prevent the tank from floating when empty. 
c.  Depth of tees. The inlet tee shall extend two (2) feet below water line. The outlet tee shall extend to within twelve (12) inches of the bottom of the tank. Tees shall be cast iron or schedule 40 PVC. 
d.  Baffles. Baffles may be provided as necessary to maximize the separation of grease from the wastewater. Baffles shall not be a substitute for inlet and outlet tees. 
e.  Base. Grease traps shall be installed on a level, stable base that will not settle. 
f.  Materials. Grease traps may be constructed of poured reinforced concrete, precast reinforced concrete, or prefabricated material acceptable to the utility director or designee. 
g.  Access manholes. Grease traps shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) twenty-four-inch-diameter manhole frames and covers to grade over the inlet and outlet tees. 
(3)  Additives. 
a.  It shall constitute a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the city sewer lines, pump stations or treatment plant unless prior written authority has been received from the utility director. Use of other substances, including enzymes and special bacteria, is solely at the discretion of the customer. 
b.  The utility director shall have the authority to prohibit the addition of any substances, including enzymes and bacteria, which creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential hazard to personnel. 
c.  If upon inspection, it is determined that a grease trap is in need of cleaning, the only acceptable means of cleaning shall be to have the trap pumped for disposal as provided elsewhere in this section. Applying heavy doses of chemicals, enzymes, or bacteria to the grease trap is expressly prohibited as a substitute for pumping and removing the material from the trap. 
d.  Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable grease trap. 
(4)  Grease trap maintenance—Pumping. All grease traps shall be maintained by the city at the user's expense. Maintenance shall include the removal of all trapped grease and settled solids. The city will contract with an area grease trap cleaning company to routinely clean all nondomestic grease traps. The city will invoice the owner of each grease trap an amount equal to the amount charged to the city by the grease trap cleaning company for each cleaning. A city representative will inspect each grease trap after pumping and at other times as deemed necessary. A fee will be established for each inspection. 
(c)  Administrative. 
(1)  Fees. It shall be unlawful for any food service establishment to discharge process wastewaters into the POTW without authorization from the control authority. Nondomestic kitchens shall be charged a pumping fee the amount of which shall be set by the governing authority. A copy of the fee schedule shall be available in the city clerk's and utility director's offices. 
(2)  Grease trap installation. Upon receipt of notice to install a grease trap for an existing nondomestic kitchen, the owner shall install a working grease trap within a mutually agreed upon time frame. 
(3)  Correcting deficiencies in existing grease traps. Upon receipt of notice to correct deficiencies in existing grease traps, the grease trap owner shall correct those deficiencies according to the following schedule: 
1.  Deficiencies posing a health hazard. (Immediately) 
2.  Deficiencies not posing a health hazard. (Six (6) months) 
(d)  Inspection and entry. The utility director or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties without prior notification, for the purpose of cleaning, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, in accordance with this provision. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge wastewater in any manner in violation of this section, or of any condition set forth in this section. 
(2)  Enforcement procedures. Violations of this provision could result in progressive enforcement procedures set forth by the control authority. 
(Code 1966, §§ 16-5-04, 16-5-05; Ord. No. 2004-20, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 25-181. - Control manholes. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manmade, when required shall be accessibly and safely located, and, shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the same so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1966, § 16-5-08) 
Sec. 25-182. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1966, § 16-5-07) 
Secs. 25-183—25-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NATURAL GAS 

Sec. 25-190. - Deposit required; tap on fee. 
No residential gas service shall be furnished unless the required deposit is paid in advance to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 6, 4-21-98) 
Sec. 25-191. - Rates, fees and charges, generally; meters. 
(a)  Gas rates, fees and charges shall be classified in a reasonable manner to cover users of the services and facilities furnished by the gas system so that these rates, fees and charges shall be as nearly uniform in application to all users falling within any reasonable class as is practicable and no free services shall be furnished at any time from the gas system. All services including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or other public body shall be furnished in accordance with the rates now or hereafter established by the mayor and council and on the file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  No gas service shall be furnished except through a meter or other appropriate measuring devise. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 6, 4-21-98) 
Secs. 25-192—25-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 25-201. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program". 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-202. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-203. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Perry. 
Covered account means: (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Note— Other than "city" and "personal identifying information", definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in CFR § 681.2. 
Sec. 25-204. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2, due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer and natural gas. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: None. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-205. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer such as a valid drivers' license containing a photograph of the customer, a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-206. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by the director of information technology on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-207. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through, a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four (4) digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-208. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent, with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-209. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to his or her department head. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to his or her department head. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-210. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-211. - Program administration. 
The utility supervisor is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The utility supervisor will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The utility supervisor is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The utility supervisor shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-212. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more covered accounts the utility supervisor shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Secs. 25-213—25-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 25-221. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-222. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Perry. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(l), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-223. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C, § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee. 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-224. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 25-225. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-28, 10-21-08) 
Secs. 25-226—25-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 25-241. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the City of Perry by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells and springs which are the supply sources for the city water system, and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. No. 2008-29, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 25-242. - Establishment of a wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone as identified and described within the State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-29, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 25-243. - Prohibited uses. 
Land use and activities in the wellhead protection zones as identified and described as potential pollution sources in the State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan will be prohibited as stated in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-29, 11-4-08) 
Sec. 25-244. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 2008-29, 11-4-08) 
Secs. 25-245—25-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATERING 

Sec. 25-251. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable sections of the Perry Land Development Ordinance and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 25-252. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The city code enforcement department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, 11-2-10) 
Sec. 25-253. - Penalties. 
A violation of any section in this article shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment provided under the City Charter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, 11-2-1-) 
ARTICLE IX. - PRIVATE WATER WELLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-260. - Drilling for water within one-half mile of city wells. 
No person shall drill, continue to drill or operate any water well within the city which shall be located or proposed to be located within one-half mile from any well which, in operation or under construction for the supply of water, constitutes or may constitute a part of the public water system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-261. - Private wells to supply only for specific purposes. 
It shall be unlawful to drill or continue to drill any private water well for the purpose of supplying water therefrom or to supply water from any such private water well to any persons for domestic use other than for irrigation and recreational purposes; provided, however, that private water wells shall be allowed for industrial users under the terms and conditions contained in section 25-276 herein. Specifically prohibited is the use of any private water well for the purpose of supplying water for use within any dwelling house, commercial or business establishment within the city except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-262. - Prohibition. 
The water from any private water well or spring shall not be used for drinking or cooking. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-263. - Open wells, cisterns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain or permit to be operated or maintained any well or cistern within the city unless the same shall be covered or protected by an enclosure sufficient to prevent any person from falling into or entering such well or cistern. 
(b)  Any covering or enclosure of any such well or cistern shall and must be approved by the building official. 
(c)  The requirements of this section shall not prevent the owner or operator of such well or cistern from entering such well or cistern for the purpose of maintenance and operation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-264. - Log of new wells. 
Every person, firm, or corporation to whom the community development department has issued a permit under the provisions of this article to construct a well shall, within thirty (30) days of the completion or the drilling, digging, boring, or excavating authorized by such permit, furnish the utility department with a log of such well. The log shall include information on the type of casing, the number and location of the perforations therein, the depth of the well and soil types at all levels of the well, as well as any other data requested by the building inspector or code enforcement official from the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-265. - Wells constructed prior to 2016. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the continued operation of any water well which had been constructed and was in continuous use on December 31, 2016, which may be within one-half (½) mile of a city well; however, any modifications to any such wells must meet all the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-266—25-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 25-271. - Required for construction, demolition of well. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall dig, bore, deepen, or excavate any well or destroy an existing well unless the person, firm, or corporation has applied for and obtained a permit therefore from the community development department pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-272. - Investigation fee. 
Each application for a permit required under this article shall be accompanied by an inspection and enforcement fee in an amount determined by the mayor and council, no part of which shall be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-273. - Issuance. 
If, after investigation of the proposed well site and verification of the data supplied in the application, the community development department determines that the proposed construction, destruction, or conversion of the well both complies with this article and is not likely to cause pollution or contamination of either the underground water or the well water, a permit for such construction, destruction, or conversion shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-274. - Scope. 
A permit issued pursuant to this article shall be valid to authorize only the proposed construction, destruction, or conversion described therein on the site specified. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-275. - Suspension or revocation. 
The building inspector or code enforcement officer from the community development department may, upon ten (10) days' written notice, suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article where he or she determines the permittee either to have exceeded the scope of the permit or to have violated any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-276. - Private water wells for industries. 
When, in the sole discretion of the building inspector or code enforcement officer of the community development department and approved by the mayor and council (which discretion shall not be unreasonably withheld), it is determined that the city is unable to provide, at a cost reasonable to the city, water at a specified quality required for an industrial customer, the user shall be authorized to build a private water well under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The water from such private water well shall only be used as an ingredient of the end-product of the industry, and all other potable water necessary at the industrial site shall be obtained from the city's water distribution system; 
(2)  As required by section 25-260, the well is not within one-half (½) mile of a well which is a part of the city's water system; and 
(3)  The user shall obtain any necessary state or federal permits. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 25-277. - Penalties. 
A violation of any section in this article shall subject the violator to the maximum punishment provided in section 1-10. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 12-20-16) 
APPENDIX A - PERRY LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1966 CODE 
  This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1966 Code, as updated through November 16, 1986, which are included herein. Sections of the 1966 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
  This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1966 Code, as updated through November 16, 1986, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1966 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede the 1966 Code, as supplemented, but which were never included in the 1966 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE CONSTITUTION REFERENCE TABLE 
  This table gives the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Georgia Constitution. 

 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 