Title 4 - PUBLIC HEALTH 
CHAPTER 4-1. - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] Article 1. General Provisions Sec. 4-1-1. Definitions. Article 2. Duties and Prohibitions Relating to Control of Animals Sec. 4-1-2. Keeping domestic animals under control. Sec. 4-1-3. Specific Requirements for Confinement. Sec. 4-1-4. Prohibitions for domestic animals. Sec. 4-1-5. Livestock running at large. Sec. 4-1-6. Control and removal of animal wastes. Sec. 4-1-7. Guard dogs. Sec. 4-1-8. Identification and inoculation. Sec. 4-1-9. Animal giveaway. Sec. 4-1-10. Obstruction of officer. Article 3. Abuse of Animals Sec. 4-1-11. Abuse of animals. Sec. 4-1-12. Bird sanctuary. Article 4. Fees and Penalties Sec. 4-1-13. Fees. Sec. 4-1-14. Penalty. Article 5. Official Powers and Authority of Animal Control Sec. 4-1-15. Power to issue citation. Sec. 4-1-16. Injured animals. Sec. 4-1-17. Impoundment of animals. Sec. 4-1-18. Disposition of impounded animals. Sec. 4-1-19. Enforcement. Sec. 4-1-20. Confinement of biting animals. Sec. 4-1-21. Redemption of impounded animals. Sec. 4-1-22. Adoption of animals. Sec. 4-1-23. Escape, injury or theft. Sec. 4-1-24. Records. Sec. 4-1-25. Regulation of dangerous, vicious, and potentially dangerous dogs. Sec. 4-1-26. Requirements for Care of Feral Cat Colonies. Sec. 4-1-27. Removal of Feral Cats from Colony. Sec. 4-1-28. Unlawful Interference with Registered Feral Cat Colony. Sec. 4-1-29. Disposition of Feral Cats - generally. Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— An ordinance enacted Dec. 1, 1998, amended Ch. 4-1 by deleting said chapter in its entirety and substituting new provisions in lieu thereof. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 4-1 contained similar subject matter and was derived from ordinances enacted Sept. 1, 1992, and May 4, 1993. 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 4-1-1. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:     Domestic animal means any dog, cat, or other legally owned animal not defined as wildlife, livestock, or nontraditional livestock.     Ear tipping means straight-line cutting of the tip of the left or right ear of a cat while the cat is anesthetized by a licensed veterinarian during sterilization and vaccination procedures. A feral cat that has been ear tipped is presumed to be sterile and to have been vaccinated at least once against rabies.     Electronic confinement system is a system designed to confine a domestic animal in a designated area within the property limits of the animal's owner or keeper using an electronic signal from a transmitter to a receiver worn by the animal that provides a shock, or other behavior correction method, to the confined animal when the animal approaches the perimeter of the confinement area. Such behavior correction method shall be of sufficient effect to prevent the animal from leaving the confinement area.     Feral cat means a cat, regardless of sex or age, that is unowned, free-roaming, and not interactive with humans.     Feral cat colony means an identified group of feral cats capable of being trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated, and released back into the area from which they were taken.     Feral cat colony caretaker means a person who is associated with an organization that meets the qualifications for an animal rescue group under standards set by Animal Control Policies and Procedures, who has registered the feral cat colony with Animal Control and who provides sustenance, water and care for a feral cat colony.     Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which he is located.     Livestock means cattle, swine, equines, poultry, sheep, goats, ratites, nontraditional livestock and ruminants.     Nontraditional livestock means the species of Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates) listed as bison, water buffalo, farmed deer, llamas and alpacas that are held and possessed legally and in a manner which is not in conflict with the provisions of O.C.G.A. chapter 5, title 27 dealing with wild animals.     Owner means any person who owns, keeps, harbors, possesses or otherwise keeps any domestic, nontraditional livestock or livestock animal for a period of 14 days, or any person who knowingly permits any domestic, nontraditional livestock or livestock animal to be kept, harbored, possessed, or otherwise kept upon his premises for a period of 14 days, or who has any animal under his or her care or responsibility, either temporarily or permanently, at any time, within Athens-Clarke County. "Owner" does not include a feral cat colony caretaker or the owner of the premises where a registered feral cat colony is located.     Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit.     Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that without provocation causes severe injury to another dog or cat, except that a dog that inflicts an injury upon another dog or cat when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this definition. In addition, a dog shall not be a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this definition if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by another dog or cat that, at the time, was not under control as defined in this section.     Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, or, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Such enclosure must be approved by the animal control superintendent.     Severe injury to another dog or cat means any unprovoked physical injury that results in broken bones or severe lacerations requiring multiple sutures or surgery.     Wildlife means any vertebrate or invertebrate animal life indigenous to this state or any species introduced or specified by the Department of Natural Resources and includes fish, except domestic fish produced by an aquaculturist registered under O.C.G.A. § 27-4-255, mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans and mollusks or any part thereof.     Zoonotic disease means those diseases transmittable to humans from animals, including parasitic, bacterial, fungal and viral diseases. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-2000, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2003, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 8-3-2004, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-4-2006, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2016(2), § 1; Ord. of 2-7-2017(1), §§ 1, 2 ) 
ARTICLE 2. - DUTIES AND PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO CONTROL OF ANIMALS 
Sec. 4-1-2. - Keeping domestic animals under control. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a domestic animal not to control the animal at all times through one of the following means: (1)  On a leash when off the property of the owner; (2)  Within the passenger area of a vehicle driven or parked on the streets; (3)  Within the property limits of its owner and attended by its owner; or (4)  Confined within the property limits of its owner or of another with the permission of the person in control of the property.     Confined means kept within an electronic confinement system, building, pen or fenced area or other structure built to prevent escape by a domestic animal.     Electronic confinement systems shall not be considered an adequate means of confinement if the system is improperly installed, malfunctioning, in disrepair, damaged, switched off, or otherwise deactivated or nonoperational. Any domestic animal confined by means of electronic confinement system must wear at all times an appropriate and properly functioning receiving device while within the confines of the system. Signage indicating the presence of an electronic confinement system must be placed around the perimeter of the system at regular intervals in sufficient quantity and of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible to anyone approaching the property. No animal which has been classified or is currently being reviewed for classification as a dangerous, potentially dangerous, or vicious dog pursuant to state or local law may be confined by means of an electronic confinement system. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a domestic animal to chain, tie, fasten or otherwise tether the animal to dog houses, trees, fences, vehicles or other stationary objects as a means of confinement except that the animal may be temporarily confined by a tether while attended by its owner. (c)  Exemptions. Feral cat colony caretakers are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2003, § 4; Ord. of 4-4-2006, § 2; Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 2; Ord. of 12-2-2016(2), § 2 ) 
Sec. 4-1-3. - Specific requirements for confinement     It shall be an offense for any owner of a domestic animal not to satisfy the following requirements: (a)  Any tether used to temporarily confine an animal while attended by its owner must be attached to a collar or harness and shall not be wrapped directly around the animal's neck. Such tethers shall not be excessively heavy or weighted so as to inhibit the animal's movement. (b)  All domestic animals shall be provided with sanitary shelter from the elements. Said shelter shall be designed, constructed and maintained to protect the animal from rain, snow, ice, excessive cold, excessive heat and excessive direct sunlight, and of a size to allow the animal sufficient space to stand, turn around, and lie down, and make all other normal body movements in a normal and comfortable position appropriate to the age, size, and health of the animal. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, vehicles, or the area on or beneath exposed porches or decks. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the transportation and temporary confinement of a domestic animal within the passenger area of a vehicle provided that the animal is provided adequate ventilation and temperature control in order to protect the animal from excessive heat or cold. (c)  All domestic animals shall be provided with clean, potable water at all times. (d)  An owner must promptly remove and dispose of animal excrement and food wastes and debris so as to minimize vermin infestation, contamination, odors, and disease hazards. (e)  All domestic animals shall be provided with a safe and sanitary confinement area constructed to confine the animal, to protect the animal from injury, and of a sufficient space to allow for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species, and breed of animal. The area shall have a means to rapidly eliminate excess water and minimize mud. (f)  Exemptions. Feral cat colony caretakers are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 2; Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 3) Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 4-1-3 by ordinance 11-6-07, section 3 of an ordinance of April 4, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former § 4-1-3, which pertained to animals in parks, and derived from ordinances of December 1, 1998; June 3, 2003; and April 4, 2006. 
Sec. 4-1-4. - Prohibitions for domestic animals.     It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a domestic animal under his or her ownership or possession to do the following: (a)  Go upon the property of any person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of such other owner or occupant; (b)  Attack or act so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways or on the property of another. Any person convicted of violating this subsection, in addition to penalties provided for in section 4-1-14, shall be required to maintain the dog in a proper enclosure, as defined in this chapter. (c)  Disturb the peace of any other person by loud, persistent, habitual barking, howling, growling, yelping or whining. No person shall be charged with violating this subsection unless written warning has previously been issued within 90 days of the charged violation. No citation for violation of this subsection shall be issued unless there are at least two complaining witnesses who shall have signed a written statement stating the address of the dog owner, a description of the dog and of the offense and the date, time and location of the offense; (d)  Reserved. (e)  Be in heat and not be confined in an enclosure to the property of its owner or keeper. (f)  Exemptions. Feral cat colony caretakers are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-2001, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2003, § 6; Ord. of 8-3-2004, § 3; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-2006, § 4; Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 3; Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 4; Ord. of 2-7-2017(1), § 3 ) 
Sec. 4-1-5. - Livestock running at large.     It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any hog, cattle, mule, sheep, goat, fowl or any other livestock or nontraditional livestock animal to permit it to run at large in the limits of Athens-Clarke County or to stray from the property of the owner or keeper or to go upon the premises of any other person. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1) 
Sec. 4-1-6. - Control and removal of animal wastes. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to refuse or fail to immediately remove any feces deposited by such animal upon public sidewalks, public streets, public parks or other public property in Athens-Clarke County, or upon any private property within Athens-Clarke County not under the exclusive use and control of said owner or keeper. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to defecate or urinate upon any private property except that upon which he or she resides or owns unless he or she has the permission of the owner of such other private property. (c)  Exemptions. Feral cat colony caretakers are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 4; Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 5) 
Sec. 4-1-7. - Guard dogs.     It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or custodian of any residential or commercial property on which a guard dog is kept for security purposes to post a notice in a prominent and conspicuous location on such property. Such notice shall comprise the words "Warning Guard Dog" and shall be in clearly contrasting color. Such letters shall be not less than one inch in width and not less than five inches in height. If a guard dog is confined within a fenced area, such notice shall be conspicuously posted upon such fence at every entrance and exit of the fence. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1) 
Sec. 4-1-8. - Identification and inoculation.     It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation and any such dog or cat shall wear at all times a securely attached collar about its neck displaying such current rabies tag. A feral cat that has been ear tipped is exempt from displaying collar and rabies tag. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 4-1-9. - Animal giveaway.     No person in Athens-Clarke County shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1) 
Sec. 4-1-10. - Obstruction of officer. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any officer of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division in the official performance of his or her duties as provided for in this chapter. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to relocate, interfere with, or alter the operation of any device, equipment, or item of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place their own animal into or remove any animal confined within a trap or cage operated by the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division. (d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false name, address or date of birth to any officer, employee or agent of the animal control division in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties with the intent to mislead such officer, employee or agent in any way. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1) 
ARTICLE 3. - ABUSE OF ANIMALS 
Sec. 4-1-11. - Abuse of animals.     The animal control officers of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 11, Article 1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, entitled "the Georgia Animal Protection Act" (O.C.G.A. § 4-11-2 et seq.). (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 4-1-12. - Bird sanctuary.     The entire area embraced within the limits of the urban service area of Athens-Clarke County is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner any bird or fowl or to rob a bird's nest or wild fowl's nest; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities in Athens-Clarke County, such birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the police department. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1) 
ARTICLE 4. - FEES AND PENALTIES 
Sec. 4-1-13. - Fees. (a)  Any person reclaiming a neutered male dog or cat, spayed female dog or cat, or any other animal shall pay a $25.00 impoundment fee for the first impoundment, $30.00 for the second impoundment and $35.00 for each subsequent impoundment. In addition to the above, $5.00 per day will be charged for boarding plus the cost of inoculations and/or veterinary services. (b)  Any person reclaiming an unneutered male or unspayed female dog or cat shall pay $50.00 for the first impoundment, $75.00 for the second impoundment and $100.00 for each subsequent impoundment. In addition to the above, $5.00 per day will be charged for boarding plus the cost of inoculations and/or veterinary services. (c)  The fee for adoptions shall be $50.00. However, upon proof of neutering or spaying, there shall be a refund of $25.00 from Athens-Clarke County. (d)  There shall be a registration fee of $100.00 for all dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs in Athens-Clarke County. Such registration is to be renewed on an annual basis. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-2003, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-5-2017(2), § 1 ; Ord. of 9-5-2017(3), § 1 ) 
Sec. 4-1-14. - Penalty. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (b) below, any person violating this chapter shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Any person violating section 4-1-4(b) or 4-1-25 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00 for the first offense and not less than $400.00 for any subsequent offenses in addition to any other penalty provided in section 1-1-5. (c)  Anyone convicted of a violation of section 4-1-4(b) shall be prohibited from confining any domestic animal by means of an electronic confinement system for a period of six months after the date of conviction. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-2001, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2003, § 7; Ord. of 8-3-2004, § 4; Ord. of 12-2-2016(2), § 3 ) 
ARTICLE 5. - OFFICIAL POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sec. 4-1-15. - Power to issue citation.     Officers of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division, the code enforcement division, the police department, or the marshal are hereby authorized to issue a summons or citation relative to the enforcement of this chapter. A citation or summons which has been prepared in accordance with this Chapter and signed by an Officer of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division may be personally served by any member of the Animal Control Division staff not less than 18 years of age who has been specially designated by the Animal Control Superintendent. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 2; Ord. of 12-2-2016(1), § 2 ; Ord. of 2-7-2017(1), § 4 ) 
Sec. 4-1-16. - Injured animals.     The superintendent of the animal control division shall have the authority humanely to dispose of impounded animals which are diseased or injured whenever it shall appear that any such animal is suffering great pain and whenever one of the following applies: (1)  No determination as to the owner can be made after a reasonable inquiry or investigation; or (2)  The owner cannot be contacted within a reasonable amount of time; or (3)  The owner refuses to claim the animal immediately and accept financial responsibility for necessary veterinary treatment. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 4-1-17. - Impoundment of animals.     Except as otherwise provided for by state law, any domestic, nontraditional livestock or livestock animal that is in violation of this chapter, whether or not the animal is on public or private property, may be, but is not required to be, impounded by the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division in accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 4-1-18. - Disposition of impounded animals. (a)  If an animal remains unclaimed within the prescribed amount of time, then the superintendent of the animal control division, or his designees, shall be authorized to dispose of such animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible, to offer the animal for adoption in accordance with section 4-1-22, or to donate such animal to a non-profit institution or agency for the purpose of humane placement or rescue. (b)  No live animal in the possession of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division shall be released, sold or given to any individual, institution, or private firm for the purposes of medical and scientific research. (c)  When calculating the prescribed amount of time for the execution of rights or responsibilities in this chapter, each day that the animal control facility is open shall be counted, except for the first day that an animal is impounded shall not be counted. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 4; Ord. of 8-17-2006, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2017(4), § 1 ) 
Sec. 4-1-19. - Enforcement.     This chapter shall be enforced by the superintendent of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division. Upon information known to, or a signed written statement lodged with, the superintendent or authorized officers of the animal control division that any owner of an animal is in violation of this chapter, a summons or citation may be served upon authority of the superintendent by authorized officers requiring the owner of the animal to appear before the Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court on a day and time certain to stand trial for violation of this chapter. If such violation has not been witnessed by an officer, a subpoena may be issued to the person supplying the information on which a formal charge may be made to appear at said time and date to testify on behalf of Athens-Clarke County. The superintendent or authorized officers of the animal control division are authorized to use necessary means to obtain warrants or subpoenas from municipal court or magistrate court for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-2004, § 5; Ord. of 2-7-2017(1), § 5 ) 
Sec. 4-1-20. - Confinement of biting animals. (a)  Any animal that is known to have bitten or scratched a person shall be confined for the purposes of rabies observation to the animal control facility, to a veterinary facility or to such other facility as may be directed by the county health department for a period of ten days after the date of the bite or scratch. All expenses incurred for such confinement and observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal. (b)  The animal control superintendent shall be authorized to order the owner of any dog that is believed to be subject to classification as potentially dangerous under this Chapter or dangerous or vicious under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21 et seq. to submit the dog to the animal control facility. All expenses incurred for such confinement shall be paid by the owner of such animal. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2003, § 8; Ord. of 8-3-2004, § 6; Ord. of 2-7-2017(1), § 6 ) 
Sec. 4-1-21. - Redemption of impounded animals. (a)  It shall be the responsibility of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division to attempt to notify the owner or feral cat colony caretaker, if known, or can be reasonably ascertained, of every animal impounded, by telephone if possible, or by mail or by written notice at the residence of the owner within two working days of the impoundment. (b)  The owner or feral cat colony caretaker of the animal may claim and take custody of the animal within five days of such impoundment by the payment of required fees and the cost of inoculations and veterinary services, including microchipping if provided pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. After five days, the animal shall be deemed abandoned and shall be the property of Athens-Clarke County, and disposed of only pursuant to section 4-1-18 or section 4-1-22, as applicable. (c)  From and after September 1, 2017, all animals other than feral cats reclaimed under this section shall be microchipped before leaving impoundment at the animal control division, with the identification number from the animal's microchip recorded in Animal Control Division records. (d)  From and after September 1, 2017, no dog or cat, other than feral cats, shall be released from impound by the Animal Control Division, more than once unless, prior to release, it is spayed or neutered at the owner's expense, unless the reclaiming owner: (1)  Shows proof of a breeding license issued by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and all local business permits or certificates applicable to a commercial dog or cat breeding business, or (2)  Provides written certification from a licensed veterinarian citing a high likelihood that the dog or cat will suffer serious bodily harm or death due to age or specified infirmity if the dog or cat is spayed or neutered and the date, if any, on which such restriction shall end, in which case the owner shall, in writing, agree that such dog or cat animal will be sterilized within 30 days from such date with proof provided promptly to the animal control superintendent. If timely proof of spay or neuter is not received, the dog or cat shall be subject to confiscation unless prior to the expiration of the agreed period the owner provides an updated veterinary certification as set forth above and the owner enters into a new sterilization agreement under the same terms. (e)  Any person reclaiming a dog or cat, other than a feral cat, that, after September 1, 2017, has been impounded for the first time, shall acknowledge in writing prior to taking custody of the dog or cat the requirements of this ordinance that upon any subsequent impound, the dog or cat animal shall not be released unless it is spayed or neutered at the owner's expense in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 7; Ord. of 7-5-2017(2), §§ 2, 3 ; Ord. of 7-5-2017(4), § 2 ; Ord. of 9-5-2017(3), §§ 2, 3 ) 
Sec. 4-1-22. - Adoption of animals. (a)  The Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Superintendent may offer for adoption any animal deemed abandoned pursuant to section 4-1-21(b) or any animal that has been donated to the division by the owner. (b)  An animal may be donated for adoption only by a resident of Athens-Clarke County and may be made available for adoption upon the determination by the animal control superintendent that the animal is of reasonably good health and temperament. In the event that the owner of an animal at the time of impound desires to reclaim an animal remaining in the custody of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division after the animal has been deemed abandoned pursuant to section 4-1-21(b), the animal control superintendent may, in his or her discretion, permit such prior owner to adopt the animal in accordance with this section, provided however, that no dog or cat shall be adopted by the prior owner unless the dog or cat has been spayed or neutered and microchipped at the owner's expense. (c)  Potential persons who want to adopt an animal must make application for adoption with the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division and meet requirements associated with the humane housing and care of the animal as determined by the superintendent of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division and by the payment of the required fees. (d)  No unclaimed dog which is not neutered or spayed shall be released from the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division without a written agreement from the person adopting the animal that such animal will be sterilized within 30 days from the date of adoption. Failure of the owner to spay or neuter the adopted dog within the prescribed time will constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. section 4-14-3(c) and will be prosecuted as a misdemeanor as prescribed in O.C.G.A. section 4-14-4. (e)  Adopted animals under six months old must be sterilized by the time the animal is seven months old. Upon written proof that the adopted animal has been sterilized within the specified time, a refund of $25.00 shall be paid by Athens-Clarke County to the person adopting such animal. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2017(2), § 4 ; Ord. of 7-5-2017(4), § 4 ; Ord. of 9-5-2017(3), § 4 ) 
Sec. 4-1-23. - Escape, injury or theft.     Employees of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division shall exercise reasonable care to prevent the injury, escape or theft of any animal which is in their custody or which they are attempting to bring into their custody under the provisions of this chapter, but they shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1) 
Sec. 4-1-24. - Records.     It shall be the duty of the Athens-Clarke County Animal Control Division to keep accurate written records showing the final disposition of all animals impounded thereby, the date of impoundment, the description and other identifying data of the animal, the fees collected, the disposition of the animal and the date thereof, which record shall be open and available for public inspection at a reasonable place during the regular business hours for a period of 24 months after the date of impoundment. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1) 
Sec. 4-1-25. - Regulation of dangerous, vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. (a)  The animal control superintendent shall be the designated authority to carry out the duties of dog control officer as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(b) and as provided for in this chapter. (b)  It shall be the duty of Judge of the Probate Court to conduct hearings and make determinations concerning the regulation and disposition of potentially dangerous dogs as required in this Chapter and dangerous and vicious dogs as required by O.C.G.A. Chapter 8, Title 4 and as required by this chapter. (c)  During the period while classification is pending and during the amount of time that such classification is eligible for or under appeal by the owner, the dog will be impounded at Athens-Clarke County Animal Control unless the animal control superintendent confirms after inspection that all of the applicable enclosure requirements of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 and this section have been met. (d)  Whenever a dog that has been classified as dangerous or vicious under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21 et seq. or potentially dangerous pursuant to the provisions of this chapter (together, "classified dogs" and each a "classified dog") is present in Athens-Clarke County, the following apply: (1)  Before the dog may be housed anywhere within Athens-Clarke County other than at Athens-Clarke County Animal Control or at veterinarian facility for the purpose of satisfying the procedures required in this section the owner must meet all of the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 and of this section and be issued a certificate of registration. (2)  All classified dogs must be spayed or neutered and microchipped. The owner must provide written proof of the spay or neuter and the identification number from the dog's microchip to the animal control superintendent before a certificate of registration may be issued or updated. The animal control superintendent shall be authorized to administer the microchip and, in any event, shall confirm the microchip placement and number by scanning the dog to the extent that such administration or confirmation can be accomplished without risk of physical harm to animal control personnel. The microchip number shall be included on the certificate of registration, and it shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove such identification. (3)  The owner of a classified dog shall confine the dog only in a proper enclosure, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 or this section, that has been inspected and approved by the animal control superintendent. Such inspection shall occur prior to issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration and must be updated if the location at which the animal is being kept is changed at any time, including if a previously classified dog is brought into Athens-Clarke County. The animal control superintendent or his designee is authorized to update it at other times in his discretion. (4)  If the owner has not already met the requirements for issuance of a certificate of registration at the time the dog is classified or at the time a previously classified dog is brought into Athens-Clarke County, the dog shall be impounded at Athens-Clarke County Animal Control. The owner must meet the requirements for keeping a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog, as applicable, no later than five days after the date the classification becomes effective or after a previously classified dog is brought into Athens-Clarke County. If the requirements are not met or the dog is not retrieved from Athens-Clarke County Animal Control within such time, then the dog shall be deemed unclaimed and subject to the provisions of section 4-1-18. (5)  The owner of a classified dog must renew the certificate of registration annually. The animal control superintendent or his designee shall inspect and approve the proper enclosure for the dog prior to renewing a certificate of registration, re-scan and verify the dog's microchip identification number, and confirm that the dog has been spayed or neutered to the extent that such confirmation can be accomplished without risk of physical harm to animal control personnel. (6)  The owner of a classified dog shall immediately orally notify the animal control division if the dog is not confined in the approved location or by the approved method, if the dog is stolen or missing, or if the dog is otherwise loose, if the dog is transferred, or if the dog is deceased. The owner thereafter must submit within two business days a notarized, sworn statement describing the circumstances of the dog's death or disappearance, or the name, address and telephone number of the person to whom the dog was transferred. (7)  Whenever a classified dog is subject to confiscation, the owner of the dog must submit the dog to Athens-Clarke County Animal Control without delay. A classified dog is subject to confiscation under this chapter if it is not validly registered, not maintained in a proper enclosure, or is outside the proper enclosure in violation of this chapter. (8)  No classified dog in the custody of Athens-Clarke County Animal Control may be offered for the purpose of adoption; provided, however, that dogs classified as potentially dangerous may be transferred to an animal shelter licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture if authorized by the animal control superintendent. (e)  In addition to the requirements set forth above, whenever a dog that has been classified as potentially dangerous pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is present in Athens-Clarke County, the following apply: (1)  A "proper enclosure" shall mean an enclosure designed to securely confine the potentially dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from leaving such property. (2)  The owner of the dog shall post on the premises where the dog is kept a clearly visible sign warning that there is a potentially dangerous dog on the property. (3)  Whenever outside the proper enclosure, the potentially dangerous dog must be restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary. (f)  Investigations by animal control superintendent; notice to owner; hearings; determinations by hearing authority. (1)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a potentially dangerous dog as defined in this Chapter, the animal control superintendent shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a potentially dangerous dog. (2)  When the animal control superintendent determines that a dog is subject to classification as a potentially dangerous dog, the animal control superintendent shall send by certified mail to the owner's last known address a dated notice to the dog's owner. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the Judge of the Probate Court on the animal control superintendent's determination within seven days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the animal control superintendent's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this Chapter. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of a dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a potentially dangerous dog, the dog shall be deemed unclaimed and subject to the provisions of section 4-1-18. (3)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the Judge of the Probate Court for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the Judge of the Probate Court shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and the Judge of the Probate Court shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the superintendent's determination. (4)  Within ten days after the hearing, Judge of the Probate Court shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a potentially dangerous dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. (g)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any dog that causes a fatality to a human will not be released to the owner until the end of any appeals process. (Ord. of 12-1-98, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2003, § 9; Ord. of 8-3-2004, § 7; Ord. of 8-17-2006, §§ 2—4; Ord. of 2-7-2017(1), §§ 7—11 ; Ord. of 7-5-2017(4), § 4 ) 
Sec. 4-1-26. - Requirements for Care of Feral Cat Colonies.     It is unlawful for any person to provide food, water, or shelter to a feral cat unless the feral cat is part of a registered feral cat colony. Caretakers of feral cat colonies shall register such colony with Animal Control. The registration shall be renewed annually. Registration shall include the name and address of the caretakers, the animal rescue group with which they are affiliated, and the location of the colony. The Manager shall develop Policies and Procedures to govern the Feral Cat Colony Program to be approved by the Mayor and Commission. A feral cat colony may be registered when the volunteer caretaker and animal rescue group can show all of the following: (1)  Regular feeding of the colony will be maintained throughout the year; (2)  Adult cats and kittens over 12 weeks of age that can be captured will be neutered or spayed and vaccinated against rabies. A three-year rabies vaccine will be administered whenever feasible; (3)  Every attempt will be made to have kittens removed from the colony and fostered before they reach the age of 12 weeks for domestication and placement; (4)  Sick or injured cats will be removed from the colony for either immediate veterinarian care or humane euthanasia as determined by the veterinarian. The decision either to treat or euthanize shall be at the entire discretion of the veterinarian; (5)  Cats will be ear tipped for recognition as members of a registered feral cat colony; (6)  Records of sterilizations, vaccination and animal identification will be provided to animal control upon request; (7)  Written permission has been given to the animal rescue group from the owner of the premises upon which the feral cat colony is located for the registered feral cat colony to be located on the owner's property; and (8)  Compliance with the Policies and Procedures governing the Feral Cat Program. (Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 8) 
Sec. 4-1-27. - Removal of Feral Cats from Colony.     Animal Control has the right immediately to seize and remove all or parts of any feral cat colony for public health and public safety concerns including rabies, other zoonotic disease epidemics, and certain animal-to-animal diseases as identified by the Superintendent of Animal Control. (Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 8) 
Sec. 4-1-28. - Unlawful Interference with Registered Feral Cat Colony.     Except as provided in section 4-1-27, it is unlawful for any person knowingly to prevent, interfere with, or obstruct the management of a registered feral cat colony. However, nothing herein shall prohibit a property owner from taking lawful steps to control or restrict feral cats within the limits of the owner's property. (Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 8) 
Sec. 4-1-29. - Disposition of Feral Cats - generally. (a)  Animal Control may impound feral cats in violation of this chapter and dispose of the cats by adoption or other disposition in accordance with this chapter, or release the cat to a feral cat colony caretaker who will maintain the cat as part of a registered feral cat colony. (b)  The superintendent of the animal control division, or his designee, shall have the authority humanely to dispose of any cat believed to be feral whenever all of the following apply: (1)  No tag, microchip, or other evidence (including without limitation the proximity of an ear-tipped cat at the time of recovery to a registered feral cat colony) which identifies or which could reasonably lead to the identity of an owner or feral colony caretaker is present; (2)  A determination has been made that the cat is feral after an overnight observation period; (3)  No owner or feral cat colony caretaker has been identified; and (4)  The cat appears to be more than 16 weeks of age. (Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 8; Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 1) 
CHAPTER 4-2. - HEALTH Sec. 4-2-1. Health-care advisory officer. Sec. 4-2-2. Posting of state food service inspection reports in food service establishments. 
Sec. 4-2-1. - Health-care advisory officer.     The director of the department of family and children services shall be designated as the health care advisory officer of Athens-Clarke County with the duties and responsibilities provided by law and by regulations and standards promulgated pursuant to law and this person shall serve in that position until such time as the mayor and commission shall designate otherwise by ordinance. The health care advisory officer shall also provide to the mayor and commission no later than the tenth day of each month a detailed report of the claims of indigence received the preceding month and of the disposition of such claims. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 4-2-2. - Posting of state food service inspection reports in food service establishments. (a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined as set forth below: (1)  Food service establishment: Establishments for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunchrooms; places which manufacture, wholesale or retail sandwiches or salads; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called, as defined by Section 290-5-14.01 of the Georgia Rules of Department of Human Resources. The term shall not mean a "food sales establishment," as defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-2-21, which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on the premises. (2)  Food service establishment inspection report: The report of inspection of a food service establishment required pursuant to Section 290-5-14.11(2)(c) of the Georgia Rules of Department of Human Resources, as amended. (3)  Local health authority: The Clarke County Board of Health. (4)  Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee, or association, or combination thereof. (b)  Every food service establishment, its agents or employees, shall post the most current food service establishment inspection report in public view at eye level (an approximate height of five feet from the floor) within 15 feet of the entrance or in a conspicuous place approved by the local health authority so that the public can walk up to and read the inspection report as designated by the local health authority. (c)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the local health authority, or Athens-Clarke County police, marshal or code enforcement officers. (d)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. (e)  In addition to actions filed by Athens-Clarke County for violations of this section, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. of 4-6-2004, § 1) 
CHAPTER 4-3. - SMOKING[2] Sec. 4-3-1. Definitions. Sec. 4-3-2. Smoking prohibited in Athens-Clarke County facilities. Sec. 4-3-3. Regulation of smoking in public places. Sec. 4-3-4. Regulation of smoking in places of employment. Sec. 4-3-5. Exemptions. Sec. 4-3-6. Declaration of nonsmoking places. Sec. 4-3-7. Responsibility of owner/manager. Sec. 4-3-8. Violation and penalty. Sec. 4-3-9. Severability. Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted July 5, 2005, deleted former ch. 4-3 of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions as ch. 4-3 as herein set out. Former ch. 4-3, §§ 4-3-1—4-3-8, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted July 6, 2004, § 1. 
Sec. 4-3-1. - Definitions.     The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section:     Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets.     Business means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, professional corporation, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, joint venture, or other entity, whether for profit or nonprofit.     Employee means an individual who is employed by a business in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.     Employer means an individual or a business that employs one or more individuals.     Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling. Such term also means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all but one side by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling.     Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, homes for the chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. This definition shall not include long-term care facilities as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 31-8-81.     Infiltrate means to permeate an enclosed area by passing through its walls, ceilings, floors, windows, or ventilation systems to the extent that an individual can smell secondhand smoke.     Local governing authority means a county or municipal corporation of the state.     Place of employment means an enclosed area under the control of an employer that employees utilize during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility. This term shall not include vehicles used in the course of employment.     Private club means a facility owned or operated by a nonprofit fraternal or civic association or corporation organized and existing under the laws of Georgia. Such association or corporation must have at least 75 members who regularly pay monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues and who select the directors or management of such corporation or association, and which is organized and operated exclusively for fraternal brotherhood, pleasure, recreation or other nonprofitable purposes. No part of the net earnings of such corporation may inure to the benefit of any stockholder or member. Entry to such facility is restricted to members and guests of members.     Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a licensed childcare, adult day-care, or health care facility.     Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term shall include a bar area within any restaurant.     Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.     Secondhand smoke means smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering, or burning tobacco when the person smoking is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff drawing, and smoke exhaled by the person smoking.     Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money.     Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments.     Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco.     Smoking area means a separately designated enclosed room which need not be entered by an employee in order to conduct business that is designated as a smoking area and, when so designated as a smoking area, shall not be construed as to deprive employees of a nonsmoking lounge, waiting area, or break room.     Sports arena means enclosed stadiums and enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-2. - Smoking prohibited in Athens-Clarke County facilities.     Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities of, including buildings owned, leased, or operated by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. Smoking shall be prohibited within the boundaries of any park, youth sports complex, or recreation area owned, leased, or operated by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, including any open area within such park, youth sports complex, or recreation area. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-3. - Regulation of smoking in public places.     Except as otherwise specifically authorized in this chapter, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-4. - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. (a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment in Athens-Clarke County, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities. (b)  Such prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all current employees no later than August 1, 2005, and to each prospective employee upon such employee's application for employment. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-5. - Exemptions. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of Code sections 4-3-3 and 4-3-4: (1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility; (2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated; (3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter; (4)  Private and semiprivate rooms in health care facilities licensed under [O.C.G.A.] Title 31 that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom have written authorization by their treating physician to smoke; (5)  Smoking areas designated by an employer or banquet or meeting rooms when such rooms are being used for private functions which shall meet the following requirements: (A)  The smoking area shall be located in a nonwork area where no employee, as part of his or her work responsibilities, shall be required to enter, except such work responsibilities shall not include custodial or maintenance work carried out in the smoking area when it is unoccupied; (B)  Air handling systems from the smoking area shall be independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the smoking area shall be exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size and capacity for the smoking area and no air from the smoking area shall be recirculated through or infiltrate other parts of the building; and (C)  The smoking area shall be for the use of employees only. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to restaurants and bars; and (6)  Private clubs. Provided, however, that smoking is prohibited at any event at a private club in which the general public is permitted to attend. (b)  In order to qualify for exempt status under subsection (a) of this Code section, any area described in subsection (a) of this Code section, except for areas described in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this Code section, shall post conspicuously at every entrance a sign indicating that smoking is permitted. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-6. - Declaration of nonsmoking places.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection (a) of Code section 4-3-7 is posted. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-7. - Responsibility of owner/manager. (a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control in every public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. (b)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of the area, unless such ashtray is permanently affixed to an existing structure. (c)  The following described sign shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter: "Athens-Clarke County prohibits smoking in this establishment at all times. To report violations, call (706) 613-3345. Athens-Clarke County Code, Secs. 4-3-3 and 4-3-4". (d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the holder of an Athens-Clarke County alcoholic beverages license shall not be subject to a civil fine, administrative hearing for suspension, revocation, probation or other administrative or judicial action with respect to such license based upon violations of this chapter occurring in the premises of such holder until no fewer than three convictions for violation of the provisions of this chapter have occurred on such licensed premises within the preceding 12 months. (e)  The Athens-Clarke County Attorney shall be authorized to bring an action to abate a public nuisance or to obtain appropriate equitable relief to protect the public health, safety and welfare in cases where repeated violations of this chapter occur in a public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited, and the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of such place has failed after notice to take action to prevent such violations. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-8. - Violation and penalty.     A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-9. - Severability.     If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. (Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
CHAPTER 4-4. - OPEN-BURNING PROHIBITION 
Sec. 4-4-1. - Open burning prohibited; exceptions.     It is unlawful for any person in any area of Athens-Clarke County to cause, suffer, allow, or permit "opening burning" of vegetative matter such as leaves, grasses, tree limbs or stumps, including the "slash burning" of forest residue for land-clearing purposes; of refuse, trash, or rubbish of any kind; of any materials which include soils or are in contact with soils during burning; of any other "open-burning" material; or to use for "open burning" any noncontainment devices such as air-curtain destructors, common back-yard fireplaces, open metal drums, burn barrels, or burn pits, except as follows: (1)  For recreational purposes or for cooking food for immediate human consumption. (2)  Operation of devices using open flames such as kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment. (3)  Training fire department personnel under the supervision of the fire chief or his designee. (4)  Silviculture practices specifically related to "prescribed burning" under authority of the Georgia Forestry Commission, as exempted from county ordinance, resolution, and regulation by the code of the State of Georgia. For purposes of this subsection, "prescribed burning" of any forest land means a "permitted" fire set by the owner or owner's designated agent under controlled conditions to burn forest understory and used as a forest management practice to establish favorable seedbeds, remove competing underbrush, accelerate nutrient recycling, control insect pests, enhance wildlife habitat, and otherwise contribute ecological benefits. Not exempted is the burning of leaf or brush piles not necessary to accomplish the purposes of "prescribed burning." (5)  Procedures recognized as necessary and essential for the production or harvesting of crops. (6)  Burning of vegetative storm damage debris using an air curtain destructor within the Agricultural Residential (AR) zoning district when authorized by State Rules for Air Quality Control or an exemption from the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and conducted pursuant to a burn permit from the Georgia Forestry Commission prior to each burn. (Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 9-4-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 4-4-2. - Burning Notification and Permitting.     Any person conducting burning for crop production and harvesting under the exemption of section 4-4-1(5), above, or conducting burning of vegetative storm damage debris under the exemption of section 4-4-1(6), above, must notify the Athens-Clarke County Fire Department prior to said burning, stating the time, place and specific purpose of the proposed burning, which must be carried out consistent with state regulations, and must provide a copy of any required state burn permit. (Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 9-4-2012, § 2) Editor's note— An Ordinance of 9-4-2012, § 2, changed the title of § 4-4-2 from Burning for crop production and harvesting to Burning Notification and Permitting. 
Sec. 4-4-3. - Penalty for violation.     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 1) 